CODE OF ETHICS
WHEREAS, The Town of Glenburn desires that the Public Trust be upheld by all of its Boards
and Committees;
WHEREAS, The Public Trust is maintained only when all members of Boards and Committees
conduct themselves at all times in a manner which is above reproach;
WHEREAS, The Public Trust is maintained only when all Boards and Committees conduct their
business in a dignified and competent manner; and
WHEREAS, The Town of Glenburn believes that these standards can be best achieved by the
adoption of a Code of Ethics to be adhered to by all members of Glenburn’s Boards and
Committees;
NOW, THEREFORE; The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this Code of Ethics be enacted
as a municipal ordinance.
A. PERSONAL INVOLVEMENT No person serving on a Board or Committee shall receive
payment from public monies for services rendered to the Town unless such payment is:
(1) A Board or Committee member stipend authorized by the Town Charter.
(2) A Board or Committee member stipend approved in the Municipal Budget.
(3) For a Town Council approved work agreement by a Board or Committee member except that
the Town Council may not approve a work agreement for one of its own members.
B. CONDUCT OF MEETINGS All meetings of Boards and Committees shall be held in
properly posted public sessions except when lawfully authorized to be held in executive session.
No meeting may go into executive session without first convening in public session. The meeting
may then go into executive session only upon affirmative vote of the Board or Committee with
the precise nature of the business of the executive session having been included in the motion.
C. DECORUM AT MEETING All meetings shall start promptly at the designated time.
Members are expected to be present at that time. Members are expected to wear clean and neat
attire at all meetings. Minutes of previous meetings should be distributed to all members prior to
the meeting date so that the matter of adoption of the minutes can be accomplished rapidly.
Agendas of all meetings should be properly prepared and posted and should be adhered to during
the meeting. Unnecessary extraneous conversation should not occur. The Chairman shall
maintain tight control of the meeting and see that all scheduled business is handled in a prompt
and courteous manner. All decisions shall be made by vote of the Board or Committee and
individual members shall base their vote on an impartial, unbiased analysis of the available facts
and data.
D. CONFLICT OF INTEREST Members of Boards and Committees shall at all times avoid
getting themselves into conflict of interest situations and shall constantly endeavor to avoid
getting into situations which might be interpreted by the public as conflicts of interest. Members
will refrain from privately advising citizens on any matter which may later come before the
Board or Committee on which he serves other than to refer the citizens to the proper ordinances
or other procedural documentation, Members shall not enter into any agreement, specific or
implied, on any matter which may later come before the Board or Committee on which he
serves, if any member has personal business which must come before the Board or Committee,
he shall announce that there is a conflict of interest and shall remove himself from the table and
he shall not vote on the matter.
E. APPOINTMENT Nominees for appointment to Board or Committee shall sign a statement on
the appointment form that they have read and understand this ordinance and that they are willing
to abide by its content.
F. VIOLATION Violation of intent or content of this ordinance may be cause for dismissal,
after notice and hearing by the appointing authority.
C REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES The ordinance entitled “Code of Ethics”,
adopted on September 12, 1985 and with an effective date of October 12, 1985, is hereby
repealed.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 09/12/85
AMENDED: 12/21/85
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF GLENBURN, MAINE
An ordinance to protect the life, health, property and public peace of the Inhabitants of the Town
of Glenburn by establishing the position of Animal Control Officer and by establishing local
regulations dealing with animal control.
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that there shall be an animal control program covering the
entire area of the town with provisions as follows.
1. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
A. APPOINTMENT. The Town Council shall appoint one, and may appoint more than one,
Animal Control Officer pursuant to 7 MRSA Sec. 3452-A. Appointments under this
section shall be for one year terms, or less, with termination to coincide with the end of the
Town’s fiscal year.
B. DUTIES. The Animal Control Officer shall perform all duties required by 7 MRSA Sec.
3452-A, and shall enforce all provisions of this ordinance.
C. REPORTS. The Animal Control Officer shall submit to the Town Manager a monthly log
of all activities performed including the date, time on/time off, elapsed time, description of
activity including location etc. and the number of miles traveled. This report shall serve
both as an activity report and an expense voucher to back up payment to the Animal
Control Officer.
D. NOTIFICATION. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Clerk within
24 hours after impounding any dog. Such notice shall include a detailed description of
the dog and the circumstances of its finding.
E. COMPENSATION. The Animal Control Officer shall receive an annual stipend payable
in four quarterly installments. In addition, the Animal Control Officer shall be paid an
hourly rate and an expense reimbursement for mileage traveled in a personal vehicle. The
stipend, hourly rate and mileage rate shall be determined by the Town Manager within
the guidelines of the annual budget. The Animal Control Officer shall not be entitled to a
mileage reimbursement for any animal control activities performed with a municipally
owned vehicle nor shall the Animal Control Officer be entitled to an hourly rate for any
animal control activities performed while on duty with the County or municipal police
force. Normally, municipal vehicles will not be used for transporting animals to and
from the animal shelter.
2. IMPOUNDMENT. The Municipal Officers shall designate the shelter to which dogs picked
up within the Town of Glenburn shall be taken under 7 MRSA Sec. 3456 or under provisions
of this ordinance. The designated shelter shall have the approval of the Commissioner of
Agriculture. The Municipal Officers shall develop an agreement with the owner of the
designated shelter outlining the full financial arrangements and procedural matters concerning
the use of such shelter as the Town of Glenburn’ s impoundment facility. The agreement shall
expire at the end of the municipal fiscal year but may be renewed if so desired by both parties.
The Town of Glenburn will not be responsible for any fees incurred at any shelter other than
the one so designated.
impounded in the shelter designated by the Dogs found running at large in violation of 7
MRSA Sec 3455 shall be taken up and Municipal Officers, and there confined in a humane
manner for a period of not less than 8 days, unless earlier claimed by their owner, except that
when dogs are found running at large and theft ownership is known, such dogs need not be
impounded, but the Animal Control Officer may institute proceedings to enjoin such violation
in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog within the
abovementioned 8 day period upon the payment of impoundment fees as set forth herein.
After the legal detention period for any particular dog has passed, and if the animal has not
been claimed by its owner, the Animal Control Officer may transfer ownership to some
person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner who will agree to comply with the
provisions of this ordinance. The sale price, if any, thus received shall turned over to the
Municipal Treasurer for receipt into the proper revenue account. If the Animal Control Officer
has not found a new owner, he shall see that the dog is disposed of in a humane manner.
3. IMPOUNDMENT FEES.* Any animal impounded hereunder may be reclaimed by the owner
during regular shelter hours only upon payment of the following fees:
A. Payment of an impoundment fee of $20.00* for each dog, except that on the second and
subsequent impoundments of the same dog in any six month period the fee shall be
$30.00*. A treasurer’s receipt showing that the impoundment fee has been paid at the
municipal office must be presented to the shelter operator before any dog can be released.
B. Payment of the board fee in the amount of $5.00* per day to be paid to the shelter operator.
C. Payment of the cost of any shots which the dog may have received while impounded to be
paid to the shelter operator.
D. Presentation to the shelter operator of a valid dog license for the impounded dog.
* The Town of Glenburn Fees Ordinance supersedes any and all fees quoted in this ordinance.
4. WHEN DOGS MAY BE KILLED. If any dangerous, fierce, or vicious dog cannot be safely
taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain by the Animal Control Officer.
5. BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS. Repealed Effective 06/24/89
6. DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK AND FOWL. Domestic livestock and fowl shall be restrained so
as to prevent their entering any public way unless under complete control of the owner or to
prevent their unauthorized entering onto any private property. When such domestic livestock
and fowl are found to be in violation of this section, the Animal Control Officer may give
written notice of such violation to the owner of such domestic livestock or fowl. ‘Owner”
means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring
such domestic livestock or fowl. If within 60 days of the issuance of the abovementioned
written notice, the owner again fails to keen his domestic livestock or fowl in compliance with
this ordinance, the Animal Control Officer may institute proceedings to enjoin such violation
in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
7. PENALTY. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, plus reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs, recoverable in a civil action in Maine District Court. The Town of Glenburn or
any appropriate officer may institute proceedings to enjoin violations of this ordinance y fines
imposed under this ordinance shall inure to the Town of Glenburn
8. SEVERABILITY. If any portion of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional or invalid,
such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions thereof.
9. REPEAL OP EXISTING ORDINANCE. Upon the effective date of this ordinance, the
ordinance entitled “Dog Control Ordinance” as adopted March 12, 1981, shall be repealed.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED 06/12/76
AMENDED 04/12/81
AMENDED 10/12/85
AMENDED 12/21/85
AMENDED 05/25/89
11/08/07: 3. Impoundment Fees Asterisk added to reflect that the Town of Glenburn Fees
Ordinance supersedes any and all fees quoted in this ordinance.
ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING BOARD OF APPEALS
WHEREAS, it is the desire of the Town of Glenburn to provide a high level of
professionalism in handling appeals from various sources;
WHEREAS, there are currently in existence several distinct boards to hear appeals from
varying sources;
WHEREAS, the work load of each board is very light, resulting in very little practice and
experience in the appeal procedure;
WHEREAS, one single board could normally handle all appeals by meeting once a month;
and
WHEREAS, such monthly meetings would provide sufficient practice and experience to keep
that board in a constant state of familiarity with the appeal process;
NOW, THEREFORE, The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this ordinance entitled
“Ordinance Establishing Board of Appeals” be enacted.
1. ESTABLISHMENT Pursuant to 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 2691, there is hereby created a Board
of Appeals which shall be governed by said 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 2691. Upon the effective
date of this ordinance the previously appointed Board of Appeals, Fair Hearing Authority,
and Board of Assessment Review shall each terminate.
2. ORGANIZATION The Board shall consist of five regular members and one associate
member who shall serve staggered three year terms, except that upon the initial
appointments two regular members shall be appointed with terms to expire on June 30,
1988, two regular members shall be appointed with terms to expire on June 30, 1987, one
regular member shall be appointed with term to expire on June 30, 1986, and the associate
member shall be appointed with term to expire on June 30, 1988. The members shall be
appointed by the Municipal Officers pursuant to Section 3.04 of the Glenburn Charter.
When there is a permanent vacancy, the Municipal Officers shall within 60 days of its
occurrence appoint a person to serve for the unexpired portion of the term. A vacancy shall
occur upon the resignation or death of any member, or when a member ceases to be a voting
resident of the Town, or when a member fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular
meetings, or fails to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding twelve (12)
month period. When a vacancy occurs, the Chairperson of the board shall immediately so
advise the Municipal Officers in writing. The Board may recommend to the Municipal
Officers that the attendance provision be waived for cause in which case no vacancy will
then exist until the Municipal Officers disapprove the recommendation. The associate
member may attend all meetings of the Board and participate in its proceedings, but may
vote only when designated by the Chairperson to sit for a member.
3. MEETING DATES The Board shall meet on the first Tuesday of each month at the
Glenburn Municipal Building starting at 7:00 p.m. except that the Chairperson shall call
special meetings at such times as the legislation governing the matter to be appealed
requires a hearing before said regular meeting date. In the event that no appeals are
scheduled for a regular meeting, the Chairperson may cancel that meeting.
4. SUBMISSION OF REQUEST FOR HEARING All requests for hearings before the Board
shall be submitted to the Town Manager, on standard forms available from the Town
Office, no later than fourteen days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Board except
that requests for hearings regarding the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance shall be submitted no
later than thirty days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Board. This requirement
shall be waived only for those matters which do not require publication.
5. PUBLICATION Except for appeals requiring consideration in executive session, such as
matters emanating from the General Assistance program, the Chairperson shall have notice
of all hearings to come before the Board published in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the Town at least seven days prior to the hearings and shall also post notice of
such hearings at the posting places within the town at which town meeting and election
notices are normally posted at least seven days prior to the hearings.
6. JURISDICTION The Board shall assert jurisdiction over any matter which is specifically
delegated to it by the Charter of the Town of Glenburn; any ordinance properly adopted by
a Glenburn Town Meeting; or any ordinance or set of rules and/or regulations properly
adopted by the Glenburn Town Council; Such jurisdiction shall include but not be limited
to the following:
A. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the Board of Assessment
Review in accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 2526(6)(E) and Section 5.22 of the
Charter of the Town of Glenburn.
B. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the Board of Appeals
referenced in Section X(1) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine.
C. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the Board of Appeals
referenced in Section 16(A)(2) of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Town of
Glenburn, Maine.
D. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the Board of Appeals
referenced in the Building Code Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine.
E. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the Fair Hearing Authority
required by the General Assistance Rules and Regulations of the Town of Glenburn.
F. The herein created Board of Appeals shall be designated as the body to hear appeals of
decisions made by the Local Plumbing Inspector as referenced in § 2100.1 of the Maine
Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 11/21/85
AMENDED: 01/16/88
AMENDED: 10119189
AMENDED: 05/27/93
AMENDED: 07/18/96
1
BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE
Section 1. Effective July 1, 2012, the Town of Glenburn must enforce the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code ("Code") as required by 10 M.R.S. § 9724(1) and 25 M.R.S. § 2373.
Section 2. This Ordinance and the Code shall be administered and enforced by the Code
Enforcement Officer who shall be responsible for the issuance of building permits and certificates
of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for inspecting all construction
for compliance with the Code as may be revised from time to time by the State of Maine pursuant
to State law.
Section 3. Pursuant to 25 M.R.S. § 2357-A, no building may be occupied until the building
official has given a certificate of occupancy for compliance with the Code.
Section 4. The owner, at the owner’s sole expense, may elect to comply with the Code through
inspections that comply with the Code and reports by third-party inspectors certified pursuant to
10 M.R.S. § 9723 submitted to the Town’s Code Enforcement Officer. The building owner shall
be responsible for contractual arrangements with a duly certified third-party inspector. The Code
Enforcement Officer may issue the certificate of occupancy for a building upon receipt of an
inspection report by a certified third-party inspector. The Town of Glenburn and the Code
Enforcement Officer have no obligation to review a report from a third-party inspector for
accuracy prior to issuing the certificate of occupancy.
Section 5. An appeal from any order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this
Ordinance or the Code, or from the Code Enforcement Officer’s refusal to issue a building permit
or a certificate of occupancy may be taken to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the
administrative appeal provisions of the Land Use Ordinance.
Section 6. Any violation of this Ordinance, the Code, or any applicable statutory provision may
be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to 30-A M.R.S. § 4452 or any other
applicable ordinance or statute.
Section 7. The Town Council may establish fees for the administration of this Code pursuant to
the Town of Glenburn Fee Ordinance.
Section 8. In addition to the issuance of a building permit, no construction of a building or
structure shall be commenced until a permit has been obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer certifying that the proposed building or structure and the contemplated use thereof is in
compliance with all other ordinances of the Town of Glenburn, including but not limited to
zoning, shoreland zoning, or land use ordinances.
Section 9. The existing Building Code Ordinance adopted on October 31, 1991, as last amended
on December 23, 2009, is hereby repealed.
2
Section 10. Pursuant to Section 3.10(c) of the Town Charter, the foregoing amendments to this
Ordinance shall become effective at the expiration of thirty (30) days after adoption.
Transition Clause: Any construction project commenced under the third party inspection process
repealed hereby shall not be subject to the foregoing amendments and shall continue to be
governed by the repealed provisions.
BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED: 12/18/86, Effective 01/18/87
REPEALED: 06/11/87
ADOPTED: 6/11/87, Emergency Ordinance with numerous abrogated versions through 05/31/90
ADOPTED: 08/09/90, effective 09/09/90 Regular Building Code Ordinance superseding
Emergency Ordinance
AMENDED: 10/31/91, Effective 11/30/91
AMENDED: 05/14/92, Effective 06/15/92
AMENDED: 12/09/93 Effective 01/09/94
AMENDED: 12/23/09 to reflect amendment approved 5/20/04-Use of Municipal Fee Schedule
for Building Permits, Section 210 of this ordinance
REPEALED: 07/01/12 Existing Building Code Ordinance adopted 10/31/91 as last amended
12/23/09
ADOPTED: 07/01/12, Effective 07/31/12 retroactive to 07/01/12 pursuant to the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code as required by 10 M.R.S. §9724 (1) and 25 M.R.S. §2373
AMENDED: 11/20/14, effective 12/20/14 Changes to Section 2 (Reaffirmation 11/19/15),
Section 4, Section 5, Section 6, Section 8, and Section 10, and Transition Clause
added.
TOWN OF GLENBURN CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATION ORDINANCE
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL
1.1 Short Title
This Ordinance shall be know as the “Glenburn Cable Television Rate Regulation Ordinance”
and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance.
1.2 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the authority conferred on cable television
franchising authorities to regulate Basic Service Rates and Charges.
1.3 Authority
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Cable Television and Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992, as amended; pursuant to regulations adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission (“FCC”), including but not limited to the “FCC Rate Regulations’
as defined herein; and pursuant to 30-A MRSA. Section 3001, as amended.
1.4 Validity and Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any
other section or provisions of the Ordinance.
1.5 Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its approval by the municipal officers.
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
2.1 Basic Service Rates and Charges:
Basic Service Tier rates and the charges for related equipment, installation and services which,
pursuant to federal laws and regulations, may be regulated by franchising authorities.
2.2 Basic Service Tier:
That tier of cable television service which contains, at a minimum, all local broadcast signals and
the public, educational and governmental channels required by the franchise agreement.
Provided that the contents of this tier meet this definition, the Cable Operator may, in its sole
discretion, determine what (if any) additional service will be provided as part of this tier.
2.3 Benchmark Approach:
That theory of rate regulation which sets rates based upon “benchmarks” established by the FCC.
2.4 Cable Operator:
Any cable television system operating within the Town of Glenburn.
2.5 Cost-of-service Approach:
That theory of rate regulation, to be initiated only by the Cable Operator, which allows the Cable
Operator to charge rates in excess of the FCC benchmark rates upon a showing that the cost of
providing cable service exceeds the benchmark rate.
2.6 FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
2.7 FCC Rate Regulations:
Report and Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Sections of Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation, MM Docket 92-266, FCC 93-177
(released May 3, 1993), as amended.
2.8 Franchising Authority:
The Town of Glenburn, acting pursuant to its authority under federal, state, and local laws and
regulations to authorize and oversee the provision of cable television service in Glenburn.
ARTICLE 3: RATE SETTING PROCEDURES
3.1 Cable Operator Submission
Within 30 days of the date of the notice from the Franchising Authority to the Cable Operator,
the Cable Operator shall file its rate justification with the Franchising Authority.
3.2 Franchising Authority Response
The Franchising Authority shall make a decision on the rate request within 30 days after the
Cable Operator submits its ratejustification. The rates proposed by the Cable Operator shall
automatically take effect after that 30 day period unless the Franchising Authority issues a
statement that it needs additional time to make its decision.
If the Franchising Authority decides that it needs longer than the initial 30-day period to consider
the rate request, it may issue a statement to that effect. Such statement may provide for up to 90
additional days to review a rate request based upon a benchmark approach and up to 150
additional days to review a rate request based upon a cost of service approach.
If the Franchising Authority cannot reach a decision by the end of the extended period set forth
in the preceding paragraph, the rates proposed by the Cable Operator shall go into effect, subject
to refund. If the Franchising Authority intends to seek refunds, it shall issue an Order to the
Cable Operator prior to expiration of the time period for response, notifying the Cable Operator
to deep accurate records with respect to rates.
3.3 Public Hearing Required
A public hearing shall be held in connection with every rate setting proceeding. At least 10 days
prior to the hearing date, the Town Clerk shall publish a notice of the hearing in a news paper of
general circulation in the Town of Glenburn. The notice shall identify the name of the Cable
Operator, indicate that a rate change has been requested, and identify the time and place of the
pub heating.
3.4 Proprietary Information
The Franchising Authority may require the Cable Operator to furnish proprietary information in
connection with any rate setting proceeding.
3.5 Calculation of Rates and Refunds
In setting Basic Tier Rates and Charges, and in setting any refunds, the Franchising Authority
shall be governed by the FCC Rate Regulations as amended. The FCC Rate Regulations shall
govern not with standing any different or inconsistent provisions in the Franchise Agreement.
3.6 Decision of Franchising Authority
The Franchising Authority shall issue a written rate decision with appropriate findings and
conclusions if the Franchising Authority:
a. disapproves, in whole or in part, the initial rate schedule or a proposed rate increase; or
b. approves the initial rate or proposed rate increase over the objection of an interested party.
Public notice must be given of any such written decision, which shall include release of the text
of the written decision to the public.
No written decision shall be required to approve an unopposed existing or proposed rate.
3.7 Appeals
The FCC shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear appeals challenging whether the Franchising
Authority’s decision is consistent with the 1992 Cable Act or any applicable FCC rules. Any
participant in a Franchising Authority’s rate regulation proceeding may appeal the Franchising
Authority’s decision on such grounds to the FCC within 30 days of release of the public notice
required under Article 3.6 of this Ordinance.
Appeals on grounds other than those stated in the preceding paragraph shall be made to Superior
Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
ARTICLE 4: EXECUTION OF DOCUMENTS
4.1 Authority conferred
The Town Manager, or the Manager’s designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the Town
and file with the FCC such certifications, forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter
be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the Town to regulate Basic Service
Rates and Charges.
ARTICLE 5: AMENDMENT
This Ordinance may be amended by the Municipal Officers following public hearing.
ARTICLE 6: FEDERAL LAW PRE-EXEMPTION
To the extent that any provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with federal law or regulations
now in effect or which may be later adopted, federal law shall govern.
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains this ordinance.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED: 01/20/94
1
CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE
Pursuant to 30 MRSA, Section 2158(2), THE TOWN OF GLENBURN, MAINE, acting by and
through its Municipal Officers, HEREBY ORDAINS this Cable Television Ordinance.
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize the Municipal Officers to control the franchising
and regulation of any CATV within the boundaries of the Town of Glenburn including its
construction, operation and maintenance in, along, upon, across, over and under the streets,
alleys, public ways and public areas now laid out or dedicated, and all future extensions thereof
and additions thereto, including poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes,
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation of the CATV.
SECTION 2- DEFINITIONS
“CATS’” shall mean any community antenna television system or facility that, in whole or in
part, receives directly or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals
transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or originates its own
signal or signals produced through any of its community access channels and distributes such
signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services, but
such term shall not include any such facility that serves only the residents of one or more
apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management.
“Cable Television Company” shall mean any person, firm, or corporation owning, controlling,
operating, managing, or leasing a CATS’ system within the Town of Glenburn sometimes
hereinafter referred to as “The Company.”
“Town” shall mean the Town of Glenburn, organized and existing under the laws of the State of
Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
SECTION 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Any cable television system shall be constructed and operated in accordance with Federal
Communications Commission regulations.
No cable television company may abandon service or any portion thereof without having given
six months’ prior written notice to the Town and to any other town which may be affected by the
abandonment and having received the written consent of the Municipal Officers. Any cable
television company which violates this paragraph shall be subject to a fine of $50.00 a day, for
each day that the violation continues.
Cable television systems, as a condition of franchise, shall be operated in such a manner as to
provide a safe, adequate, and reliable service to subscribers. The Town shall be entitled to
injunctive relief in addition to any other remedies available by law to protect any rights conferred
upon the Town by this ordinance or State Law. (30 MRSA, Section 2158).
Cable television systems located in accordance with this ordinance, implementing regulations,
and franchises are not considered defects in public ways.
2
SECTION 4- FRANCHISE REQUIRED
No person, firm, or corporation shall install, maintain, or operate within the Town or place or
maintain along the Town’s public ways or other public areas, any Cable television system and
appurtenances, or parts thereof, unless a franchise authorizing the use of said public ways or
other public areas has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance and unless
said franchise is in full force and effect.
SECTION 5 - DETERMINATION OF PUBLIC NEEDS
In order to determine special local needs or interests, the Municipal Officers shall, prior to the
issuance of a request for proposals from one or more cable television operators, hold a public
hearing for the purpose of determining any special local needs or interests regarding cable
television. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the same manner as for town
meetings at least 7 days prior to the hearing. During the two week period following the public
hearing, the public may submit written comments on the proposed request for proposals.
SECTION 6- REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
Subsequent to the close of the public hearing, the Municipal Officers may issue their request for
proposals. Applications shall be in a format prescribed by the Municipal Officers and shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.
SECTION 7 - SUBMISSION OF APPLICATIONS
Applicants for a franchise shall pay a non-refundable filing fee to the Town of $175.00 (one
hundred seventy-five dollars) to defray the cost of public notice, advertising, and other expenses
incurred in acting upon applications.
The application shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall contain such information as the
Municipal Officers may require, including but not limited to:
a. a construction schedule;
b. a written commitment to timely service;
c. a general description of the applicant’s proposed operation;
d. the restoration of property;
e. a schedule of proposed charges;
f. a statement detailing its business or corporate organization; and
g. a statement detailing the prior operational experience of the applicant in cable television
systems and microwave services.
Upon filing, any franchise applications and related documents shall be open for inspection by the
public during regular municipal office hours. The Municipal Officers shall insure that the public
is given reasonable notice of the availability of the documents.
SECTION 8 - FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS OR CONTRACTS
Before authorizing the issuance of any franchise agreement, the Municipal Officers shall review
the applicant’s character, financial and technical qualifications, and the adequacy and feasibility
3
of its qualifications to operate a CATV system within the Town, and shall conduct a public
hearing thereon after having giving at least seven days advertised notice of such public hearing.
The Municipal Officers may contract on such terms and conditions and impose such fees as its
Municipal Officers determine to be in the best interests of the municipality and its residents.,
including the grant of exclusive or nonexclusive franchises for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
years for the placing and maintenance of cable television systems and appurtenances, or parts
thereof, along public ways and including contracts with cable television companies which
receive the services of television signal transmissions offered by any public utilities using public
ways for such transmission. Each franchise shall contain the following provisions:
(a) area or areas to be served;
(b) a line extension policy;
(c) a provision for renewal, the term of which shall not exceed fifteen (15) years;
(d) procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints by the cable television
company;
(e) procedures for revoking the franchise or contract by the Municipal Officers for good and
sufficient cause after due notice to the cable television company and a public hearing thereon
with the right of appeal to the Maine Superior Court under rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure; and
(f) such other terms and conditions which are in the best interests of the municipality.
SECTION 9- PERFORMANCE BOND & INSURANCE COVERAGE
Upon the execution of any such franchise contract the Cable Television Company shall file a
surety company performance bond in an amount not less than $25,000.00 conditioned upon the
faithful performance of said contract and full compliance with any laws, ordinances, regulations
governing said franchise, including cost of dismantling the system, and also evidence of such
public liability, copyright infringement and other insurance coverage as the Municipal Officers
may require. When the Cable Television Company has completed its proposed system as set
forth in its proposal, and is in compliance with its franchise agreement, the Municipal Officers
shall permit The Company to cancel said bond except for an amount to cover cost of dismantling
the system.
SECTION 1.0 - EFFECTIVE DATE
Pursuant to 30 MRSA, Section 2158(2), this ordinance shall become effective immediately upon
adoption by the Municipal Officers.
SECTION 11 - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
The “Community Antenna Television System Ordinance” of the Town of Glenburn, adopted on
March 28, 1985 is hereby repealed in its entirety.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED: 03/10/88
EFFECTIVE: 04/10/88
1
CEMETERY ORDINANCE FOR THE TOWN OF GLENBURN, MAINE
Title and Purpose: The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this ordinance entitled “Cemetery
Ordinance for the Town of Glenburn, Maine” be enacted. The purpose of this ordinance is to
establish a set of rules and regulations governing the operation of the municipally owned
Lakeview, Birch Grove, and Pleasant View cemeteries (“the Cemeteries”) and to assist in the
maintenance of these lands as peaceful and beautiful areas and as reverent symbols of respect for
the deceased.
I. ORGANIZATION
A. SUPERINTENDENT OF CEMETERIES
1. Appointment. The Town Council shall appoint a Superintendent of Cemeteries for three
year terms. Each term shall commence at the beginning of the Town’s fiscal year. The
Town Manager may serve as the Superintendent of Cemeteries if so appointed by the Town
Council.
2. Responsibility. If the Superintendent is the Town Manager, the Superintendent shall be
directly responsible to the Town Council. If the Superintendent is other than the Town
Manager, the Superintendent shall be responsible to the Town Manager.
3. Duties. The Superintendent shall be responsible for overseeing all aspects of cemetery
management within the Town of Glenburn.
B. SEXTONS
1. Appointment. The Sexton(s) shall be appointed by the Town Council for (a) three year
term(s). Each term shall commence at the beginning of the Town’s fiscal year. The
appointments shall be made from a list of nominees provided by the Cemetery Committee.
However, if the Town Council feels that the best interests of the Town would be so served,
they may make the appointments from outside the nomination list provided by the
Cemetery Committee.
2. Responsibility. The Sexton(s) shall be directly responsible to the Superintendent.
3. Duties. The Sextons shall prepare and keep updated plot maps of each cemetery; supervise
all interments, including opening and closing of each grave site; supervise removal of
bodies from graves; and prepare an accounting of all cemetery activities for inclusion in the
annual town report.
C. CEMETERY COMMITTEE
1. Appointment. The Town Council shall appoint a five member Cemetery Committee. The
term of each member shall be for 3 years or until the member’s successor is appointed and
qualified except that the transition appointments (Ordinance amendment to change from
one year to three year terms) beginning July 1, 1994 shall be as follows: Two for three
years; two for two years; and one for one year. Each term shall commence at the beginning
of the Town’s fiscal year.
2
2. Responsibility. The Cemetery Committee is directly responsible to the Superintendent.
3. Duties. The Cemetery Committee shall monitor all aspects of the management of the
municipal cemeteries and shall advise the Superintendent of needed improvements;
nominate Sexton(s) each year for appointment by the Town Council (These nominations
may be made from members of the Committee); and shall submit to the Town Manager, at
the appropriate time, a recommended annual budget for the operation of the cemeteries.
4. Meetings. The Cemetery Committee shall hold four regular meetings each year. These
meetings shall be held on the third Tuesday of April, June, August, & October. The time of
the meetings shall be established by the Committee. The Committee may hold such
additional meetings as are necessary.
5. Officers. The Cemetery Committee shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary at the first
regular meeting of each fiscal year.
II. FINANCIAL MATTERS
It is intended that the Town support the maintenance of the cemeteries through a combination of
tax revenues and the interest on the Trust Fund. As long as the combination is sufficient to
maintain the Cemeteries in a reasonable state of attractiveness, all lots in the Cemeteries will be
maintained at the same level using the combination of funds. In the event that at some future
time, the voters do not allow sufficient tax revenue to be raised or appropriated to properly care
for the Cemeteries, then the interest from the Trust fund shall be used to maintain only the lots
designated as perpetual care. Only if the interest exceeds the amount necessary to maintain the
perpetual care lots for the full year may the excess be used for other Cemetery maintenance.
Nothing in this ordinance is to be construed to prohibit the establishment of special trust funds
for purposes other than those outlined herein.
A. BUDGET
Upon the call of the Town Manager, the Cemetery Committee shall annually prepare a
recommended budget for the operation of the Cemeteries within the Town for the following
fiscal year. If the Superintendent is not the Town Manager, the Superintendent shall assist
the Committee in the preparation of the budget recommendation. The Town Manager shall
use the budget recommendations as a guide in the preparation of the cemetery appropriation
portion of the budget to be recommended to the Town Council for eventual consideration by
the Town Meeting. The Town Manager shall also include in the budget recommendation an
estimated revenue and the amount of interest projected to be earned during the current fiscal
year by the Trust Fund described in Section H.D. of this ordinance. At the beginning of the
new fiscal year for which the budget is being prepared, all interest actually earned by said
trust during the previous fiscal year shall be receipted into the General Fund as revenue for
the new fiscal year. As long as a Town Meeting appropriation and the resulting expenditures
for cemetery operation exceed the amount of interest earned on the trust, it shall be
considered that the interest money has been spent on the cemeteries.
3
B. SALE OF GRAVESITES
The Town will sell cemetery lots, at prices stated in Section II. C. 1. of this ordinance, to
both residents and non-residents of Glenburn. A resident is defined to be a person living
within the Town of Glenburn at the time of the purchase of the lot. A non-resident is defined
to be a non-resident of Glenburn but with immediate family members previously buried in
Glenburn cemeteries. The Town shall issue a certificate of ownership of the lot(s) along
with a map showing the location of such lot(s) within 30 days of receipt of payment for said
lot(s). If problems arise which must be resolved before the certificate can be issued, the
abovementioned 30-day time period may be extended. In such case, the Town shall give
written notice to the purchaser of the gravesite(s) within the 30-day period, stating the
specific reasons for the delay and the expected date of delivery of the certificate.
C. FEES, CHARGES, AND PAYMENTS*
1. Sale of gravesites. The sale price of each single cemetery gravesite shall be $50.00* for
residents and $200.00* for non-residents.
2. Charges for opening and closing gravesites. There shall be a charge of $500.00* for
opening and closing a grave for full burial and $200.00 for cremation from April 15 to
October 30. The fee for opening and closing a grave from November 1 to April 14 will be
determined by the Sexton and approved by the Superintendent. Sodding and seeding of
the mound will be done for an additional charge, to be paid in advance. The payment of
all charges related to the opening and closing of graves shall be made directly to the
Sextons by the funeral directors or others requesting the service. The Sextons shall
submit to the Town Manager complete reports of all graves opened and closed during the
fiscal year ending June 30 and all amounts received for so doing. Such reports shall be
made no later than 10 days following the close of the fiscal year.
3. Private sales of lots once lots are purchased from the Town shall not occur without the
approval of the Town. Lots shall only be sold at the price that they were originally
purchased. Sellers of lots must provide the Town with a copy of the proposed signed Bill
of Sale so that the Town can approve the sale and record the new owners for Town
records.
*The Town of Glenburn Fees Ordinance supersedes all fees quoted in this ordinance.
D. TRUST FUND
A special Trust Fund shall be established by the Town Treasurer who shall maintain an
accurate accounting thereof. The Treasurer shall see that a detailed report of the Trust Fund
is published in the annual report for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1985 and every fifth year
thereafter. The Trust Fund shall consist of three subsections, namely:
1. The sale price of gravesites. The proceeds from the sale of gravesites received subsequent
to the adoption of this ordinance shall be deposited in Part I of the Trust Fund. The
Treasurer shall be required to show in the account only the cumulative total of receipts,
and not the individual amounts or names of persons purchasing such gravesites. The sale
of gravesites by the Town is strictly a real estate transaction and in no way is the sale to be
4
construed to imply that the Town has assumed any obligation for the future upkeep of
such site.
2. The principal amount received for establishing perpetual care. The Treasurer shall maintain
the complete listing of perpetual care lots. The listing shall include the name of the
person’s perpetual care, the principal amount of the donation, and, as soon as proper maps
are available, the map numbers of the lots involved. The listing shall include all perpetual
care lots existing at the effective date of this ordinance plus all lots for which perpetual
care donations are received subsequent to such effective date. A lot (single burial site)
may be designated as a perpetual care lot upon receipt of a donation of at least $200.00.
The Town Council may accept these perpetual care donations on behalf of the Inhabitants
of the Town of Glenburn.
3. The cumulative total of donations for the maintenance of cemeteries received subsequent
to the effective date of this ordinance and for which the donor has not requested special
trust fund status. The Treasurer shall be required to show in the account only the
cumulative total of such donations, and not the individual amounts or names of such
donors.
4. The Town will ensure that there will always be perpetual care on the perpetual care lots on
Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, and Labor Day.
III. RECORDS AND MAPS
A. The Superintendent shall see that a record system is established to provide up to date
records of interments, lot owners, and trust funds along with up to date plot maps. These
records and maps shall be protected within a fireproof vault except when in use.
B. Family Burial Grounds
When a person or persons appropriate for a burying ground a piece of land, it must be
recorded in the registry of deeds of the same county and by the clerk of the town where it
is situated and substantially marked or be kept fenced. Family Burial Grounds shall be
for family members only, not the general public, and shall not exceed ten (10) lots.
IV. GROUNDS MAINTENANCE
1. All lots within each cemetery shall be mowed and trimmed during the summer season as
required. The Superintendent of Cemeteries shall insure that adequate contractual
agreements are in force to provide for sequential maintenance. Additional grounds
maintenance and improvements such as gates, fencing, grading, soils for roadways, and lot
renovations, and posting of signs shall be accomplished by direction of the Superintendent
within the limits of available budget considerations and as recommended by the Cemetery
Committee.
2. In no case shall the maintenance, repair, or replacement of any memorial, tomb, or marker
be construed as grounds maintenance. Special approval of the Town Council will be
required for expenditure of funds for such purposes.
5
3. Lot owners may perform individual work on their own property only upon approval of the
Sexton(s) or the Superintendent. They may also arrange for such care by paying an amount
as determined by the Sexton(s).
4. On and after the effective date of this ordinance no lot or grave site shall be partially or
fully enclosed by a fence, rail, curb, hedge, trees, or shrubs, and no burial plot shall be
raised to a level higher than the surrounding plot levels. No stones shall be allowed on
gravesites. Corner and foot markers shall be installed at ground level with at least one (1) to
two (2) inches of stone underneath them.
5. Roadway and land areas between lots shall be contoured as required to provide for adequate
surface drainage.
6. The cemetery grounds maintenance will include trimming of trees and shrubs. No
individual beds of shrubbery or flowers shall be permitted on the grounds. No shrubs or
trees will be planted on individual or family plots.
7. The Sexton shall have the right to remove all floral designs, receptacles, flowers, weeds,
trees, shrubs, plants, herbage of any kind from the cemetery when in the opinion of the
Sexton they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, or diseased, or when they do not
conform to the standard maintained in the cemetery.
8. Waste receptacles shall be placed in each cemetery to encourage the elimination of grounds
clutter.
V. INTERMENTS AND REMOVALS
A. INTERMENTS
1. The Sextons shall insure that all State laws with respect to burials are complied with.
2. The lot owner or funeral director shall designate the location of the grave on each plot. Any
change in location made after the opening has begun shall be at the expense of the lot
owner.
3. All interments shall be restricted to members of the family that has reserved such lot.
Written permission of the lot owner must accompany all requests for permits to bury
persons not members of the immediate family.
4. No burial will be permitted without a vault of concrete, steel, or other durable material
approved by the Sexton.
5. An additional charge may be assessed for service on Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays.
6. A 36 hour notice shall be given the Sexton for the opening and preparation of the grave
prior to interment unless religious or other conviction demands earlier burial.
7. Interment shall be scheduled from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Other
times may be specially scheduled with the Sexton(s).
6
B. REMOVAL
1. Removal of bodies from graves will be made only under the direction of the Sexton(s) in
accordance with the Statutes of the State of Maine. Charges for removal will be made in
accordance with the difficulty of the work.
2. Graves will not be opened for inspection except for official investigations.
3. Any markers or monuments designating the location of an interment shall be removed
under the supervision of the Sexton at the time of disinterment.
VI. STONES AND MONUMENTS
1. The owner of any lot shall have the right to erect thereon any proper stone or monument. It
is desirable that the Sexton be consulted before ordering monumental work to insure
harmony with other stones in the cemetery.
2. No headstone, monument or other superstructure shall be erected until a suitable foundation
is laid. Foundations shall not be constructed within the actual grave space except where the
grave liner is of a permanent type of sufficient strength to support the weight. Foundation
depth will normally be at least four (4) feet deep. Cremations shall be at least two (2) feet
deep and do not need to be in a vault.
3. The setting of monuments, stones and markers, including foot markers, and the
transportation of all tools, materials, etc. within the cemetery grounds shall be subject to the
supervision and control of the Sexton. No monument, stone, or marker, including foot
markers, may be installed until the location of such monument, stone, or marker has been
marked out and approved by the Sexton. Installations must be in the presence of the
Sexton. Any monuments, stones, and markers, including foot markers, that are not
installed according to the provision of this ordinance shall be reset to meet the provision of
this ordinance within 72 hours of the initial setting.
Failure of the contractor or individual to reset the monument, stone, and markers, including
foot markers, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance will result in the
contractor or individual being barred from installing any other monuments, stones, and
markers, including foot markers, at any cemeteries in the Town of Glenburn until the
monuments, stones, and markers, including foot markers, are installed to the satisfaction of
the Cemetery Sexton or the Superintendent of Cemeteries.
A monument company must notify the Cemetery Sexton by filling out a request to install a
monument, stone, or marker application at least 72 hours in advance of the placement and
installation of monuments, stones, and markers.
A monument company shall disclose if they are an LLC and provide proof of liability
insurance at the time of the submission of the application.
A monument company shall also be required to sign a form indicating that the monument,
stone, or marker has been installed in accordance with the Town of Glenburn Cemetery
Ordinance and that failure to install the monuments, stone, or marker in accordance with the
Town of Glenburn Cemetery Ordinance will require the stone, marker, or monument to be
7
reset until it meets the standards contained in the Town of Glenburn Cemetery Ordinance
and may subject the company to fines and penalties.
4. Stone work or monumental work once placed on its foundation shall not be removed
without the knowledge and consent of the Sexton. (See “Removal” above)
VII. PUBLIC HOURS
The cemeteries shall be open to the public from sunrise to sunset each day.
VIII. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
1. Firearms, bows and arrows, sling-shots, air rifles, or other offensive weapons shall not be
allowed within the confines of any municipal cemeteries except when part of a military
ceremony.
2. Joy riding of any sort, including but not limited to bicycles, motorcycles, snowmobiles, all
terrain vehicles, and horseback, shall not be allowed within any municipal cemetery.
3. Unauthorized presence of any persons or vehicles within any of the cemeteries covered by
this ordinance between sunset and sunrise shall not be allowed. In accordance with 17-A
M.R.S. §402(1)(E), a person commits criminal trespass (a Class E crime) if that person
enters or remains in a cemetery between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour
before sunrise, unless authorized by the Town.
4. Conduct unbecoming to a sacred place shall not be allowed.
5. Glass bottles and alcoholic beverages are not allowed and shall not be placed on
monuments and graves.
IX. PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance where no specific penalty is imposed by
the Laws of the State of Maine shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more
than $500.00, plus reasonable attorney fees and costs, recoverable in a civil action in Maine
District Court. The Town of Glenburn or any appropriate officer may institute proceedings to
enjoin such violations. Any fines collected shall inure to Town of Glenburn. The Town Council
may authorize the expenditure of such fines for the repair of damages done in the cemeteries but
in no case may such fines be used for routine repair and maintenance. Any monies received from
such fines which are not expended during any fiscal year shall be carried over to subsequent
fiscal years in a special fund.
X. SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional, or invalid, this will not affect the
remaining provisions of the ordinance.
XI. REPEAL OP CONFLICTING ORDINANCE
The ordinance entitled “Ordinance Establishing Cemetery Association”, adopted by the
Glenburn Town Council on August 25, 1983 and the “Regulations of Glenburn Cemeteries”, as
8
amended, which were adopted in accordance with the terms of the Ordinance are hereby
repealed.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
Adopted: 6/12/76
Amended: 01/15/80
Amended: 09/24/81
Amended: 09/24/83
Amended: 03/03/85
Amended: 10/05/92
Amended: 05/27/93
Amended: 12/09/93
Amended: 05/19/16, effective 06/19/16
Amended: 08/11/16, effective 09/10/16
Pursuant to Section 3.10 (c) of the Town Charter, this Ordinance will become effective at the expiration of 30 days
after adoption.
1
TOWN OF GLENBURN ORDINANCE REGULATING CONDUCT IN PUBLIC PARKS
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains this Ordinance which shall be known and may be cited as
the “Town of Glenburn Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Public Parks.”
Section 1: Definitions
(1) “Town” means the Town of Glenburn.
(2) All references to time in this Ordinance shall mean Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Time, whichever may then be in effect by virtue of 1 MRSA Sec. 151.
(3) “Public” means any member of the general public except that in the case of the Lakeside
Landing Recreation Area, the term “Public” shall be limited to
(a) Persons having a residence in the Town of Glenburn and their guests. For purposes of this
Ordinance, the term “residence” is that place in which a person’s habitation is fixed, or
(b) Persons not having a residence in the Town of Glenburn but who own taxable real estate
within the Town of Glenburn and their guests.
(4) “Vehicle” means any wheeled conveyance whether motor powered, animal drawn, or selfpropelled.
The term shall include, but not be limited to, any trailer in tow, automobile,
truck, wagon, snowmobile, motor bike, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle (ATV), or trail bike
of any size, kind, or description. Exception is made for baby carriages, bicycles,
handicapped conveyances, and for vehicles being used in the maintenance and operation of
Town Parks.
(5) “Park” shall mean the areas within the boundaries of the following Town of Glenburn owned
recreational properties and facilities:
Lakeside Landing Recreation Area
The entire area acquired by the Town of Glenburn on May 26, 1989 by deed recorded in the
Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Volume 4448, Page 292, exclusive of any outtransfers
by the Town of Glenburn subsequent to the date of acquisition.
Elementary School Recreation Area-also known as Smith Field Complex
A portion of the land acquired by the Town of Glenburn on August 21, 1975 by deed
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Volume 2577, Page 230, such portion
being that developed under Project No. 23-00403 of the State of Maine, Bureau of Parks &
Recreation, Land & Water Conservation Fund. The area is divided into two parts:
Part A is under the jurisdiction of the Town of Glenburn and is comprised of the baseball
field, the softball field, the soccer field, and the jogging and nature trails. Part A is located
on the 23.11 acre parcel of land shown on the Division Plan dated April 29, 2009 prepared by
Richard N. Perry, Sr.
Part B is under the jurisdiction of the Glenburn School Department and is comprised of the
school playground area and the picnic area. Part B is located on the 10.73 acre “School
2
Parcel” shown on the Division Plan. The School Parcel also encompasses the lawn areas, the
school parking areas, the wastewater disposal area, the old playground area north of the
school, and those areas of the school building which can be used for recreational purposes.
Cookson Lot Recreational Fields
The recreational fields that are accessed via Nadia Drive.
Butler Park
The basketball court located in front of the Glenburn Town Office.
West Side Recreation Area
The entire area acquired by the Town of Glenburn from the Estate of Leona B. Buzzell on
February 5, 1997 by deed recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Volume
6320, Page 142.
Section 2: Parks and Recreation Director
There is hereby created the position of Parks and Recreation Director who shall have the powers
and duties enumerated in this ordinance. The Parks and Recreation Director shall be appointed
for an indefinite term by the Town Manager. Compensation and benefits of the Parks and
Recreation Director, if any, shall be as determined in the adopted municipal budget in accounts
set up for this purpose.
Section 3: Park Property
Except as may be necessitated by reason of construction activities or maintenance activities
under the supervision and control of the Parks and Recreation Director, or forest management
activities and harvesting under the supervision and control of the Parks and Recreation Director
and with the approval of the Town Council, no person in a Park shall:
(1) Disfiguration or Removal of Park Property
Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building,
bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines, or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, playground equipment, facilities or Park property or appurtenances
whatever, either real or personal;
(2) Removal or Disruption of Natural Resources
Dig or remove any sand, soil, rock, stones, timber or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency;
(3) Damage to Plant Life
Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, shrub or plant or injure the bark, or pick
the flowers or seeds, of any tree, shrub or plant. Nor shall any person attach a rope, wire, or
other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass
areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area; or
3
(4) Erection of Structures
Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such lands, except on
special written permit issued by the Parks and Recreation Director, duly authorized by the Town
Council.
Section 4: Sanitation
In order to minimize as much as possible conditions which might be detrimental to the health of
visitors or to the environment, no person in a Park shall:
(1) Pollution of Waters
Throw, discharge or otherwise place or caused to be placed in the waters or any fountain,
pool, pond, stream or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(2) Refuse and Trash
Bring in and dump, deposit or leave in a park any solid waste, special waste, hazardous
waste, waste oil, construction and demolition debris, land clearing debris, septage waste,
wood waste, yard waste, or any other type of waste. This includes but is not limited to
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse,
household trash, or other type of. solid waste. Any solid waste generated within the park,
such as but not limited to empty containers and wrappers from a picnic, shall not be disposed
of or placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, except in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not
so provided, all such solid waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for such presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(3) Animal Waste
Fail to immediately remove and lawfully dispose of any feces left in any park by a dog,
horse, or other animal owned by such person or under his/her control. This regulation shall
not apply to a dog or other animal accompanying any handicapped person who, by reason of
his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 5: Traffic
(1) Motor Vehicles
(a) State Motor Vehicle Laws
All persons shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State of Maine Motor
Vehicle Laws with regard to equipment and operations of vehicles together with such
regulations as are contained in this and other Town of Glenburn Ordinances.
4
(b) Traffic Signs
All persons shall comply with all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution,
stopping, or parking, and all others posted for proper traffic control and for safeguarding
life and the property.
(c) Operation of Vehicles
No person shall drive any vehicle, excepting bicycles, on or in any area except public
ways, public easements, and park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may, on
occasion, be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Parks and
Recreation Director. Excepting bicycles, only vehicles properly licensed and registered
for operation on public ways and operated by persons properly licensed to operate said
vehicle shall be permitted in any Park area. Snowmobiles are allowed on marked trails
only.
(2) Parking
(a) Designated Areas
No person in a Park shall park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with directions posted thereat and with
the instructions of any attendant who may be present.
(i) Vehicles with trailers for boats; Parking in upper parking lot
i. Lot on Right as you enter the park
(ii) Passenger Vehicles; Parking in lower lot
i. Lot on Left after the “S” turn in the road
(iii) Handicap Vehicles; Parking on L, by picnic pavilion, at the end of road by boat
launch, vehicles in this area must have a handicap plate or placard
(iv) Special Event Parking; vehicles associated with a special event need to park in the
upper parking lot first (Lot on R as you enter the park) as to not to hinder general
public use as much as possible, these vehicles need to display the special event
parking permit.
(b) Night Parking
No person in a Park shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night within any Park
between one-half hour after sunset and 6 AM except as allowed in Section 6(3) of this
ordinance.
(c) Parking Spaces for Handicapped Persons
No persons shall park a vehicle in a parking space clearly marked as a handicapped
parking space unless the vehicle bears a special registration plate, or prominently bears a
placard issued under 29-A MRSA. § 521 or 523, as amended, or a similar plate or placard
issued by another state. The Parks and Recreation Director is hereby authorized to
designate and mark handicapped parking spaces in any park of the Town of Glenburn.
(3) Bicycles
5
(a) Confined to Roads
No person in a Park shall ride a bicycle on other than a vehicle road or path designated
for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over
any grassy area or wooded trail or any area reserved for pedestrian use. No vehicles of
any type, bicycles included, shall be allowed on the nature trail behind the Glenburn
Elementary School and the West Glenburn Park Trail. This subsection shall not apply to
wheelchairs or other vehicles needed for the transport of the handicapped.
(b) Operation
Persons on bicycles shall keep to the right-hand side of the road or path as close to the
edge of the traveled way as conditions permit. Bicycles shall be kept in a single file when
two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines
with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the left of any
vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicle they are meeting.
(c) Designated Racks
No person in a Park shall leave a bicycle at a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(4) Winter Use
No person shall launch or recover any snowmobile or ATV in any area of any Park except
that such vehicles may be launched and recovered from the boat ramp area at Lakeside
Landing for use on the lake. Once launched, such vehicles shall not be operated in any other
area of the Park nor shall such vehicles be operated on any designated skating area on the
lake adjacent to the Park.
(5) Snowmobiles
No person shall operate a snowmobile in a Park except on designated and marked trails.
Section 6: Recreational Activities
(1) Bathing and Swimming
(a) Designated Areas
No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in the waters of any fountain, pond, pool, stream or
other body of water in any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing
into such waters, except in areas specifically provided for swimming or bathing, and in
compliance with this Ordinance and any regulations as promulgated by the Parks and
Recreation Director. The Parks and Recreation Director may prohibit swimming or
bathing in any area upon finding such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise
inadvisable.
(b) Animals
1. All animals brought into any Town Park shall be under the owner’s control at all times
so as to not interfere with the enjoyment of the outdoor facility by other members of
the public. No animal shall be off a leash at any time at any Town Park. Leashes shall
be no longer than eight (8) feet. Owners shall pick up after their animals.
6
2. Animals are not allowed in the swim area in Pushaw Lake located inside of the buoys
or on the sand beach portion of Lakeside Landing at any time.
3. The restrictions in this subsection shall not apply to service animals.
(2) Camping
No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter in a Park for the purpose
of overnight camping. Nor, after closing hours, shall any person leave in a Park any movable
structure or special vehicle that could be used for shelter or housing, including but not limited
to house trailers, motor homes, camp trailers, and tents. The Parks and Recreation Director
may waive this prohibition for organized groups.
(3) Watercraft and Other Vehicle Launching
No person shall leave any vehicle on the boat ramp, its access, or its turn-around for any
longer than necessary to unload or load watercraft, snowmobiles, or ATVs. Notwithstanding
the hours of operation provision in Section 9(1) of this ordinance, the boat ramp may be
utilized for its launching and recovering watercraft, snowmobiles, and ATVs at any time.
Section 7: Prohibitions
In order to promote peace and tranquility for visitors to our parks and to minimize the possibility
of harm to visitors and the Park themselves, the following items and activities are prohibited:
(1) Alcoholic Beverages
Alcoholic beverages in any form are prohibited in Parks of the Town of Glenburn.
(2) Fires
No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a fire except in areas designated for such
purposes. Nor shall any person drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, or other flammable material within any Park area.
(3) Fireworks
No person shall discharge any type of fireworks in any Park at any time.
(4) Closed Areas
No person shall enter into any area posted as “Closed to the Public” or use any area in
violation of posted notices.
(5) Smoking & Tobacco Products
Smoking and tobacco products are prohibited in all Parks, beaches, and recreation fields.
(6) Glass Containers
Glass containers of any type are prohibited in public Parks of the Town of Glenburn.
7
Section 8: Merchandising, Advertising, and Signs
(1) Vending and Peddling
Except for concessionaires licensed by and acting under the general control and supervision
of the Parks and Recreation Director and duly authorized by the Town Council, no person in
a Park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing nor shall any person place or station
any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing.
(2) Advertising
Except in conjunction with supervised activities under the general control and supervision of
the Parks and Recreation Director and duly authorized by the Town Council, no person in a
Park shall pronounce, advertise, or call to the public attention in any way any article or
service for sale or hire.
(3) Signs
Except in conjunction with supervised activities under the general control and supervision of
the Parks and Recreation Director, no person in a Park shall paste, glue, tack, or otherwise
post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any Town owned lands or roads within a park.
Exception from the prohibitions of this subsection is made for the posting of such notices as
may be required by this Ordinance.
Section 9: Park Operating Policy
(1) Hours
Except as provided in Sections 6(3) and 9(2) of this ordinance, all Parks, as defined herein,
shall be open to the public every day of the year from 6 AM to one-half hour after sunset.
The Parks and Recreation Director shall cause notices of the opening and closing hours to be
posted in each individual Park for public information purposes.
(2) Closed Areas
Any section or part of any Park may be declared closed to the public by the Parks and
Recreation Director at any time for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regularly
stated intervals (daily or otherwise).
(3) Entry Prohibited
Except with the written permission of the Parks and Recreation Director, no person shall
enter, pass through, or remain in any Park, or the closed area of any park, except during the
hours and times which such Parks, or portions thereof, are open to the public as provided in
this section.
(4) Lakeside Landing Recreation Area - Use Restricted
(a) Qualifications for Use
For purposes of promoting and protecting the public health, welfare, and safety, and for
purposes of protecting the property of the Town of Glenburn at Lakeside Landing, use of
8
the Lakeside Landing Recreation Area shall be restricted to those whom have the
appropriate “Park Use” Permit affixed to their windshields and are in good standing
(meaning their permit isn’t on a revoked list).
(b) Permit Required
Admission to the Lakeside Landing Recreation area shall be by permit only. A new
permit is required each calendar year. A citizen may purchase one permit per vehicle
registered in their name.
(i) Residents and Non-Resident Taxpayers
Glenburn residents and non-resident Glenburn taxpayers may obtain an annual permit
from the Town Office at a cost of $2.00. Such permit shall be affixed to the vehicle’s
windshield. Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(ii) Guests of Residents and Non-Resident Taxpayers
Glenburn residents and non-resident Glenburn taxpayers may obtain a seven-day
temporary permit for a guest’s vehicle from the Town Office at a cost of $2.00.
Such temporary permit shall be displayed on the vehicle’s dashboard so as to be
clearly visible through the windshield. The temporary permit must be signed for and
picked up by the resident or non-resident taxpayer host. The permit must contain the
visitor’s vehicle registration number, the host’s vehicle registration number, and the
host’s park permit number.
(iii) Non-Residents & Seasonal Renters
Non-residents and seasonal renters may obtain an annual permit from the Glenburn
Town Office at a cost of $30.00. Such permit shall be affixed to the vehicle’s
windshield. Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(5) Waivers by Parks and Recreation Director
The Parks and Recreation Director may waive provisions of this ordinance in order to
facilitate the activities of Glenburn based organized groups, and Non Glenburn based
501(c)(3) non-profit organizations approved by the Parks and Recreation Director, provided
that such waiver will not have an adverse impact on the recreation area and will not create
conditions which would be a nuisance to nearby residents. The intent of this section is to
allow authorized groups to carry out such activities as camping overnight, gathering wood
for campfires, and gathering nature samples. Glenburn based organized groups and Non
Glenburn based 501(c)(3) non-profit organizations will be required to fill out and submit to
the Glenburn Parks and Recreation Director an application for a special activity permit at
least four (4) weeks in advance of the scheduled date of the activity. If approved, the Parks
and Recreation Director will issue an activity specific Special Activity Permit at a cost of
$50.00 for each Special Activity Permit issued. The Special Activity Permit that is issued
shall include a section that includes the day or dates of the event, any setup/clean up or extra
dates needed, and whether the application has been approved. Attendees at the event will be
required to place a copy of that section of the permit application on the front right hand side
9
dash of the vehicle to serve as a parking permit for Lakeside Landing for the duration of that
approved event.
(6) Public Notification
The Parks and Recreation Director shall post a notice in each Park that indicates a complete
copy of the Town of Glenburn Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Public Parks may be
obtained at the Glenburn Town Office during regularly scheduled business hours and on the
Town’s website at www.glenburn.org
Section 10: Enforcement
(1) Enforcement Authority
The Penobscot County Sheriff’s Office shall diligently enforce violations of Section 5 of this
Ordinance. The Animal Control Officer of the Town of Glenburn shall enforce the
provisions of the ordinance related to domestic animals. The Parks and Recreation Director
may enforce the remaining provisions of the Ordinance.
(2) Improper Vehicles
The following procedure shall be used with respect to violations of Section 5(2) and Section
9 of this Ordinance:
(a) The enforcing officer may issue a citation for any violation.
(b) In addition to the penalties provided for in this Ordinance, any vehicles parked in
violation of Section 5(2) or Section 9 of this Ordinance may be towed to a suitable garage
or storage space and impounded therein until all towing and storage fees are paid. The
removal and storage of a vehicle pursuant to this Ordinance, and the payment of the fees
herein, shall in no way prevent or limit enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance.
(c) When any vehicle is towed pursuant to this Ordinance, the following procedure shall be
followed:
(1) Notice shall be sent to the registered owner of the vehicle by regular first-class mail,
postage pre-paid, within 24 hours following the tow.
(2) The Notice shall contain the following information: registration number and brief
description of the vehicle; name and address of person or company who performed
the tow; location where the vehicle is stored; the provisions of the Ordinance which
were violated and led to the tow; and the towing fee and any storage fee.
(d) Before the owner of such vehicle, or their representative, may remove the vehicle from
the possession of the person towing or storing it, they shall;
(1) Furnish satisfactory evidence of their identity and of their ownership of said vehicle to
the person having possession of the vehicle.
10
(2) Pay to the person having possession of said vehicle reasonable charges for the towing
and storage of said vehicle.
(3) Sign a receipt for said vehicle.
Section 11: Penalties
1. Fees: Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this
Ordinance shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100.00 except that violations of
Section 5(2)(c) will result in a fine not exceeding $200.00 Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. Persons charged with violating any provision of this
Ordinance may waive court action by payment of a fee of $50.00 ($100.00 in the case of
violation of Section 5(2)(c)) within ten (10) days after receiving notice of such violation.
Any such waiver and payment of fee shall be processed through the Town Treasurer or
Deputy Treasurer.
2. Revoking Park Use Permit: The Town of Glenburn retains the right to revoke any park
use permit at any time. The Town manager, upon receipt & review of law enforcement
reports may, after making reasonable attempts to contact the individual, immediately
revoke a permit.
Section 12: Separability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be
deemed a separate, distinct independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions hereof.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
Enacted 10/14/93, effective 11/13/93
Revised 11/16/00
Amended 11/03/11 Section 9 (5) Lakeside Landing Recreation Area, (a) & (b) deleted, and
Section 10 (2) amended, effective date 01/01/12
Amended 05/19/16, effective 06/18/16
Amended 10/06/16, effective 11/05/16 Section 9 (5)Waivers by Parks and Recreation Director
Amended 05/18/17, effective 06/17/17—Section 5(2)(a); Section 9(4)(a) Section 9(4)(b);
Section 9(5); & Section 11
ORDINANCE TO SET DAYS FOR REGULAR COUNCIL MEETINGS
THE TOWN OF GLENBURN HEREBY ORDAINS that regular Meetings of the Glenburn
Town Council shall be held on the alternate Thursdays in the Glenburn Municipal Building at
7:00 P.M. At any meeting of the Town Council, no new agenda item, new council item, or new
manager item shall be brought to the table after 10:00 P.M. except upon majority vote of the
council.
The only exceptions shall be that:
(1) No Meetings shall be held on legal holidays.
(2) The Town Council may, by majority vote, change the time of, location of, and/or cancel any
regular meeting if such a change is deemed appropriate.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 04/08/76
AMENDED: 12/08/82
AMENDED: 06/30/88
ORDINANCE REGULATING THE DISPOSAL OF WASTES GENERATED IN
THE TOWN OF GLENBURN
Whereas, it is the responsibility of the municipality to provide for the health and welfare of its
Inhabitants;
Whereas, it is the responsibility of the municipality to provide an adequate system for the
disposal of hazardous wastes, septic sludge wastes, domestic and commercial solid waste,
brush and discarded lumber, metal goods, and demolition debris; and
Whereas; the municipality desires that the aforementioned wastes be disposed of in land areas
outside of Glenburn, so far as possible:
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this ordinance entitled “Ordinance Regulating the
Disposal of Wastes Generated in the Town of Glenburn” shall be enacted as follows:
A. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
1. Town Disposal Site
a. The town shall maintain a site for the disposal of trash suitable for burning, white goods and
metal wastes, and demolition debris solely for such materials generated within the Town.
b. The existing landfill area will be closed to any dumping of household refuse on the
effective date of the curbside pickup contract.
2. Authorization to contract for Disposal of Wastes
a. The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized to enter into yearly or multi-yearly contracts
for curb side pickup, septic sludge disposal sites, and for disposal of other wastes outside
the land areas of Glenburn. When practical, contracts shall be awarded by the open bid
process.
3. Authorization for Municipal officers to Develop regulations
a. The Municipal Officers shall incorporate all pertinent provisions of the contracts into a set
of regulations which shall be followed by the residents of the town. These regulations shall
be disseminated to all residents.
B. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
1. The long term storage or disposal of hazardous wastes within the Town is prohibited. Each
person or enterprise dealing with or creating hazardous wastes will privately contract for
the removal of said wastes to an authorized facility.
2. The storage of junk, as defined in the State Statutes, shall be prohibited on private property
if in public view.
3. Household wastes (litter) shall not be in public view except when properly deposited at
curbside for pickup.
C. ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce this ordinance and any regulations developed
under this
ordinance. If he finds any person in violation, he shall notify that person in writing, ordering
the necessary corrective action. All costs of corrective action will be borne by the person or
firm in violation thereof.
D. PENALTY
Any violation of this ordinance or any regulations developed under this ordinance constitutes
a nuisance. The Code Enforcement Officer with the approval of the municipal officers shall
institute any and all legal and equitable actions, including seeking injunctions and fines, which
he deems necessary for enforcement. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this
ordinance or the regulations thereof shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each act of
noncompliance. Any fines collected under this section shall inure to the town.
E. SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this ordinance is held to be unconstitutional, or invalid, this will not affect
the remaining provisions of such ordinance.
F. REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
The ordinance entitled “Ordinance Regulating the Disposal of Wastes Within the Town of
Glenburn, Maine” with an effective date of October 25, 1981 is hereby repealed in its entirety.
G. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective upon the automatic repeal date of the emergency
ordinance of the same title adopted August 1, 1985.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 10/1/85
1
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GLENBURN
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE
I. PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
A. Department Created
Pursuant to the Maine Constitution, Article VIII, Part Second; 30-A MRSA Sec. 3001; and Section
3.04(b) of the Glenburn Charter, the Town of Glenburn hereby establishes the Parks and
Recreation Department.
B. Functions of the Parks and Recreation Department
The Parks and Recreation Department will have the following functions:
1. To Plan, Operate, and Maintain All Municipal Parks
To plan, operate, and maintain all municipal parks while preserving the symmetry and beauty of
such parks with special emphasis on increasing safety therein.
2. To organize and supervise a Municipal Recreation Program
To promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive municipal recreation program and
administer the same in the interest of the entire community.
3. To conduct Cultural and Social Activities
To conduct municipal recreational, cultural, or social activity that will employ the leisure time of
the citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner.
4. Assume Maine Bureau of Parks & Recreation Project obligations
a. The Parks and Recreation Department will supersede and assume all responsibilities required
of the Glenburn Recreation Board and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee under
the State of Maine, Bureau of Parks & Recreation, Land & Water Conservation Fund Project
23-0043 - namely the recreation area behind the Glenburn School,
b. The Parks and Recreation Department shall comply with the terms of the Memorandum of
Understanding developed under said Project #23-0043 and as adopted by the Glenburn
School Committee and the Glenburn Recreation Committee, with any subsequent
amendments.
II. PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
A. Committee Established
There is hereby authorized and established a Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee to consist
of five regular members and two associate members. One member of the Town Council will serve
as an ex-officio member of the Advisory Committee.
B. Functions of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. The functions of the Committee are
to:
1. Hold regular monthly meetings for the purpose of advising the Parks and Recreation Director
with respect to all phases of the recreational program of the Parks and Recreation Department.
This advice will consist of developing and recommending changes, additions and/or revisions to
2
Department procedures that do not circumvent the administrative responsibilities of the Parks
and Recreation Director and Town Manager.
2. Create and appoint members to various subcommittees as needed to deal with specific issues
affecting the Parks and Recreation Department programs. Members of the sub-committees may
be, but do not need to be, members of the Advisory Committee.
C. Method of Appointment, Term of Office, and Filling of Vacancies
1. Method of Appointment
Members of the Committee will be appointed by the Town Council to serve terms of three years
or until a successor is duly appointed. Any vacancy created on the committee shall be filled by
the Town Council for the remainder of the term. The ex-officio Town Council member shall be
appointed annually by the Chairperson of the Council. All Committee members must be
residents of the Town of Glenburn.
2. Term of Office
Members will serve three year terms.
3. Filling of Vacancies
When there is a permanent vacancy, the Town Council will, within 60 days of its occurrence or
as soon as administratively practical, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired portion of the
term. A vacancy shall occur upon the resignation or death of any member, when a member
ceases to be a voting resident of the Town, when a member fails to attend and is absent from
three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee without
being excused, or when a member is convicted of a crime/offense that is reasonably related to
the member’s ability to serve on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. Given that the
Parks & Recreation Department primarily serves children, the conviction of a crime/offense of
moral turpitude shall be deemed to be reasonably related to the member’s ability to serve on the
committee. When a vacancy occurs, the Chairperson of the Committee will immediately so
advise the Town Council via the Town Manager in writing.
D. Organization and Rules
1. The Committee will elect a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson, and a Secretary from among its
members and shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine necessary. The term of
all offices will be one year with eligibility for re-election. Elections will take place during the
first meeting in July of each calendar year.
2. The associate members are expected to attend all meetings of the Committee and participate in
its proceedings. However, the associate members may vote only when designated by the
Chairperson to substitute for a regular member who is unable to act because of absence, conflict
of interest, physical incapacity, or any other reason satisfactory to the Chairperson.
3. The Committee will hold one regular meeting each month on a date to be established by the
Committee. The Chairperson may call special meetings as needed. All meetings will be
advertised, tape recorded, public, and televised on the Town’s cable channel. The inability or
failure to record or televise a meeting shall not invalidate the meeting.
4. No meeting of the Committee will be held without a quorum of three.
5. The Secretary will keep written minutes of each committee meeting that will include but not
limited to discussions, votes, resolutions, transactions, and correspondence. All records shall be
deemed public records under 1 M.R.S.A., Section 402, and may be inspected at reasonable
times.
3
III. PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.
A. Position Established.
There is hereby authorized and established the position of Parks and Recreation Director. This
position will be included in the Personnel Classification and Compensation Plan for the Town of
Glenburn. The Parks and Recreation Director will be appointed by the Town Manager on the basis
of merit and fitness alone, subject to the confirmation of the Town Council
B. Duties of the Director.
The Parks and Recreation Director will:
1. Report to the Town Manager and administer all policies and procedures of the Parks and
Recreation Department.
2. Prepare annually, upon the request of the Town Manager, a recommended budget for the
operation of the Department for the following fiscal year. The Town Manager shall use this
recommendation as a guide in developing overall Town budget recommendations to the Town
Council.
3. Manage the Department’s budget as finally approved by the Town Meeting. In no case may
the Department’s budget appropriation be over expended. Transfers between sub account
appropriations may be made only upon approval of the Municipal Officers.
4. Make an annual report and recommendation to the Town Council regarding the need, if any,
for new recreational facilities in the Town of Glenburn, to include capital development,
redevelopment, and maintenance needs with respect to existing facilities.
5. Prepare annually a report of all of the Department’s activities for inclusion in the town’s annual
report. Submit a report to the Town Manager, before the first Council meeting of each month,
as to the activities of the Department for the preceding month.
6. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Town Manager or any applicable state
or local laws and ordinances.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
Adopted 5/21/98
Revised 03/31/05 by Town Council vote, Section II, A. Committee Established. Change from one associate
member to two associate members
Amended February 27, 2014 by Town Council vote, effective March 27, 2014 (For amendments see “Ordinance Amending
The Establishment of the Glenburn Parks and Recreation Department Ordinance” filed with ordinance permanent records)
Pursuant to Section 3.10(c) of the Town Charter, this Ordinance will become effective at the expiration of 30 days after adoption.
FIRE DEPARTMENT ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF GLENBURN
WHEREAS, the Glenburn Volunteer Fire Department and Ambulance Service was organized as
a Corporation under Title 13 M.R.S.A., Chapter 81 on September 30, 1968 with Certificate of
Organization filed with the Office of the Secretary of State on November 14, 1968 and recorded
in the Office of Secretary of State in Vol. 30, Page 9;
WHEREAS, Articles of Amendment of the Corporation ‘Glenburn Volunteer Fire Department
and Ambulance Service were voted upon on May 14, 1980 and were filed with the Office of the
Secretary of State on May 19, 1980 and there assigned File No. 30 - 9;
WHEREAS, such Articles of Amendment changed the name of the Corporation to ‘Glenburn
Volunteer Ambulance Service’ and modified the original purposes of the Corporation by deleting
those purposes related to fire protection, leaving the title and the purposes to apply only to an
Ambulance Service, thus completely eliminating the Incorporated Fire Association as of May 14,
1980;
WHEREAS, the Glenburn Town Council created a Municipal Fire Department by adopting an
‘Ordinance to Establish Municipal Fire Dept.’ with an effective date of May 8, 1976, amended
with effective date of June 12, 1976, and again with effective date of May 22, 1982;
WHEREAS, said ordinance charged the Municipal Fire Chief with all the Powers and Duties as
provided for in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Sect. 3153.’ which Section authorizes the Fire Chief to
employ all Municipal Firefighters;
WHEREAS, following the filing of the Articles of Amendment, the firefighters apparently
believed that the Volunteer Association still existed and they continued to operate a Volunteer
Fire Department under the ‘Constitution and By-Laws of the ‘Glenburn Volunteer Municipal
Fire Department’;
WHEREAS, such operations included the maintenance of a checking account, the raising of
funds through various fund raising activities, the acceptance of a lump sum stipend from the
Town of Glenburn for the ‘Volunteers’, the distribution of the stipend to individual ‘Volunteers’,
and the expenditure of funds for various purposes including the purchase of fire fighting
equipment.
WHEREAS, such operations continue to this day;
WHEREAS, the above facts strongly indicate that there exists some confusion as to the basic
organization of the Glenburn Fire Department; and
WHEREAS, it is desired that the Glenburn Fire Department be clearly established as a
Municipal Department with a specific organizational structure;
NOW THEREFORE, the Town of Glenburn hereby ordains this ordinance.
100 - TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND PURPOSE
110 Title
This ordinance shall be known as the Fire Department Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn.
120 Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Maine Constitution, Article VII(1); Title 30-A
M.R.S.A., Section 3001, as amended; the Charter of the Town of Glenburn, Maine, Sections
3.04(b) and 5.01(a); and Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3152, as amended.
130 Purpose
The purpose of this Fire Department Ordinance shall be to clarify the scope of the Municipal Fire
Department established by ordinance on May 8, 1976, with amendments on June 12, 1976 and
May 22, 1982; to establish appointment procedures and to define the powers and duties of the
Chief, other Officers, Municipal Firefighters, and Junior Firefighters; to define the procedures
under which the Department shall operate; and to provide the maximum possible legal protection
for the Chief, other Officers, Municipal Firefighters, and Junior Firefighters.
200 - ESTABLISHMENT, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND NON-DISCRIMINATION
210 Establishment
There is hereby established by this ordinance a Municipal Fire Department which shall be known
as the Glenburn Fire Department.
220 Responsibilities
The Glenburn Fire Department shall provide fire protection to the inhabitants of the Town of
Glenburn, and elsewhere as provided by mutual aid agreements, by maintaining a Municipal Fire
Department for fire prevention and extinguishment and for handling other types of emergency
situations in accordance with the terms of this ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically
authorized by this ordinance, the Glenburn Fire Department shall be governed by the appropriate
sections of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Chapter 153, as amended, in carrying out these responsibilities.
230 Non-Discrimination
The Glenburn Fire Department shall be non-sectarian, non-partisan, and shall not discriminate
against any race, creed, color, or sex.
300- PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
310 Privileges and Immunities
Members of the Municipal Fire Department shall enjoy the privileges and immunities provided
by 14 M.R.S.A., Section 8101-8118, as amended, Maine Tort Claims Act. The Officers,
Municipal Firefighters, and Junior Firefighters shall be covered by such of the Town of
Glenburn’s insurance coverage as applies to members of a municipal fire department.
400 - PERSONNEL
410 Membership
411 Positions
The Glenburn Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Chief, an Assistant Fire Chief, a Captain,
Lieutenants equal in number to the number of in-service fire fighting vehicles in the Department,
not more than 30 Municipal Firefighters, and not more than 15 Junior Firefighters.
412 Officers and Members
For the purposes of this ordinance, the Fire Chief, the Assistant Fire Chief, the Captain, and the
Lieutenants shall be considered Officers. The Officers, the Municipal Firefighters, and the Junior
Firefighters shall be considered members of the Glenburn Fire Department.
413 Qualifications
All members shall be at least 18 years of age except that Junior Firefighters must be at least 14
years of age and under the age of 18.
414 Status
All members of the Glenburn Fire Department shall be volunteers and provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, Section 553.100 et. seq. as such applies to volunteers shall be strictly
complied with.
420 FIRE CHIEF
421 Appointment
a. Board of Review
When a Fire Chief appointment is pending, a five member Board of Review shall be
established. The Board shall consist of a Glenburn Town Councilor chosen by the Town
Council; the Chief from a Fire Department having a mutual aid agreement with Glenburn
chosen by the Town Council; a Glenburn citizen not affiliated with the Town Council or the
Glenburn Fire Department to be chosen by the Town Council; and two members of the
Glenburn Fire Department to be elected by the Fire Department members.
b. Qualifications
The Board of Review shall evaluate all candidates who submitted resumes to the Town
Manager.
In conducting the evaluation, the Board shall consider the applicant’s:
1) Knowledge of Federal and State laws and Rules and Regulations pertaining to the Fire
Service.
2) Quantity and quality of command experience.
3) Quantity and quality of administrative experience.
4) Ability and willingness to attend seminars and meetings in order to keep current with
changes in fire department requirements.
After completing its evaluation, the Board of Review shall submit to the Town Manager a
written list of the top three applicants arranged in order of the Board’s preference.
c. Town Manager to Appoint
The Town Manager shall appoint the Fire Chief for an indefinite term, subject to
confirmation by the Town Council. If the candidate chosen is not the first preference of the
Board of Review, the Town Manager shall explain why in a written report to the Town
Council. Following appointment, the Fire Chief will be sworn by the Town Clerk or other
person authorized to administer oaths.
422 Vacancy
If, for any reason, the office of Fire Chief becomes vacant, the Town Manager shall appoint a
replacement in accordance with the provisions of Section 421.
423 Powers and Duties
The Fire Chief shall be the head of the Fire Department and shall:
a. Prepare and submit to the Town Manager monthly reports stating calls received, runs
made, training sessions held, and other pertinent activities of the Fire Department;
b. Prepare and submit to the Town Manager a summary of the year’s activities for inclusion
in the annual town report;
c. Prepare and submit to the Town Manager an annual budget request covering proposed Fire
Department activities and a recommended annual update of the Fire Department’s portion
of the Town’s long term capital program;
d. Maintain an up-to-date inventory of all equipment and be responsible for the maintenance
and care of all equipment in the inventory;
e. Prepare a list of permissible duties for junior members and shall submit such list to the
Town Manager within 30 days of the enactment of this ordinance. Thereafter, the Fire
Chief shall notify the Town Manager of any changes in the duty list within 5 days of the
adoption of such changes;
f. Maintain a complete record of all fires, fire investigations, inspections, personnel attending
fires and training sessions, apparatus and equipment maintenance, costs and other
information pertaining to the existence and operation of the Municipal Fire Department;
and
g. Maintain a current roster of all members, including name, current address, telephone
number, social security number, and drivers license number and notify the Town Manager
of any changes in the roster.
Except as otherwise provided by this ordinance, the Fire Chief shall have the powers and duties
as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3153, as amended.
The Fire Chief may delegate, in writing, any of the above duties to other members of the Fire
Department, but the Fire Chief remains fully responsible for complying with this section.
424 Stipend
The Fire Chief shall receive a nominal quarterly stipend as established in the municipal budget.
425 Annual Review
The Town Manager shall evaluate the performance of the Fire Chief on or about July 1 of each
year,
430 ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF
431 Appointment
The Assistant Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall be sworn by the Town
Clerk or other person authorized to administer oaths. The term of office shall be for three years
with the appointment terminating on the last day of the municipal fiscal year. On the effective
date of this ordinance, the existing appointment of the Assistant Fire Chief, to expire on 6/30/91,
shall be hereby ratified.
432 Vacancy
If, for any reason, the office of Assistant Fire Chief becomes vacant prior to the expiration of a
three (3) year term, the Fire Chief shall appoint a replacement in accordance with the provisions
of Section 431 except that the term shall be for the unexpired portion of the original
appointment.
433 Powers and Duties
The Assistant Fire Chief shall assist the Fire Chief and shall perform the duties and assume the
responsibilities of the Fire Chief in the absence of the Fire Chief.
434 Stipend
The Assistant Fire Chief shall receive a nominal quarterly stipend as established in the municipal
budget.
440 CAPTAIN
441 Appointment
The Captain shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall be sworn by the Town Clerk or other
person authorized to administer oaths. The term of office shall be for three years with the
appointment terminating on the last day of the municipal fiscal year. On the effective date of this
ordinance, the existing appointment of the Captain, to expire on 6/30/91, shall be hereby ratified.
442 Vacancy
If, for any reason, the office of Captain becomes vacant prior to the expiration of a three (3) year
term, the Fire Chief shall appoint a replacement in accordance with the provisions of Section 441
except that the term shall be for the unexpired portion of the original appointment.
443 Powers and Duties
The Captain shall assist the Fire Chief and the Assistant Fire Chief and shall perform the duties
and assume the responsibilities of the Fire Chief in the absence of the Fire Chief and the
Assistant Fire Chief. The Captain shall coordinate all training programs within the Department.
444 Stipend
The Captain shall receive a nominal quarterly stipend as established in the municipal budget.
450 LIEUTENANTS
451 Appointment
The Lieutenants shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall be sworn by the Town Clerk or
other person authorized to administer oaths. The term of office shall be for three years with the
appointment terminating on the last day of the municipal fiscal year. On the effective date of this
ordinance, tile existing appointments of the Lieutenants, to expire on 6/30/91, shall be hereby
ratified.
452 Vacancy
If, for any reason, the office of Lieutenant becomes vacant prior to the expiration of a three (3)
year term, the Fire Chief shall appoint a replacement in accordance with the provisions of
Section 451 except that the term shall be for the unexpired portion of the original appointment.
453 Powers and Duties
The Lieutenants shall be responsible for the proper maintenance and upkeep of the vehicle
assigned to their care. They shall perform regular preventative maintenance procedures and shall
regularly provide to the Fire Chief a written evaluation of the condition of the vehicle and its
equipment.
454 Stipend
The Lieutenants shall receive a nominal quarterly stipend as established in the municipal budget.
460 MUNICIPAL FIREFIGHTERS
461 Appointment
Municipal Firefighters shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall serve at his pleasure.
462 Vacancy
The Fire Chief shall attempt to fill all vacancies as provided in Section 461 as soon as possible in
order to keep the Fire Department at full strength.
463 Powers and Duties
The Municipal Firefighters shall have the duties and otherwise be controlled by the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3154 as may be amended from time to time.
464 Stipend
The Municipal Firefighters shall receive a nominal semi-annual stipend as established in the
municipal budget.
470 JUNIOR FIREFIGHTERS
471 Appointment
Junior Firefighters shall be appointed by the Fire Chief and shall serve at his pleasure except that
the appointment shall not extend beyond the member’s 18th birthday.
472 Vacancy
The Fire Chief shall attempt to fill all vacancies as provided in Section 471 as soon as possible in
order to keep the Fire Department at full strength.
473 Powers and Duties
Junior Firefighters may assist adult members of the department in the performance of those
duties promulgated under Section 423(e) of this ordinance.
474 Stipend
The Junior Firefighters shall receive no stipend.
480 Removal
481 Fire Chief
The Town Manager may remove the Fire Chief from office at any time, for cause and after
notice and hearing.
482 Other Officers, Municipal Firefighters, and Junior Firefighters
At any time that the well being of the Department would be furthered by his so doing, the Fire
Chief may refuse to accept further volunteer services from any Officer, Municipal Firefighter, or
Junior Firefighter.
500 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
510 Administrative Rules and Regulations
The Fire Chief shall prepare Administrative Rules and Regulations, and amendments thereto as
needed, governing the operation of the Glenburn Fire Department. These Rules and Regulations
shall be consistent with this ordinance and with Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 153, as amended.
Copies of all such Administrative Rules and Regulations and any amendments thereto shall be
filed with the Secretary to the Town Council.
520 Purchasing
521 Purchasing Authority
The Fire Chief shall be responsible for obtaining the goods and services necessary for the proper
operation of the Fire Department within the limits of appropriations made for that purpose and
within the time allocations stated in the approved budget.
522 Purchase Orders
The Fire Chief shall establish and maintain a purchase order system for the purchase of goods
and services, in a manner agreeable to the Town’s purchasing agent.
523 Approval
The Fire Chief shall approve all invoices for purchases made for the Fire Department before
submitting them to the Town Manager for payment.
600 - MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS
610 MutualAid
The Town Council is hereby authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with other
municipalities pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3156, as amended, for fire extinguishing
purposes and pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Sec. 3001, as amended, for other emergency
purposes. The Town Council shall make its decision as to whether or not to enter into any such
agreement after receiving a recommendation from the Fire Chief submitted through the Town
Manager. All such existing agreements are hereby approved and ratified.
700 - ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS
710 Acceptance of Gifts
Pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Sections 5654 and 5655, as amended, gifts, whether
conditional or unconditional, shall not be accepted by the Fire Department. If any person or
organization desires to make such gift to the Department, the Fire Chief shall so notify the Town
Manager who shall then bring the matter to the attention of the Town Council. The Town
Council may then, if they feel that the town would benefit from such gift, place an article on an
annual or a special town meeting warrant asking the Inhabitants of the Town of Glenburn to vote
on whether or not to accept such gift.
If at some future time the Charter of the Town of Glenburn is amended to so allow, then the
Town Council or the Fire Chief, rather than the Inhabitants of the Town of Glenburn at a town
meeting, may accept such gift.
800 - SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, AND SUPERSEDURE
810 Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
820 Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective on the 31st day following its adoption by the Town
Council.
830 Supersedure of Conflicting Ordinances
This ordinance shall supersede any prior ordinance of the same nature. Known prior ordinances
adopted by the Glenburn Town Council are: the ‘Ordinance to Establish Municipal Fire Dept.’
with an effective date of May 8, 1976; the ‘Amendment to Ordinance to Establish Municipal Fire
Dept.’ with an effective date of June 12, 1976; and the amendment to the ‘Ordinance to Establish
Municipal Fire Department’ with an effective date of May 22, 1982.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 04/08/76
AMENDED: 06/13/76
AMENDED: 04/22/82
AMENDED 03/23/89
AMENDED 03/07/91
AMENDED: 10/01/92
AMENDED: 03/31/94
1
General Assistance Ordinance
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
Table of Contents
Article I Policy Statement
Article II Definitions
Section 2.1 Common meaning of words
Section 2.2 Definitions
Article III Administrative Rules and Regulations
Section 3.1 Confidentiality
• Case records
• Release of information
• Information from other sources
• Misuse of information
Section 3.2 Maintenance of records
• Administrator’s responsibility
• Case records
Article IV Application Procedure
Section 4.1 Right to apply
Who may apply
• Telephone applications
• Written applications
• When to apply
Section 4.2 Application interview
Section 4.3 Contents of application
Section 4.4 Administrator’s responsibilities
• Application requirements
• Eligibility requirements
• Applicant rights
• Reimbursement/Recovery
Section 4.5 Applicant’s responsibilities
Section 4.6 Action on application
2
• Written decision
• Contents
Section 4.7 Application withdrawal
Section 4.8 Application temporarily refused
Section 4.9 Emergencies
• Disqualifications
• Verification
• Telephone applications
• Limitation on Emergency Assistance
Section 4.10 Residence
• Moving; relocating
• Institutions
• Temporary housing
• Disputes
Article V
Eligibility Factors
Section 5.1 Initial applications/subsequent applicants
Section 5.2 Categorical assistance
Section 5.3 Personal property
• Liquid assets
• Tangible assets
• Automobile ownership
• Insurance
• Transfer of property
Section 5.4 Real Estate
Section 5.5 Work requirements
• Employment; rehabilitation
• Verification
• Disqualification
• Disqualification for job quit/discharge for misconduct
• Just cause, and applicant’s burden of showing
• Eligibility regained
3
• Dependents
• Exemptions
Section 5.6 Municipal work program
• Consent
• Limitations
• “Workfare-first” policy
• Work-related expenses
• Disqualification
• Eligibility regained
• Reports.to.DHS
Section 5.7 Resources
• Requirement to use
• Minors
• Disability
• Written notice/disqualification
• Forfeiture of benefits
Section 5.8 Period of disqualification
•Work requirement
• Fraud
Article VI Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1 Recognition of dignity and rights
Section 62 Determination; redetermination
Section 6.3 Verification
• Applicant’s responsibility
• Decision
• Denial of assistance
• Right to verify
• Penalty for refusing to release information
Section 6.4 Fraud
• Period of ineligibility
• Right to a fair hearing
• Reimbursement
4
• Dependents
Section 6.5 Period of eligibility
Section 6.6 Determination of need
• Income for basic necessities
• Use of income standards
• Calculation of income and expenses
• Consolidation of deficit
Section 6.7 Income
• Standards
• Calculation of income
• Types of income
• Earned income
• Entitlement income
• Support payments
• Income from other sources
• Earnings of household dependents
• Income from household members
• Pooling/non-pooling income
• Lump sum income
Section. 6.8 Basic necessities; Maximum levels of assistance
• Overall maximum levels of assistance
• Maximum assistance for specific basic needs
• Food
• Housing
• Rental payments to relatives
• Rental payments to private homes
• Mortgage
• Liens
• Property taxes
• Housing maximums
• Utilities
• Non-Electric utilities
5
• Personal care; household supplies
• Other basic necessities
• Clothing
• Medical care
• Hospital
• Dental services
• Eye care
• Work-related expenses
• Travel expenses
• Burials/cremations
• Notice from funeral director
• Application on behalf of deceased
• Financial responsibility of family members
• Consideration of family members’ responsibility
• Proration of familial responsibility
• Ten days to determine eligibility
• Effect of contributions from others
• Burial maximums
• Cremation maximums
• Capital improvements
Section 6.9 Notice of decision
• Written decision
• Contents
• Disbursement of General Assistance not in cash
Article VII The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1 Right to a fair hearing
Section 7.2 Method of obtaining a hearing
• Written request
• Scheduling the fair hearing
Section 7.3 The fair hearing authority
Section 7.4 Fair hearing procedure
Section 7.5 Fair hearing decision
6
Article VIII Recovery of Expenses
• Recipients
• Recipients anticipating Workers’ Compensation benefits
• Recipients of SSI
• Relatives
Article IX Severability
Appendix A Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance
Appendix B Food Allowances
Appendix C Housing Allowances
7
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Town/City of ________________________ administers a program of general assistance
available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of
eligibility as provided herein and in 22 M.R.S.A. 43O1 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant and to encourage self-reliance.
The program will help each person achieve self- maintenance and will encourage the work
incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial through
rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. General assistance will promote strengthening
the family, especially with regard to the care and protection of children.
The general assistance program will place no restrictions on the personal rights of the applicant
or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, religion,
disability or political affiliation. The applicant or recipient will be informed of his/her rights and
responsibilities under the general assistance program.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance and
requests for fair hearings. Within 24 hours of receiving an application, the administrator will give
the applicant a written decision, whether or not assistance is granted, that will state the specific
reasons for the decision. The administrator will also give the applicant written notice that the
applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision.
When an applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the admin
istrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a
workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each applicant and
recipient. These records are confidential.
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person, will be available to take applications in
the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public upon request. Notice to this
effect will be posted.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
8
Section 2.1 Common meaning of words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their common
meaning.
Section 2.2 Special definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized representative,
an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency, requested assistance without
first completing an application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an application has been
submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for the
purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact that a person
has made application. The application form must be signed by the applicant to be considered
complete.
Basic necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non elective medical services as
recommended by a physician, nonprescription drugs, telephone where it is necessary for medical
reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of the
applicant’s place of residence, and any other commodity or service determined essential by the
municipality. “Basic necessities” do not include security deposits for rental property, except for
those situations where no other permanent lodging is available unless a security deposit is paid,
and a waiver, deferral or installment arrangement cannot be made between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for the immediate payment of the security deposit or payment in full.
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.1).
Case record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative records
and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding
eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types and amounts of assistance
provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request for fair hearing and those fair hearing
decisions.
Categorical assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for the
household as provided in Section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If
the household income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance, the
household has no deficit.
Disabled person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to a
physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician.
Dwelling unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or more
persons living as a single housekeeping unit. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.2).
Eligible person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the municipality
according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.3).
9
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the individual
which, if not alleviated immediately, could reason ably be expected to pose a threat to the health
or safety of a person. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.4, 4308.2,4310).
General assistance program. A service administered by a municipality for the immediate aid of
persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their
families. A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for defined
needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or
“categorical” welfare program. This definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of
each municipality to provide general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need
and is found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.5).
General assistance administrator. A municipal official designated to receive applications,
make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and prepare records and
communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an elected overseer or an authorized
agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or caseworker. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.12).
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a dwelling
unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals, even when a
landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible
applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the
shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of assistance established
in the municipal ordinance. The income of household members not legally liable or otherwise
responsible for supporting the household shall be considered as available to the applicant only
when there is a pooling of income. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.6).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household
including net remuneration for services performed, cash received on either secured or unsecured
credit, any payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits, veterans’ pensions,
workers’ compensation unemployment benefits, benefits under any state or federal categorical
assistance program, supplemental security income, social security and any other payments from
governmental sources unless specifically prohibited by any law or regulation, court ordered
support payments, income from pension or trust funds, and household income from any other
source, including relatives or unrelated household members.
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets which must be liquidated for the
purposes of deriving income.
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental entitlement
specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such as taxes,
retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and from work, special
equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full- time students and who are
not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis forthe calculation shall be a 30-day period
commencing on the date of the application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an
10
applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does
not exceed the income standards established by the municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7)
Just cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with one or
more conditions of eligibility. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.8, 431 6-A.5)
Lump sum payment. Lump sum payment” means a one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of
money issued to an applicant or recipient after an initial application. Lump sum payment
includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions of social security benefits,
workers’ compensation payments, unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans’ benefits,
severance pay benefits, or money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury
awards, property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the
amount of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been made
from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include conversion of a non
liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been used or is intended to be used
to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses. The term conversion of a nonliquid
resource to a liquid resource” refers, in general, to a settlement of an insurance claim filed
as a result of damaged or destroyed property. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.8-A).
Material Fact. A material fact is fact that necessarily has some bearing on the determination of
an applicant’s General Assistance eligibility, and which would, if disclosed to the administrator,
have some determinable effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of
assistance.
Maximum levels of assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or service
as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such basic necessity,
whichever is less.
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means conduct evincing such willful or wanton disregard of an
employer’s interest as is found in deliberate violations or disregard of standards of behavior
which the employer has a right to expect of his employee, or in carelessness or negligence of
such degree or recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to
show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interests or of the employee’s
duties and obligations to his or her employer. (26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23)).
Municipality. Any city, town, or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of responsibility. The municipality which is liable for the support of an eligible
person at the time of application. (22 M.R.S.A. 4301.9, 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or other
resources available to provide basic necessitates for the individual and the individual’s family are
less than the maximum levels of assistance. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.10, 4308).
Net general assistance costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in providing
assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the municipal officers. These
do not include the administrative expenses of the general assistance program. (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301.11,4311)
11
Period of eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The period of
eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in no event shall this
period extend beyond one month. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.1).
Pooling of Income. Pooling of income” means the financial relation ship among household
members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs any commingling of
funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by ordinance establish as a
rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income.
Applicants who are requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one or
more household members are not pooling their income have the burden of rebutting the
presumed pooling of income.
Real estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to the land.
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.13).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of remaining in
that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no other residence. A
person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a resident of that municipality or
any other municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first applies.
That municipality must take an application and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is
eligible, until he/she establishes a new residence in another municipality (see section 4.10). (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which are an
alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of resources; available
and potential. Potential resources are programs, services, non-liquid assets, or trusts which
typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a period of time before eligibility is
determined or the potential income is released. Potential resources include but are not limited to
any state or federal assistance program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension
program, available trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and
jointly held resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual.
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF/AFDC programs, Food Stamps,
fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant or which
can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank
accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market, or support from relatives
which is being made available at the time of application and for which the applicant does not
have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region).
Available resources also include the ser vices, commodities or facilities made available by
private organizations when 1) the applicant voluntarily agrees to utilize such services, 2) the
municipality has established a contractual relationship with the private organization to provide
services or commodities when requested, 3) the municipality is able to secure the services or
commodities needed by an applicant from the private organization for any consideration
acceptable to both the organization and the municipality, or 4) the service is available and
offered at no cost to the applicant and deemed necessary by a physician, psychologist or other
professional retraining or rehabilitation specialist. Charities may be considered private
12
organizations which are available resources only if the charity places no unreasonable
requirements on the applicant which are violative of the applicant’s fundamental rights. Fie!d v.
Lewiston, Andro. Sup. Ct. CV 87-4; Bolduc v. Lewiston, Andro, Sup. Ct. CV 87-248).
30-day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective 30-day
costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this
calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s actual 30-day cost for the
basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic necessity as established by this
ordinance, whichever is less.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as established by
Section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated pursuant to Section 6.7 of
this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is
greater than the household’s 30-day need, the household does not have an unmet need.
Work requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal administrator
places on applicants for general assistance as directed or authorized by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to
the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general assistance when
complied with, result in disqualification when violated, and are not merely optional,
discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include registering for work, looking for work in
good faith, accepting all suitable job offers, performing workfare, and participating in training,
educational, or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1 Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general assistance
are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the applicant or recipient
states in writing what information is to be released. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306, Janak V. D.H.S.,
Aroostook Cty #CV-89-1 16).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the right to
review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however, unless the
administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing the release of
his/her records to the specified parties. Whenever the administrator releases any information,
he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file stating to whom the record was released and
the date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when
appropriate.
Information from other sources; penalty. Information furnished to I NOTES:
the municipality by the Department of Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator will also
comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of records concerning birth, marriage and death.
22 M.R.S.A. § 2706.
13
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a general
assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to
verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. Any such person
who refuses to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who knowingly and
willfully makes a false representation of a material fact to the administrator is committing a
Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, 4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is a
punishable offense. (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2).
Section 3.2 Maintenance of records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general assistance records
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or judicial
review of a decision by the general assistance admini trator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record for each
applicant or recipient. Each case record will include at least the household’s applications, budget
sheets, information concerning the types and amounts of assistance provided, narrative
statements describing the nature of the emergency situation whenever general assistance is
granted in amounts greater than the applicant’s mathematical eligibility (i.e., deficit or unmet
need, whichever is less), written decisions, and any requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing
authority decisions. Workfare participation will also be recorded, as will any cash repayments to
the municipality. The record may also include any narrative writings docu menting the need for
general assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information, referrals, changes in status,
the reason(s) for the release of confidential information, adjustments in aid, and suspension or
termination of eligibility. Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant
to an applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
ARTICLE IV
Application procedure
Section 4.1 Right to apply
Who may apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family, any other
responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in person, except in
special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this ordinance or except when the
applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has made an agreement with
that emergency shelter to presume shelter residents to be eligible for general assistance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4304(3)). The administrator may require a representative to present a signed
statement documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
14
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written application and
any other required forms so that the administrator can determine eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305,
4308). With notice, all members of the household receiving general assistance may be required
to physically present themselves to the administrator.
Application via telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in person
due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good cause, and he/she
cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application by
telephone. The telephone application process will include the administrator receiving written
verification by mail or visiting the applicant’s home with his/her permission (22 M.R.S.A. §
4304).
Written application upon each request. Each request for assistance will be administered in
accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an independent determination of
eligibility for general assistance each time a person applies. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308, 4309).
Applications accepted; posted notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people may
apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take emergency applications
at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include the fact that the municipality must
issue a written decision on all applications within 24 hours, and the Department of Human
Services’ toll free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints. Completed
applications will be accepted and interviews given only during the regular hours established and
posted by the administrator. In an emergency, however, the administrator will be available to
accept applications for assistance when ever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2 Application interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each applicant
personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in private, although the
applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or family member.
Section 4.3 Contents of the application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of birth, Social Security number, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social Security number(s) of other household members for whom
the applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals in the building or apartment where the applicant is residing;
d) employment and employability information;
e) all household income, resources, assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify information;
15
j) signature of applicant and date.
Section 4.4 General assistance administrator’s responsibilities at the time of the application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying for and
receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant
rights, and reimbursement obligations.
Application requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the application
form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the applicant of any
other information or documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for the
administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance. The administrator will fully
explain the purpose of any release of information form or reimbursement agreement before
seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written authorization.
Eligibility requirements. The administrator will inform the applicant of the eligibility
requirements for the program, including
• the income standard of need;
• the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource- related responsibilities, as
described in the section immediately below;
• the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending household income on
non-necessities; and
• the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform work-related
assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith effort to secure potential
resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has been explained to the
applicant in writing.
Applicant rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
• review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General Assistance law;
• apply for assistance;
• receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for assistance;
• confidentiality;
• contact the Department of Human Services;
• challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been granted in the
event of a subsequent ability to pay. In addition to seeking repayment from a recipient, the
municipality also may recover the amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous
12 months from any relative legally liable for the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of
persons under the age of 25, see Article VII, Recovery of Expenses). 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 4319.
Whenever applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place
against a recipient’s real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien,
16
the Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI Interim assistance agreement”
lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, Recovery of Expenses.
Section 4.5 Responsibilities of the applicant at the time of application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate, complete
and current information and verifiable documentation concerning his or her income, resources,
assets, household employment, how the applicant has spent his or her income, the names and
addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s support, and any change in this
information from a previous application that would affect his or her eligibility (22 M.R.S.A.
§4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation that shows
the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without just cause or been
discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a part-time basis,
has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare
assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments;
(c) has made use of all available and potential resources when NOTES directed in writing to such
a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to, other government benefit
programs or the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative program when
appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program by the administrator, in order to
diminish the applicants need for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 4.6 Action on applications
Written decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to the
applicant concerning his/her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits a written
application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period except when the
municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this ordinance) to issue
assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment. (22 M.R.S.A. §
4305, 431 6-A, 4321). A written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether
assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
e) the applicant’s right to notify the Department of Human Services if he! she believes the
municipality has acted illegally. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7 Withdrawal of an application
17
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his/her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form needed by the
general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8 Temporary refusal to accept application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily refuse to
accept applications for 24 hours. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
a) when the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the applicant is
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the applicant will be asked to leave,
and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The applicant will be
informed that an application will be accepted when his/her conduct is under control;
b) when a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant. That person may be
required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly authorized to act as a
representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9 Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control
of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the household. (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301.4). Although they may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive general assistance,
persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an emergency will be granted assistance, except as
provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency
need and have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency. 22 M.R.S.A. §
4308.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General Assistance due
to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, or 6.4 of this ordinance is ineligible to receive emergency
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308.2(A)). Dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for
assistance. For the purposes of this section, “dependents” are defined as:
1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is
required to provide care for any child under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member
of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.3). In the event one or more members of a household
are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of
those dependents will be calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents
only, except that all household income will be considered available to them.
Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that he/she
needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance
within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the applicant will
probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his/her need.
18
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the applicant’s statements
about needing emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized until the
applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22 M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due to
illness, disability, lack of transportation, lack of child care, or other good cause, and if there is no
authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the administrator will accept
an application over the telephone.
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if the
applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting his/her
home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his/her eligibility through any other
means.
Limitation on emergency assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency
assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all or part of an
emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not basic necessities, they will not be
eligible to receive general assistance to replace that money. Applicants have the responsibility to
provide the administrator with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not
have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the
administrator may limit emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount
of money necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for emergency
assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created by a negative account
balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage or utility payments), and the
negative account balance was created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the
applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in
the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the applicant’s
ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable time period, including
evidence of all income and re sources received over that period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities during the
applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum levels established by this
ordinance for the specific basic necessities or the actual monthly cost, whichever is less,
including all costs NOTES associated with averting the particular emergency situation for
which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time period, the
administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments available to the
household for the applicable time period as well as the total general assistance actually
received during the appli cable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the difference yielded
by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant will not totally alleviate the
emergency situation.
19
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life threatening
situations or for first time applicants; that is, persons who have never before applied for
general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipal ity from electing to
alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost- effective manner available, provided such a
determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in conformance with general
assistance law.
Section 4.10 Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for assistance
who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no other residence and is
physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible persons who
apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other municipality. If a person
who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator will
determine his/her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he/she establishes a
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an applicant or
recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to relocate to another
municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants financial
assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality will be responsible for
providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she moves provided the recipient
remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or hospital) and
requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of this municipality
for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution. The municipality thereafter retains
responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this
municipality to which he/she intends to return. The municipality also recognizes its
responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in this municipality if such an applicant had
no residence prior to entering the institution. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307.4).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are considered
institutions (see above) if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes arrangements
for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging. [ municipalities which
illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the applicant stays in temporary
lodging are responsible for the applicant for up to 6 months and may be subject to other
penalties. (22 M.R.S.A. 4307.4).1
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another municipality
but that municipality disputes its responsi bility the administrator will notify the Department of
Human Services in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his/her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant
assistance until the Department has concluded which municipality is responsible for providing
20
assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the Department will recover the amount due
from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307.5, 4307.6).
ARTICLE V
Eligibility factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied with the
eligibility requirements set forth below.
Section 5.1 Initial application
Initial application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need will be
the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by law, applies to
all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting
employment without just cause or for being discharged from employment for misconduct (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1-A), see section 5.5)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before
applied for general assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308.1).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including pro-rated income, where applicable),
property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance
contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and
he/she does not have adequate income or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants. Repeat
applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat
applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at any time
in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not a dependent minor in the
household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for general assistance, they must be in need and
meet all other eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely
affected to the extent they have not used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
Section 5.2 Eligibility for categorical assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general assistance if
the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance programs will be
considered as income when determining need, with the exception of Food Stamps, which will not
be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into consideration when determining need
(7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)). Also, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ ECIP) received by an applicant will not
be considered as income or a resource; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating
needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs. (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general assistance
for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP shall be accomplished
in accordance with subsection (C) under Types of Income at section 6.6 of this ordinance.
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being advised
in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who, without just cause,
make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from receiving
assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3 Personal property
21
a) Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including but not limited
to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit and other marketable security, will be
eligible for general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his/her basic
needs, and thereby exhausts them.
b) Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property consisting of more than
one motor vehicle, or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are convertible into
cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of the applicant’s household will be eligible for
general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person is making an initial application or
when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at fair market value are unsuccessful.
Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of
income are exempt from the above category and are not considered available assets.
c) Automobile ownership. Ownership of one automobile per house hold will not make a person
ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for transportation to employment, medical
care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or if it is essential to the maintenance of the
applicant’s household. Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market
value greater than $5000 may be required, with written, 30-day notice, to make a good faith
effort to trade that automobile in to a reputable automobile dealer for an automobile with a
market value of less than $5000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a
trade down must be used for his/her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade down the
excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). The
municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary expenses any car payment for which
the applicant is responsible. General assistance for travel-related needs shall be computed in
accordance with section 6.8(f)(6 and 7) Travel/work related expenses.
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non- contributory basis or that is
required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining eligibility for
general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may be considered as a tangible
asset when an applicant has received assistance for 4 weeks or more after an application for
assistance.
e) Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market value to someone
else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general assistance will not be granted
general assistance to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance will
be denied within a 120-day limit up to the uncompensated value of the asset which was
transferred unless the transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will issue. There will be a presumption that the applicant transferred his/her
assets in order to be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less than the
fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general
assistance unless the applicant can demonstrate the existence of an arms-length transaction.
Section 5.4 Ownership of real estate
If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that occupied as the principal home,
continued eligibility will depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:
a) dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the property into cash which
can be applied toward meeting present need; or
22
b) obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present need. Applicants who
transfer their excess property to a third party in order to become eligible for general assistance
will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital improvement
payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property. The lien shall not be
enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the recipient (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320, see also section 6.8).
Section 5.5 Work requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to the
extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless the applicant
is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment, rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their households who
are 16 years of age or older will be required to accept any suitable job offer or opportunity for
rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see Exemptions). Applicants must demonstrate
to the administrator that they are available for work and are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job which the applicant is mentally and physically able to perform.
“Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for work during
normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no circumstance exists which would
prevent them from complying with the work requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will be
required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the time of each
application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the employers
contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the employer
representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting a written
application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a written application
or letter of inquiry to employers. For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of
unemployment or partial employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers
per week to whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or
her work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the region and
the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search activities after
considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment obligations, workfare
obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not be expected at the time of the
initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
Disqualification. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants will
be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause;
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and appropriate.
Recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered
to be performing a diligent work search and will be disqualified.
23
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program that would
assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work;
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work program (see
section 5.6).
Disqualification for job quit or discharge for misconduct. No applicant, whether an initial or
repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full time or part-time job without just cause or who has
been discharged from employment for misconduct will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301.8, 4316-A (1-A)).
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to comply
with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to any work
requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable
evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her from
working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to meet piece
work standards;
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or rehabilitation
program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or disabled family
members;
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any other verifiable
reason which the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just
cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 431 6-A.5).
Applicant’s burden of establishing just cause. If the administrator finds that the applicant has
violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a work
requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or otherwise
satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the
work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq., or the performance of a
service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax pursuant to
federal law.
24
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a disqualification for
workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under Eligibility Regained.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work requirements shall
not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household who is not capable of working,
including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child under 6 years of age
or for any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.3). In the event one
(or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and assistance is requested for those
remaining members of the household who are dependents, the eligibility of those dependents
will be calculated as though the household is composed of the dependents only, except that all
household income will be considered as available to them.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly, physically
or mentally ill, or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for any pre-school age
child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an applicant’s
existing employment, ability to pursue a bona tide job offer, ability to attend an interview for
possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site participation in a training
program which is either approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the Department
of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in securing employment, or classroom
participation in a degree-granting program operated under the control of the Department of
Human Services or Department of Labor.
Section 5.6 Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be required to
perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit organization, as a condition
of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 431 6-A.2). As part of the municipal work program, the
municipality can require recipients to participate in training, education, or rehabilitative
programs that will assist the recipient in securing employment. The work requirement provisions
found in section 5.5 regarding just cause, dependents, and exempt ions also apply to the
municipal workfare program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that they
understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the
form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read it themselves. The
form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work and the hourly rate by means
of which the duration of the work assignment is calculated. In addition, the consent form shall
describe the consequences of failing to adequately perform part or all of the workfare or
workfare-first assignment.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations. (22 M.R.S.A. § 431
6-A.3).
25
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work that
exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives under municipal
general assistance standards. Any person performing work under this subsection shall be
provided with net general assistance, the value of which is calculated at a rate of at least the
prevailing minimum wage under state or federal law. (Note: The federal minimum wage is
$4.75/hour as of October 1, 1996, and shall be increased to $5.15/ hour on September 1,
1997.)
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if that work
would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs;
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsec tion replace regular
municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible person’s:
a) existing employment
b) ability to follow up on a bona tide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to lead to a high
school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by the Department of
Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be reasonably expected to assist the person
in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated under
the control of the Department of Human Services or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours, per week. An eligible
person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the
extent that the work requirement in combination with his/her regular employment would result in
the person working more than 40 hours per week.
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his/her capabilities.
However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person may be required as a
condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s statement detailing the extent of the
disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or disability, the
municipality will pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to pay for the
exam, however in such a case the administrator will choose the doctor. The administrator will
not require verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22 M.R.S.A. §
4316.5).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an emergency
situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for committing a program
violation) be required to perform work under this subsection prior to receiving general
assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate needs upon receiving written assurance
from the eligible person that he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general
26
assistance. When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required
prior to receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare firsts policy.
“Workfare first” policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316- A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of general
assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general
assistance benefit conditionally granted.
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is eligible be
withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as otherwise
required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for general assistance and prior
to performing any workfare for the municipality associated with that request for assistance.
That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being conditionally granted to the
household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being issued (in days or
weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing minimum wage), upon
which the duration of the workfare assignment is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment must be performed, in hours, before the
general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general nature of the type of work
being assigned, location(s) of work-site, date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare
supervisors’ names and contact telephone numbers, and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s) the recipient will be
expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy must sign a
consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfare-related rights and
responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform all or part of the workfare
assigned without just cause.
4) In addition to any disqualification penalty that may apply, the consequences of refusing to
perform or completely failing to perform the workfare assignment, without just cause, or
performing the entire workfare assignment below the average standards that job without just
cause, will be the, termination of the entire general assistance grant. Notice of the grant
termination will be provided the workfare participant in accordance with section 6.9 of this
ordinance.
5) If some of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there has been a
failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just cause, the administrator shall
issue a grant of general assistance in the amount of the number of workfare hours
satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate used to calculate the duration of the workfare
assignment. In addition to any disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of
27
the conditionally issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance
with section 6.9 of this ordinance.
6) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the workfare
participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just cause reasons shall be
reassigned.
Work-related expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this section
will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the person (22 M.R.S.A. §
4316.2(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes or equipment the recipient needs to
perform his/her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who willfully fails to perform or willfully performs below average
standards the work assigned by the municipality, without just cause, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days. (22 M. R.S.A. § 4316-A.1). As soon as the administrator knows that a
recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify the recipient in
writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days unless the recipient can show just cause. The
burden of demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
Eligibility regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because they have
violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their eligibility under the
following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been given will
be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although dependents in the
household may be eligible (see Sec. 5.5, Dependents).
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to perform the
work assignment which he or she, without just cause, failed to perform, the disqualified recipient
will be given an opportu nity to regain eligibility. The administrator will give the recipient a
work assignment as soon as possible. If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an
emergency need and the administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to
alleviate the emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to
avert the emergency, but the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the 120-day disqualification if the recipient fails to
regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment. The amount of emergency
assistance granted will be considered in the computation of the total number of hours the
recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked to regain their eligibility during a 120 day disqualification period and
who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously failed to perform and who, without
just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work assignment will be considered to have acted in bad
faith. In such a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the
term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently disqualified
within the initial 120-day period of disqualification for failing to comply with the municipal
28
work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period beginning with the
new disqualification date, but with no opportunity to requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property or harms other employees by his/her
actions and is discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by
returning to the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to persons who
work for the municipality in reports to the Department of Human Services (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A.2).
Section 5.7 Use of resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available or
potential resource which may reduce his/her need for general assistance (see definition of
Resources). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith effort to secure a potential resource
after receiving written notice to do so are disqualified from receiving assistance until they make
an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good
faith effort to secure the resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying independently for
general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or children will be eligible to
receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the home of his or her parent, legal
guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire household will be evaluated for
eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult- supervised supportive
living arrangement; or
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth of any
dependent child; or
5) the Department of Human Services determines that the physical or emotional health or safety
of the minor or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the Department of Human Services determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is
good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.4).
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his/ her parents for general
assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the applicant’s parents are
still legally liable for his/ her support and the municipality has the right to seek recovery from the
parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such a recipient to the extent his/her parents are
financially capable of repaying the municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. §4319). With regard to any such
application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s need for general assistance
by contacting his/her parents. If the applicant’s parents declare a willingness to provide the
applicant with his/her basic needs directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the applicant
29
would be jeopardized by relying on his/her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find
the applicant to be in no need for general assistance for the reason that his/her needs are being
provided by a legally liable relative.
Mental or physical disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability must make
a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have been
recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or rehabilitation
specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not constitute a financial
burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written notice; disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resources. Any applicant who
refuses to utilize such potential resources, without just cause, after receiving written 7-day notice
will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good faith effort to utilize the
resources.
General assistance will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the
applicant has made, or is in the process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
Forfeiture of benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in benefits
from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a knowing or intentional
violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that program’s rules without just cause
will be ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the
forfeited benefits can be considered income under general assistance law, the worth of the
forfeited benefits will be considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of
the forfeiture. To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but,
rather, in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource, up
to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of 120 days from
the date of the forfeiture unless the municipality is prohibited by federal or state law from
considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local public assistance programs
(22 M.R.S.A. §4317).
Section 5.8 Period of Disqualification
No one will have his/her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being given
written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321-4322). Each person will
be notified in writing of the reasons for his/her ineligibility, and any person disqualified for not
complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the period of disqualification.
Work requirement. People who do not comply with a work requirement are disqualified from
receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility; see sections 5.5,
5.6). Recipients who do not comply with the work requirement associated with their grant of
assistance and are disqualified before the period covered by the grant of assistance expires shall
be disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the assistance grant.
People who do not comply with a work requirement and are disqualified after the period covered
by the grant of assistance expires will be disqualified for 120 days from the date of the written
notice of disqualification. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a
decision of disqualification.
30
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120
days. (see section 6.4, Fraud). The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to render a
decision. If a disqualification for fraud is issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the
period of disqualification shall commence on the day following the end of the period covered by
the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered after the period covered by the grant of assistance
has expired, the period of ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of
disqualification.
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1 Recognition of dignity and rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a manner
that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his/her individual
rights.
Section 6.2 Determination; redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a person
applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a redetermination of
eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to administer the program
efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any application, the administrator will
determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis, but may elect
to disburse that applicant’s assistance periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of
eligibility pursuant to that initial eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he/she is
receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the recipient’s circumstances
that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a recipient has been
granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior
written notice to the recipient explaining the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient
an opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
Section 6.3 Verification
Applicant’s responsibility. Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of
application and continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her need, income, use of income, expenses, and any changes in
information previously reported on the application. The administrator will require documentation
of the applicant’s income, use of income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for
rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical services and other basic necessities that are reasonably
obtain able. The recipient is responsible for notifying the administrator of any changes in his/her
household or income that may affect his/her eligibility.
31
When determining an applicant’s eligibility, the administrator will seek all necessary information
first from the applicant. Information needed from other sources, with the exception of public
records, will be gathered only with the knowledge and consent of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. §
4309.1-B).
Decision. If an applicant does not have the necessary information at the time of application, the
administrator will give the applicant the opportunity to provide the information prior to the
expiration of the 24 hour period within which the administrator must act on the application.
Except when assistance is conditionally granted pursuant to this municipality’s workfare-first
policy (see section 5.6), if all the necessary information has been provided and the applicant is
eligible, assistance will be granted. If the applicant does not provide the required information
needed within the 24 hour period, and the administrator cannot determine the applicant’s
eligibility, the applicant will be denied assistance for that reason (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.1-B).
Denial of assistance. The administrator will not grant assistance to any applicant who refuses to
supply necessary information and documentation concerning his/her needs, income and other
resources, or who refuses to grant permission for the administrator to contact other persons to
verify the information, If the administrator has attempted to verify the information but is unable
to determine if the applicant is eligible because the applicant has refused to provide or allow the
administrator to verify the necessary information, the applicant will be denied assistance until the
necessary verification has been accomplished (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.1-B).
Right to verify. It is the administrator’s responsibility to determine and verify the eligibility of
each applicant. The administrator may seek and verify information from all appropriate sources
including, but not limited to: the Department of Human Services and any other department of the
state having information that has a bearing on an applicant’s eligibility, financial institutions,
employers, landlords, physicians, and legally liable relatives. The administrator will request the
applicant’s written consent authorizing the administrator to receive the necessary information (22
M.R.S.A. § 4314).
Penalty for refusing to release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314 who
refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has been requested must
state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of receiving the request. Any such
person who refuses to provide the information, without just cause, commits a civil violation and
may be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false information to the
administrator is guilty of a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § 4314.5, 4314.6, 4315).
Section 6.4 Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false representation of a material
fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause someone else to receive
general assistance. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). False representation shall consist of any individual
knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either orally or in writing, in
order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or the applicant’s household is not entitled;
32
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order to obtain assistance
to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false represen tation prior to being given
an opportunity for a fair hearing.
Period of ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person has
knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making himself or
herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that applicant in writing that
he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for 120 days. For the purpose of this
section, a material misrepresentation is a false statement about an eligibility factor in the absence
of which some or all of the assistance would not be or would not have been granted. The
notification of disqualification issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his/her
right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority within 5 working days of
receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period
covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received or upon the date of notification of
disqualification, whichever is later.’
Right to a fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority
in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have his/her assistance
reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified and given, the
opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the fair
hearing authority may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80-B of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.3).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing authority
determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will be required to
reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she was not entitled.
Dependents. In no event will the disqualification of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.3). In the event one or
more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is
comprised of the dependents only, except that the entire household income will be considered
available to them.
Section 6.5 Period of eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is sufficient to
meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in excess of one month
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon any application the administrator will determine the applicant’s
eligibility on the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis. For reasons of administrative efficiency,
however, the administrator may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance for shorter periods of
time, such as weekly, throughout the 30- day period of eligibility. When the administrator elects
to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30 days, subsequent grants of
assistance during that 30-day period may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need
33
unless the applicant’s financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant a
redetermination of eligibility.
Section 6.6 Determination of need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7). The administrator will calculate applicants’ expenses
according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the specific
necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these expenses, as calculated for
a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need. Applicants will not be considered
eligible if their income and other resources exceed this calculation except in an emergency (see
section 4.9,22 M.R.S.A. § 4308.2).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income, property,
credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their household are
greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in the beginning of
section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.10, 4305.3-B). The difference between the applicant’s income
and the overall maximum levels of assistance established by this ordinance is the applicant’s
deficit. Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity listed in section 6.8 shall be used by the administrator to guide
the distribution of assistance for which the applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients
maintain a standard of health and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.3-A).
Income for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic necessities.
Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that
was spent within the 30- day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and services
that are not basic necessities. All income spent on goods and services that are not basic
necessities will be considered available to the applicant and combined with the applicant’s
prospective 30-day income for the purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A).
Applicants who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income
to purchase goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need assistance
with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does not exceed the
overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-income requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for general
assistance must document his/her use of income to the administrator. This documentation can
take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has
exhausted all household income received over the last 30-day period. Any repeat applicant may
be required to verify that such an expenditure of income was for basic necessities.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mort gage); the cost of heating
fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the base rate if the
household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of non elective medical services as
recommended by a physician which are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement or
insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing and non prescription drugs, and the costs of
any other commodity or service deter mined essential by the administrator.
34
Cable television, cigarettes/alcohol, gifts purchased, costs of trips or vacations, court fines paid,
repayments of unsecured loans, credit card debt, costs associated with pet care, etc., are not
considered basic necessities and will not be included in the budget computation.
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his/her income for basic necessities or
fails to reasonably document his/her use of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Those additional
requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his/ her income, at the time it
becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The administrator may prioritize such
required expenditures so that most or all of the applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e.,
rent/mortgage), energy (i.e., heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities.
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use- of-income requirements
placed on them.
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s income was spent,
or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income was not spent as directed and
was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not be eligible to receive either
regular or emergency general assistance to replace that income.
4) If the applicant does not spend his/her income as directed, but can show with verifiable
documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the
applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s eligibility and need.
Calculation of income and expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found atthe
beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of assistance, the
applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see Sec. 4.9). If income is less than the
overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a deficit.
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the applicant
also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant
assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of this ordinance for
specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the administrator elects to consolidate
the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately below.
Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants will be
eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount
allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost of the necessity, whichever
is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in accordance with the following conditions,
the administrator may consolidate the applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in
an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity in
amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the applicant is in
an emergency situation; and
35
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic necessity
was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or resources in violation of the
use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
Section 6.7 Income
Income standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of assistance
provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in an emergency. The
administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the applicant’s income and expenses
each time an applicant applies.
Calculation of income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator will
calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on the date of
application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all applicants
other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider as available income any income
that was not spent during the previous 30-day period on basic necessities, as well as any income
that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for
specific basic necessities. If a household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need
for basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be
considered in need. Exceptions will be made in emergency situations which may necessitate that
the maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. [ see section 4.9). To calculate weekly income
and expenses, the administrator will divide the applicants’ monthly income and expenses by 4.3.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through wages, salary,
commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is considered earned
income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be computed by subtracting reasonable
and actual business expenses from gross income. When income consists of wages, the amount
computed will be the income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce that is sold is
considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the applicant or the
applicant’s dependents will not be considered as earned income.
NOTE: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and from work,
special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will not be considered available
income and will be deducted (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7).
b) income from other assistance or social services programs. State/federal categorical assistance
benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA benefits, unemployment insurance
benefits, and payments from other government sources will be considered as income, unless
expressly prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP and EPIC) from
being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel assistance will not be used to
reduce the amount of general assistance the applicant is eligible to receive, although
applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or
electricity if a recently received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or
otherwise obviated an actual fuel-related cost over the prospective 30-day period. The
administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an applicant who has
36
received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his/her total fuel costs. Accordingly, in
such cases, the administrator will budget for the household’s heating energy needs according
to actual usage, up to the ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice
to the applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until such
a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable need for the
disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s fuel tank can accept a
minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a positive credit balance with his/her
utility company. The municipality is not obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy
allowance toward non-heating purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of
HEAP/ECIP.
C) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support payments will be considered
income only if actually received by the applicant. The general assistance administrator will
refer cases where support payments are not actually received to the State Department of
Human Services’ Support Enforcement Location Unit.
d) Income from other sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be considered
income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered income as will cash or in-kind
contributions provided to the household from any other source, including relatives (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301.7).
e) Earnings of a son or daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters below the age of
18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time will not be considered
income. The unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered available to the
household.
f) Income from household members. Income from household members will be considered
available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is legally obligated for the
support of the applicant, if the household members pool or share their income and expenses as
a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide support to one another.
g) The pooling or non-pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the same
dwelling unit but not all members of the house hold are applying for general assistance, the
administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable presumption that the entire household is
pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.12-A). One or more applicants for assistance can
successfully rebut the presumption that all household income is being pooled by providing the
administrator with verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of nonpooling
for the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would include
evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements, cancelled checks,
receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly supporting a claim that the
applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely responsible for his or her pro-rata share
of household costs. If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s
presumption that all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will
be determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully rebuts the
municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled, the applicant’s
eligibility will be determined on the basis of his/her income and his/her pro-rata share of
actual household expenses.
37
h) Lump sum income. A lump sum payment as defined in this ordinance and received by a
household prior to the date of application for general assistance will be considered as income
available to the household, with the exception of any required payments (i.e., any third party
payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump sum payment, or any
payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and
any amount of the lump sum payment which the applicant can document was spent on basic
necessities, as described below.
In the case where a lump sum payment was received by a household at any time prior to the date
of application for general assistance, the administrator will assess the need for prorating an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance according to the following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. §
4301.7).
1) Identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was spent on basic
necessities, including all basic necessities provided by general assistance in reasonable
conformance with the specific maximum levels of assistance, per month, provided in this
ordinance; any reasonable payment of funeral or burial expenses for a family member; any
reasonable travel costs related to the illness or death of a family member; repair or
replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of
a motor vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day living
necessities (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7).
4) Add to the remainder all income received by the household between the date of receipt of the
lump sum payment and the date of application for general assistance.
5) divide the sum created by subsection (4) by the aggregate maximum monthly allocation of
general assistance available to the household pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. §4305.3-B (Appendix
A).
The dividend remaining after following the above guidelines represents the number of months
from the receipt of the lump sum payment during which an income level equivalent to the
maximum monthly allocation of general assistance for the household will be deemed available
to that household. No proration of lump sum income can extend longer than 12 months from
the date of application. Applicants who have been declared ineligible for reasons of lump sum
proration will not be eligible for emergency general assistance during the period of proration.
Section 6.8 Basic necessities; Maximum levels of assistance
Overall maximum levels of assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of assistance
for specific basic necessities listed in this section, an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance
will be first deter mined by subtracting his/her income from the overall maximum level of
assistance designated immediately below for the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. §
4305.3-B). The difference yielded by this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit. Applicants
will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is
unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their
families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for general assistance unless they
38
are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for emergency general assistance will be
determined according to section 4.9 of this ordinance.
No. in Household Weekly Monthly
1
2 (The applicable figures from
3 Appendix A should be inserted
4 here.)
5
6
Additional persons $75.00
Maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities. The municipality will grant
assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum levels for
specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation with the applicant,
may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance with any one or combination
of necessities not to exceed the total deficit; These maximum levels will be strictly adhered to
unless the administrator determines that there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is
shown to exist, in which case these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate
needs. In all cases either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the
maximum amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other household
members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No applicant will be allowed
to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid by another person. In addition, as
a general rule the municipality will not provide a benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that
is issued to a person not living with the applicants household or that has otherwise been incurred
by a person who has not been found eligible to receive assistance. Temporary exceptions to this
general rule may be made by the administrator in the following circum stances: (1) a recent,
unplanned separation has occurred in the household resulting in the sustained or permanent
absence of a former household member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the
applicant and members of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the
commodities or services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance;
and (3) the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
a) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the allowed
maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate household
size. For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A. Thrifty
Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Human Services on or about October of
each year. In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C. §2017(b)). The
municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved food products.
39
The maximum amounts allowed for food are:
No. in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $ $
2
3 (See Appendix B for figures to be inserted here.)
4
5
6
7
8
The administrator will exceed the above maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s statement
verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food that is greater than the
ordinance maximums.
b) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments that are
reasonable and within the allowed maximum levels below. It is the applicant’s responsibility
to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the applicant find housing when
appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to
assist the applicant in his/her search for housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will
be the categorical housing maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary
to adequately shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing
that contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members will be
provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms actually needed.
Rental payments to relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental payment to an
applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at least three months and the
applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their basic needs. For the purpose of this
section, a relative” is defined as the applicant’s parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren,
siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319.2).
Rental payments to private homes. When applicants are living in private homes or sharing
dwelling units with other people who are not requesting general assistance, the amount allowed
as the applicant’s shelter expense will be the applicant’s prorata share of the actual, total shelter
cost, up to the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.6).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued, whenever
reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most superior interest in the
property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any landlord in
any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments issued during the
calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS
regulation. See section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue Code.
40
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on behalf of
applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a minimum, make a good
faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department of Human Services, Division of
Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-1 44A Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a
condition of that landlord receiving future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her
tenants.
Mortgage payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage payment, the
general assistance administrator will make an individual factual determination of whether the
applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making this determination, the administrator
will consider the extent and liquidity of the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing.
Factors to consider in making this determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity,
(2) the amount of equity,
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant an opportunity to
secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate needs,
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial rehabilitation,
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the anticipated rental charges
the applicant would be responsible for if he/she were to be dislocated to rental housing,
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because of his/her inability
to meet the mortgage payments,
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such dislocation, and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the shelter is an
available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the municipality would otherwise be
required to provide. If after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines that: (1) the
monthly mort gage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels of assistance available
for housing appropriate to the applicant’s household size; (2) there is no capacity in the
accumulated equity in the property, when considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing
capacity with the mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to suspend or reduce the
mortgage obligation; and (3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property, then the administrator
shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s request for mortgage assistance to
the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for general assistance.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount due, up to the
amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After an initial application,
assistance with such payments will be given only after the applicant has made all reasonable
efforts to borrow against the equity of his/her home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home
with which to secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line
with the rental rates for similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the
administrator will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
41
within his/her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to secure such
housing.
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs of granting
assistance with mortgage payments (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be enforced against a
recipient except upon his/her death or the transfer of the property. Further, no lien may be
enforced against a person who is currently receiving any form of public assistance, or who would
again become eligible for general assistance if the lien were enforced.
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s property to
recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment it must file a notice of
the lien with the county registry of deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making
the mortgage payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage payment and all subsequent mortgage payments made
on behalf of the same eligible person, plus interest and costs. Not less than 10 days prior to filing
the lien in the registry, the municipal officers must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the
general assistance recipient, and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice
must clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The municipal officers
must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount secured by the lien is
increased because of an additional mortgage payment or the imposition of interest. This notice
must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file notice sent to the
recipient.
The municipality will charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien. The municipal
officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate of interest allowed by the
State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the date the
lien is filed.
Property taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his/ her property taxes, the
administrator will inform the applicant that there are two procedures on the local level to request
that relief: the poverty abate ment process (36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the
applicant chooses to seek property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant
is denied a poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the date of
application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information obtained from the
applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a tax lien foreclosure will result in
subsequent eviction from the residential property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the Maine Resident
Property Tax Program, when available.
Housing maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this ordinance
have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental surveyor the fair market
42
rental values developed by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are derived from the HUD values made effective as of
every October 1, and adjusted to disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as
developed by the Maine State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by
reference. If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be submitted to
the Department of Human Services, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance adoption
and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
The maximum amounts allowed for housing are:
Unheated Heated
No. of Bedrooms Weekly/Monthly Weekly/Monthly
0 $ $ $ $
1
2 (See Appendix C for figures to insert here)
3
4
c) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if they are
not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with the utility
company regarding service, including entering into a special payment arrangement if
necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The
municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits. Exceptions may be
made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9. Disconnection of utility service will not be
considered an emergency in all cases. The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis
to determine if the termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the household
members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision. Applicants who had sufficient
income, money, assets or other resources to pay their utility bill when it was received, but who
spent all or part of their income on items which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to
receive general assistance to replace those funds. Applicants have the burden of providing
evidence of their income and use of income for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. §
4308.2, see section 4.9). The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give
the administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is
low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements with the utility company
to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if assistance is needed with a utility bill
prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. The maximum amounts
allowed for utilities for lights cooking, and other electric uses, excluding electric hot water are:
No. in Household Weekly Monthly
43
1 $14.00 $60.00
2 15.70 67.50
3 17.45 75.00
4 19.20 82.50
5 21.00 90.00
6 22.70 97.50
Additional members, add $7.50/month
Electricity Maximums for Households that use Electrically Heated Hot Water. The
maximum amount allowed for electric utilities for dwelling units that have electrically heated hot
water shall be $70 per month for the first member of the household, with an additional $10 per
month for each additional household member.
No. in Household Weekly Monthly
1. $16.30 $70.00
2 18.60 80.00
3 21.00 90.00
4 23.30 100.00
5. 25.60 110.00
6 27.90 120.00
Note: For electrically heated households, the maximum amount allowed for electrical utilities per
month shall be the sum of the appropriate maximum amount under this subsection and the
appropriate maximum amount for fuel as provided below.
In accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may allow as a budge table
expense the amount of an applicant’s summer-loaded special payment arrangement (SPA) or
budget payment arrangement (BPA), as calculated by the electric utility and entered into by the
applicant, even when the arranged payment amount exceeds the above maximums or actual
usage:
1) The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above monthly maximums, when
annualized, for non-electrically heated dwelling units.
2) The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above monthly maximums and the
fuel assistance maximums, when annualized, for electrically heated dwelling units.
3) The administrator determines, in consultation with the utility, that the payment arrangement
does not include in any part the installment payment of past debt unless the municipality
guaranteed to the utility the allowance of such an arrangement as a condition of averting a
disconnection.
Pursuant to the use-of-income requirements in section 6.6 of this ordinance, whenever the
administrator budgets for SPA’s or BPA’s under this section, the recipient will be required to pay
the SPA or BPA him or herself to the extent of the income capacity of the household.
44
Non-electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be budgeted
at the actual 30-day cost for those services.
d) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for fuel during
the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses are reasonable, and at
other times during the year when the administrator determines the request for fuel assistance
is reason able and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill. The
municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided in section 4.9.
Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and requesting assistance prior to
depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have been informed of this responsibility run
out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for failing to give the administrator timely
notice of their need for fuel, the administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the
applicants’ control, and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of
this ordinance.
When considering requests for heating fuel, eligible applicants will be granted assistance with
the actual amount necessary up to the following maximums:
month gallons month gallons
September 50 January 225
October 100 February 225
November 200 March 125
December 200 April 125
May 50
When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for heating purposes
will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed for that month by the
current price per gallon. When fuels such as wood, coal and/or natural gas are used for heating
purposes, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. No eligible applicant shall
be considered to need more than 7 tons of coal per year, 8 cords of wood per year, 126,000 cubic
feet of natural gas per year, or 1000 gallons of propane.
e) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and household
supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual need for these items, up
to the maximums below. Personal and household supplies include: hand soap, toothpaste,
shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and costs, household
cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash
bags, and light bulbs.
No. in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $8.20 $35.00
3-4 9.30 40.00
5-6 10.50 45.00
7-8 11.60 50.00
45
Additional persons in the household will be budgeted at $1.25 per week or $5 a month. When an
applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be budgeted
as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth or
disposable diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
No. of Children Weekly Monthly
1 $10.50 $45.00
2 15.10 65.00
3 20.90 90.00
4 25.60 110.00
f) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when they are
deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the general assistance
administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a physician. Assistance will be granted
only when these necessities cannot be obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of adequate clothing.
Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general assistance administrator must be
satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available resources to secure the necessary clothing.
In some circumstances, clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for
example, if fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity,
special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a household member is
without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than hospital bills
(see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves the expenses and services
prior to their being made or delivered. Medical expenses include prescriptions, devices,
treatments, or services that are determined to be medically necessary by a licensed physician.
The municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance cannot be
obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able to receive necessary
medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The applicant is required to utilize any
resource, including any federal or state program, that will diminish his/her need to seek
general assistance for medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for nonemergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a second medical
opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to verify the necessity of the
services. Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established Medicaid
rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical commodities. Before authorizing
general assistance for any medical expenses, the administrator will inform the pharmacy or
medical service provider of the municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the
Medicaid rate, and ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual amount when
the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies include bandages,
aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, non-prescription medicines. In addition, the
basic monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the
health and safety of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an
46
allowable expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician certifying
that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the hospital must notify
the administrator within 5 business days of the admission. Notification must be by telephone,
confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice
to the administrator, the municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his/her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for consideration
under the hospital’s charity care program as provided in Title 22 M.R.S.A. § 396-F(1).
Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s charity care program may apply for general
assistance. Applicants must apply for assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the
hospital and provide a notice from the hospital certifying that they re not eligible for the
hospital’s charity care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a necessary expense,
the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the hospital. The
payment arrangement will be based upon the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s
eligibility, the municipality will budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has
agreed to pay. The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each
time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly budget, but
the recipient will be responsible for making any nece payments to the hospital pursuant to the
use-of- income requirements found at section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only. As is the case
with medical services generally, the municipal ity will issue general assistance for dental
services at the established Medicaid rates for those services, and before authorizing the
general assistance benefit for dental services, the administrator will inform the dentist or
dental surgeon of the municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth
extractions are necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a dental clinic in the
area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the applicant to bear a reasonable part
of the cost for dental services, including extractions and dentures, taking into account the
applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses, an applicant must
have his/her medical need certified by a person licensed to practice optometry. The general
assistance administratar will provide assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after
the applicant has exhausted all other available resources.
6) Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual work-related expenses will
be deducted from earned income. These expenses include transportation at the actual costs not
to exceed $.28 per mile, child care costs, work clothes and supplies. The applicant is required
to provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
7) Travel expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not work-related will be
budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the prospective need for travel is
necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation to a supermarket will be
considered, as will any medically necessary travel. The rate at which such necessary travel
47
will be budgeted is $.28/mile, and this rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs associated
with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires, maintenance, insurance,
financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
8) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the procedures and
limitations described below, the municipality recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial
or cremation of eligible persons.
Funeral Director must give timely notice: In order for the municipality to be liable for a burial
or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to the burial or
cremation or by the end of the next business day following the funeral director’ receipt of the
body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313.2). This contact by the funeral director shall
begin the process of developing an application for burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the
deceased. It is the funeral director’s responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if
the family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family
members or others are unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the
municipality to pay all or part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact
to the municipal administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable
relatives to the administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be
accomplished.
Application for assistance shall be created on behalf of the de ceased: For the purposes of
determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance for burial or
cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be created by the administrator on
behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be the
municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of death as
residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their income,
assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an application for
general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial assistance. To clarify
this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the
burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only exists to the extent the
legally liable relatives have a financial capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives
who are eligible for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to
pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance
issued for burial or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the
deceased.
The financial responsibility of certain family members: grandparents, parents, siblings,
children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine or own property in Maine, are
financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives,
individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation either in
lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement with the funeral home.
Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable relatives must provide the
municipal administrator with any reasonably requested information regarding their income,
assets, and basic living expenses.
48
Consideration of the financial responsibility of family members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable relatives
have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by
lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement, the municipality will
not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the administrator is unable to
make such a finding, the following proration of familial responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of familial responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay
for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have
a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator is unable to
determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives. Under these circumstances,
each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible for his or her prorata share of the
total municipal contribution that would exist if no legally liable relatives had a financial
capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long as all other eligibility factors have been
satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate of all
prorata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the
administrator by providing information or documentation reasonably necessary to determine
that relative’s financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally
liable relative who can financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or
cremation to the extent of that relative’s share.
Ten days to determine eligibility: The administrator may take up to 10 days from the date of
contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount of the
municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The 10-day eligibility determination
period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as necessary to make
third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family members and
determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact
the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and other related administrative
tasks. The administrator shall not use this 10-day period allowed by law to unreasonably delay
the municipality’s decision.
The municipal obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or others can contribute: The
figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by the municipality when
no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from any other source. To the
extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial capacity to pay for the
burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be deducted from the maximum burial costs
allowed by this section. In addition, any other benefits or resources that are available, such as
Social Security burial benefits, veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons,
will be deducted from the maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no
deduction from the municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the
purpose of publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose
of $75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to the
administrator.
Burial expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with regard to
whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. The maximum amount of
general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125, with additional payments,
49
where there is an actual cost, for: (1) the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery, by
laws, requires one; (2) the opening and closing of the grave site; and (3) a lot in the least
expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able to provide a cemetery lot in a
municipally-owned cemetery or in a cemetery under municipal control, the cost of the
cemetery lot in any other cemetery will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to: removal of the
body from a local residence or institution; a secured death certificate or obituary; embalming;
a minimum casket; a reasonable cost for necessary transportation; and other reasonable and
necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the funeral director and approved by the
municipal administrator.
Cremation expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the deceased,
or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any family members, the
administrator wilt issue general assistance for cremation services. The maximum amount of
assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785, with additional payments, where there is an
actuat cost, for a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery, a reasonable cost
for a burial urn not to exceed $50, and transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a
reasonable rate per mile for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
9) Capital improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs (e.g.,
heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a basic necessity.
Exceptions can be made only when the capital improvement/repair has been pre-approved by
the administrator as a necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital
improvement/repair has been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of
the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the contractor. The
administrator may grant general assistance for capital improvements when: 1) the failure to do
so would place the applicant(s) in emergency circumstances; 2) there are no other resources
available to effect the capital repair; and 3) there is no more co alternative available to the
applicant or municipality to alleviate an emergency situation. In some cases, the entire
immediate cost of the capital improvement can be mitigated by the applicant entering into an
installment payment arrangement with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to
place a lien on any property pursuant to 22 M. R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has
been used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in the same
manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection (b), above.
Section 6.9 Notice of decision
Written decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after making a
determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be given to the
applicant within 24 hours of receiving an application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.3; See Article IV,
section 4.6).
In order to ensure that applicants understand• their rights, it is the responsibility of the general
assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the written notice of
decision.
50
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written notice of
any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the contents of a written
decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair hearing and;
b) have the right to contact the Department of Human Services if they believe the municipality
has violated the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of general assistance. Except when determined impractical by the administrator,
all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or purchase order payable to a
vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or services. General
assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to an applicant unless there is no
alternative to making such a cash payment, in which case the administrator shall document the
circumstances for issuing general assis tance in the form of cash. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.6).
ARTICLE VII NOTES:
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1 Right to a fair hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant or his/her
authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right
to review a decision of the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the applicant to a
full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review of the decision (Carson v. Oakland,
42 A.2d 170 (Me. 1982); Thibodeau v. Lewiston, Andro. Sup. Ct. CV# 78-388].
Section 7.2 Method of obtaining a fair hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all claimants
will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear
requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the general
assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or explanation, the
administrator will make an entry in the case record and file any correspondence involved.
Written request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his/her authorized representative,
must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the administrator’s decision to
grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or
failure to act. The administrator will make available a printed form for requesting a fair hearing
and will assist the claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will
give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes he/she is eligible
to receive assistance; and
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
51
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been withdrawn by
the claimant.
Scheduling the fair hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair hearing
authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The administrator will notify
the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In
addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing sent to the claimant
shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal counsel or other
spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the claimant;
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely notice to
allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing
procedure to allow for effective preparation of his/her case.
Section 7.3 The fair hearing authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority that will review decisions of the
general assistance administrator when requested by any claimant or the claimant’s authorized
representative. The authority is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that general
assistance is administered in accordance with the state law and local ordinance.
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons appointed
by the municipal officers to act as the hearing authority, or, if designated, the board of appeals
created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the organization of
the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria. The person(s)
serving as fair hearing authority must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
(c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and the facts
necessary to make a fair determination;
(d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the claimant the
laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and interpreting to the
administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4 Fair hearing procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the hearing in
writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure
to allow for effective preparation of his/her case. The claimant shall be permitted to review his/
her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the claimant will be told the following information,
which will govern all fair hearings. All fair hearings will:
52
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal counsel, or
others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance administrator, his/her
agents, counsel and wit nesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the requirements
of due process;
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for themselves or
with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or documentary
evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the hearing; and examine all evidence
presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and filed with
evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to
establish all pertinent facts and circum stances, and to advance any arguments without undue
interference. Information that the claimant does not have an opportunity to hear or see will not
be used in the fair hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed
by the fair hearing authority must be made available to the claimant or his/her representative.
The claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to pursue
court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. (22 M.R.S.A.
§4322).
Section 7.5 The fair hearing decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance administrator,
and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days after completion of
the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the decision;
d) the decision and the reasons for it. A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the
claimant. The hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the general assistance
administrator. The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with
the fair hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must file
a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair hearing
decision. When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
ARTICLE VIII
53
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a person from
either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his/her executors or
administrators in a civil action. Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of
assistance, the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying
him/her in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to
recover such costs if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for
general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients anticipating workers’ compensation benefits. The municipality shall claim a lien
for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment
made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar law of any other state (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318,39-A M.R.S.A. §106). After issuing any general assistance on behalf of a
recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation, the municipality shall file
a notice of the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of
State, Uniform Commercial Code division. The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form
which must be signed by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving
Workers’ Compensation. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is
receiving Workers’ Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1
form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s Worker’s
Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s insurance
company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’ Compensation Board. The lien
shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’ Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which therefore
may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to sign a statement on
an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the Department of Human Ser vices that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment
to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance granted. Any general
assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying for SSI, or who may be
required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. §4317, and who refuses to sign the Interim
Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he
or she provides the required signature (22 M.R.S.A. §4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age of 25, are
liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. §4319). In addition, grandchildren, children,
siblings, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each other. The municipality
considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in
proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may complain to any court of competent
jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill
their responsibility. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
ARTICLE IX
54
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
In compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.4
October 1996
1
TOWN OF GLENBURN FEES ORDINANCE
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that the following ordinance be enacted.
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to create a mechanism for the Establishment of various fees to be
charged by the Town of Glenburn.
Section 2. Fee Schedule
The fees to be charged by the Town of Glenburn shall be as set forth in a fee schedule to be adopted, or
amended from time to time, by order of the Glenburn Town Council. A copy of the fee schedule shall be
available from the Town Clerk.
Section 3. Applicability
This Ordinance, and any fee schedule adopted or amended Pursuant to this Ordinance, shall supersede
any fees called for under any other ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, and shall apply to any
applications, proceedings, permits, licenses, requests, or other matters that require payment of a fee after
the date of adoption of the Ordinance.
(Adopted 5/20/04)
(Rev. 12/01/04)
(Rev. 11/08/07)
(Rev. 12/20/07)
(Amended 05/20/10) Building Permit Fees-Fee for telecommunication towers added.
(Amended 11/18/10) Rental of Municipal Building Meeting Room-Waiver of fee for use to non
profit and public service agencies.
(Amended 04/07/11) Office Fees Photocopies per page (single side) changed to $0.25.
Added: Upon request, any resident may receive one free copy of any and all
materials associated with a Public Hearing or vote.
(Amended 10/06/11) Construction/Demolition Site Permit Fees- Added: *Limit one punch card
(Six loads, one card per year) per resident/taxpayer per year regardless of
the number of properties that are owned by the resident/taxpayer.
(Amended 01/01/12) Lakeside Landing All fees repealed.
(Amended 01/12/12) Office Fees Copies of video tapes deleted. Copy of DVD (fee $5.00) added
(Amended 03/07/13) Office Fees Deleted: Photocopies per page (single side) $0.25
Added: Email received (per page/sheet) $2.00
Added: Color photocopies per page (single side) $0.75
Added: Black & white photocopies per page (single side) $0.25
(Amended 10/09/14) Recreation Program Fees This entire section was added.
Planning Board/Code Enforcement Added: All Planning Board and Code
Enforcement fees are non-refundable.
Planning Board/Code Enforcement Added: No Building Permit fee shall exceed
$400.00.
Office Fees Added: Copy or scan & electronic transfer (email) of public documents
(per page/sheet) $2.00
2
(Amended 11/20/14) Building Permit Fees
Added section Building Permit Fees for Third Party Inspected Structures
Added section Building Permit Fees for CED Inspected Structures with fee changes
Changed fee for structures less than 200 sq. ft. in Shoreland Zone
Changed Certificate of Occupancy (if required) to no fee
(Amended 02/26/15) Mobile Home Parks New or Expanded
Added: Mobile Home Park Yearly License Renewal Fee $50.00
(Amended 03/12/15) Building Permit Fees Waiver of building permits for fire related rebuilding
Plumbing Permits (External & Internal) Waiver of plumbing permit fees for fire
related rebuilding (State of Maine fees must be collected)
(Amended 11/05/15) Subdivision Fees: Wording amended only. No fees were changed.
Office Fees: Voter registration list and fee deleted. Voter registration disk and fee
also deleted.
(Amended 04/21/16) Recreation Program Fees
(Amended 06/16/16) Notary Fees and Black & White Photocopies per page (single side)
(Amended 03/23/17) Recreation Program Fees
(Amended 06/29/17) Added: Lakeside Landing Park Permit Fees
Amended 08/22/19, effective 09/22/19 Recreation Program Fees
3
TOWN OF GLENBURN MUNICIPAL SCHEDULE OF FEES
PLANNING BOARD/CODE ENFORCEMENT
All Planning Board and Code Enforcement Fees are Non-refundable
SUBDIVISION FEES:
Application Fee……………………………………………………………………....……$250.00
Lot/Dwelling Unit Fee…..………………………………..…..…$250.00 Per lot or dwelling unit
Public Hearing(s)………………………………………………..……all costs borne by applicant
MOBILE HOME PARKS NEW OR EXPANDED:
Mobile Home Park Fees………………………………………………Same as Subdivision Fees
Mobile Home Park Yearly License Renewal Fee…………………………………………$50.00
BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Structures of less than 200 sq. ft. outside the Shoreland Zone require a no-fee permit.
Structures of less than 200 sq. ft. within Shoreland Zoning…………………………20¢ sq. ft.
Example: 150 ft. structure (must be back 100’ from high water mark)……$30.00
In the event of a fire, all building permit fees may be waived by the Town Treasurer, if the owner
applies for a building permit to rebuild the structure within 12 months from the date of loss.
Building Permit Fees for Third Party Inspected Structures
Residential/Commercial, Unfinished (Third Party Inspected)……………………..…. 10¢ sq. ft.
Example: Garage, private or commercial…non-habitable
Foundation….non-habitable
Breezeway between house & garage….non-habitable
Warehouse….non-habitable
Residential/Commercial, Finished (Third Party Inspected)…………………..……….. 20¢ sq. ft
(Finished = a habitable area)
Example: Single family or multi-unit dwelling….habitable
Warehouse Office Area….habitable
Daylight Basement……habitable
Garage with living space over (rated sheetrock)……habitable
All Third Party Inspected Structures.………………. No Building Permit fee shall exceed $400.00
Building Permit Fees for CEO Inspected Structures
Residential/Commercial, Unfinished (CEO Inspected)………………… ..…………….20¢ sq. ft.
Example: Garage, private or commercial…non-habitable
Foundation….non-habitable
Breezeway between house & garage….non-habitable
Warehouse….non-habitable
4
Residential/Commercial, Finished (CEO Inspected)…………………………………..30¢ sq. ft.
(Finished = a habitable area)
Example: Single family or multi-unit dwelling….habitable
Warehouse Office Area….habitable
Daylight Basement……habitable
Garage with living space over (rated sheetrock)……habitable
Telecommunication Towers………………………………………………..$2.00 per ft. by height
Fee for Driveway Entrance Permits (off Local Roads)…............................................……..$20.00
PENALTIES for starting work without a permit:
Applies to new construction and renovations of over 300 sq. ft.
First Offense….................................................................................................... Double permit fee
Each Additional Offense…..………………………………………………….…. Triple permit fee
Demolition Fee (applies to structures over 300 sq. ft.)………...............................................$20.00
Supplemental Plumbing Inspections..………………………………………………..…….. $50.00
Plus $20.00 each for repeat inspections and “no shows.”
Plumbing Permits (External & Internal)………..…………………………………Minimum fee as
established by State plus $20.00 for each repeat and “no-show” inspection.
In the event of fire, all Town of Glenburn plumbing permit fees may be waived by the Town
Treasurer, if the owner applies for a plumbing permit within 12 months from the date of loss.
The Town of Glenburn must collect all State of Maine plumbing permit fees and forward those
fees to the State of Maine in accordance with the Town of Glenburn’s generally accepted
accounting practices.
Flood Hazard Development Permits………………..…………………………..….…….. $50.00
Provides for minimum of two inspections with elevation verification, administrative time
and travel.
Board of Appeals………….……………………………………………………..…….... $100.00
Plus $15.00 per Board member who attends any site visit. (Five members are on the Board). The
appellant is responsible for cost of all required advertisements/public notices.
Items Requiring Planning Board Review/Approval………………………..……..…..… $100.00
Plus $15.00 per Board member who attends any site visit. (Seven members are on the Board).
The appellant is responsible for cost of all required advertisements/public notices.
Land Use Permits……………………………………………………………..…….….. $50.00**
**Plus $30.00, if land in question is within a Shoreland Zone and not requiring a Flood Hazard
Development Permit or Planning Board Review.
Certificate of Occupancy (if required) …………………………..……..…........................No fee
5
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION SITE PERMIT FEES:
Resident/Taxpayer Punch Card (Six loads, one card per year)………………….….... $10.00 each
*Limit one punch card (Six loads, one card per year) per resident/taxpayer per year regardless
of the number of properties that are owned by the resident/taxpayer.
Single Use Cards (each — after punch card is used up)………………………….….……. $5.00
Large Loads (Greater capacity than full sized pick-up)…………………………….. $350.00 each
Additional fee- Certification by CEO….……………………………………………………$35.00
CEMETERY FEES:
Sale of Lot per grave (Resident)………………………………………………….………. $200.00
Sale of Lot per grave (non-resident)……………………………………………….…… $500.00
Perpetual Care per grave ……………………………………………………..……..…. $200.00
LAKESIDE LANDING PARK PERMIT FEES:
All permits are valid from January 1st to December 31st of each year.
Residents & Glenburn taxpayers…………………………………………………………………..$2.00
Guests of residents and taxpayers (temporary 7-day permit)..................………………………..$2.00
Non-residents……………………………………………………………………………………….$30.00
Special Events………………………………………………………………………………………...$50.00
RECREATION PROGRAM FEES:
Field Hockey Basics 2-4th…………………………….....……………………………..……$25.00
Field Hockey 5-8th…………………………………………………………………………. $45.00
Soccer PreK-1st …………………………………………………………………………….. $25.00
Soccer 2-6th …………………………………………………………………………………$30.00
Flag Football K-1st.………………………………………………………………………….$25.00
Rec Basketball PreK-1st…………………………………………………………………..... $25.00
Rec Basketball 2-6th……………………………………………………………………….. $30.00
Travel Basketball 3-4th…………………………………………………………………....... $65.00
Travel Basketball 5-8th…………………………………………………………………….. $75.00
Cheering 3-6th.……………………………………………………………….. $25.00 Game Squad
Cheering 3-6th..…………………………………………………………$25.00 Competition Squad
Pre-K Baseball Ages 3-4 ….……………………………………………………………….. $25.00
Adult Basketball 18+…$1.00 per night or $15.00 season pass or team fee of $100.00 for team of
5-7/15-18 game nights
6
Adult Volleyball......team fee of $40.00 for team of 6-10/6 game nights
Exercises Classes 18+….Instructor Fees $5.00 per class if paid ahead; drop-in fees $8.00
per class
Hermon Mountain Ski 5-adult …………………………………………………….Mountain Fees
Hermon Mountain Ski Bus ………..……………………20.00 per 4 week session=$5.00 per trip
Ticket program(s)-Selling tickets to activities/parks (Funtown/Splashtown Combo Pass, etc.), Parks &
Rec makes $1.00 per sale. This amount is regulated by MPRA and cannot be changed by the Town.
Summer camps by our dept ……………….$40.00 per player per week – 3-4 weeks/Mon-Thurs
Types - field hockey, soccer, basketball
Grades 2-6th
All pending volunteer staff & participation
Summer Rec Day Camp for Ages 5-12...………………………Non-refundable Deposit $25.00
Weekly Fee Resident ……………………………………………………………………..$125.00
Weekly Non-Resident Fee ………………………………………………………………..$135.00
Resident Daily Fee …………………………………………………..$40.00 (minimum of 3 days)
Non-resident Daily Fee..………..……………………………………$45.00 (minimum of 3 days)
If residents pay the fees in full for the entire summer recreation/day camp by the Friday before the
summer camp program starts, then for all 8 weeks=$925.00 + $25.00 deposit will equal $950.00 instead
of the $1,025.00 resulting in a $75.00 discount if all the fees are paid prior to the start of the program.
In non-residents pay the fees in full for the entire summer recreation/day camp by the Friday before the
summer camp program starts, then for all 8 weeks=$1,005.00 + $25.00 deposit will equal $1,030.00
instead of the $1,105.00 resulting in a $75.00 discount if all the fees are paid prior to the start of the
program.
Late Fee..………………………………………$10.00 after deadlines (if there is space available)
JR volunteer referee/score-table workers “Thank you” donation schedule in gift card form:
3-5 games=$15.00 16-20 games=$75.00
6-10 games=$25.00 20+ games=$100.00 (max to be given)
11-15 game=$50.00
Plus one snack/drink from concession per game.
JR concession volunteers with parent donation schedule to be given in gift card form:
10-15 hrs=$25.00
16-20 hrs=$50.00
20+ hrs=$75.00
All volunteers working at a game or recreation department sponsored event may also have one snack &
drink per game or event.
Head coaches who take an online youth coach class in the sport they are interested in coaching and can
show certification of passing the class and proof of payment may be reimbursed once per season.
7
Coach/Assistant Coaches: To encourage more volunteerism we will offer reimbursement of one player
registration per rec team/sport season to an adult coaching if chosen after background check is run.
Example: Basketball-if you coach two teams, one rec and one travel, your child can play for free on the
rec team, and travel team registration will not be reimbursed; or if you have two children both playing on
rec teams, one can play for free.
Adult Referees-$20.00 per game (soccer/rec basketball)
Adult Score table Workers-$15.00 per game
Adult Volleyball-$1.00 per person per night
OFFICE FEES:
Copy of DVD……………………………….……………….………………………………. $5.00
Copy of Audio Cassette Tape………………………………………………………………...$5.00
Copy of Assessing Property Card..……………………………………………….. $2.00 each side
Copy of Reduced Property Map Page………..………………………………….....$2.00 each side
Copy or scan & electronic transfer (email) of public documents (per Page/Sheet)…………$ 2.00
Commitment Book…………………………………………………………………………..$95.00
CD Taxes Database………………………………………………………………………….$50.00
Facsimile Received (per Page/Sheet) ………………………………………….............$ 2.00 each
*Notary Fee………………………………………………………………… $2.00 each signature
Email received (per page/sheet)……………………………………………………………. $2.00
Color photocopies per page (single side)……………………………………………………..$0.75
**Black & White Photocopies per page (single side)……………………………………..... $0.25
Upon request, any resident may receive one free copy of any and all materials associated with a
Public Hearing or vote.
Returned Checks…………………..………………………………………..……………….$40.00
Genealogical Search ………..………………………………………………..……$20.00 per hour
*The Town will waive the cost of performing notarial acts associated with the residency
declaration forms required by the school.
**The Town will waive the fee for photocopies for a copy of a tax bill when it is being used for
the sole purpose of verifying Glenburn residency for the Glenburn School Department.
RENTAL OF MUNICIPAL BUILDING MEETING ROOM ....$40.00 (Plus $30 refundable deposit)
Except that the Town Council or Town Manager may waive the entire fee for a non profit or
public service agency that provides services to the Inhabitants of the Town of Glenburn
ANIMAL CONTROL FEES:
Impoundment Fees…………………………………………………………………………...**
8
**Payment of an impoundment fee of $25 for each dog for first impoundment; $50 for each dog
for second impoundment; and $75 for each dog for the third and subsequent impoundments.
Payment of the impoundment fee shall be paid to the shelter operator who shall then forward
the fee to the Town of Glenburn.
Cost of Board …………………………………………………………………………………**
**As determined by the Bangor Humane Society for each day of impoundment from the date of
impoundment.
Veterinarian Fees……………………………………………………………………………...**
**Payment of the full cost of any shots and fees, which the animal may have received while
impounded, to be paid to the shelter operator.
Dog License Fees…………………………………………………………………………….. **
** Per State Statute
GLENBURN PLANNING BOARD ORDINANCE
1. Establishment. Pursuant to M.R.S.A. Const. Art. VIII-A and 30 M.R.S.A. 1917, the Town of
Glenburn hereby ordains that the Glenburn Planning Board be established.
2. Appointment
A. Board members shall be appointed by the Municipal Officers and sworn by the Clerk or
other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. The Board shall consist of 5 members and 2 associate members.
C. The term of each member shall be for 3 years or until the member’s successor is appointed
and qualified except that the initial appointments made under this ordinance shall be as
follows: two regular members, 3 years; two regular members and one associate member, 2
years; one regular member and one associate member, one year. Each term shall commence
at the beginning of the Town’s fiscal year.
D. A vacancy shall exist whenever:
a. A member dies
b. A member resigns from the Board
c. A member ceases to be a voting resident of the Town
d. A member is removed from the Board by the Municipal Officers
e. A member is not appointed to the Board by the Municipal Officers at the commencement
of a new term
E. When there is a vacancy, the Municipal Officers shall within 60 days of its occurrence
appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term.
F. A Municipal Officer may not be a member or associate member.
G. The Municipal Officers may remove any member of the Planning Board for any one of the
following reasons:
a. Failure by any member of the Board to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings;
b. Failure of any member to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding twelve
(12) month period;
c. For cause.
Removal based on either a. or b. above shall not require notice and hearing and shall
only require a majority vote of the Municipal Officers. The Planning Board may
recommend to the Municipal Officers in writing against removal pursuant to a. or b.
above whenever it finds that the absences of the member subject to removal are
excusable.
Removal based on c. above shall require notice and hearing to the member affected and
shall be by unanimous vote of the Municipal Officers.
3. Organization and Rules.
A. At their first meeting of each fiscal year, the Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary
from among its members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The
term of all offices shall be one year with eligibility for re-election.
B. When a member is unable to act because of interest, physical incapacity, absence or any
other reason satisfactory to the Chairman, the Chairman shall designate an associate
member to sit in his stead.
C. An associate member may attend all meetings of the Board and participate in its
proceedings, but may vote only when he has been designated by the Chairman to sit for a
member.
D. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular matter
shall be decided by a majority vote of the members except the member who is being
challenged.
E. The Board shall hold its regular monthly meeting on the second Tuesday of each month.
The Chairman may call special meetings when necessary.
F. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consisting of three members or
associate members authorized to vote.
G. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of its business.
H. The secretary shall keep a record of its resolutions, votes, transactions, correspondence,
findings and determinations. All records shall be deemed public and may be inspected at
reasonable times.
4. Duties; Powers
A. The Board shall prepare a Comprehensive Plan as defined by 30 M.R.S.A. S 4961.
B. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided by
Glenburn ordinance and the laws of the State of Maine.
C. The Board shall, upon the call of the Town Manager, annually prepare a recommended
budget for the operation of the Planning Board for the following year. The Town Manager
shall use the budget recommendations as a guide in his preparation of the Planning &
Zoning portion of the budget to be recommended to the Town Council for eventual
consideration by the Town Meeting.
D. The Board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper function within the
limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
E. The Board shall each year prepare a report of all of its activities for Inclusion in the town’s
annual report. Included in the report shall be a listing by name of land use permits Issued,
subdivisions approved, and other activities of the Board.
5. Effective Date
The effective date of this ordinance shall be July 1, 1986.
6. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
The ordinance entitled “ESTABLISHMENT OF GLENBURN PLANNING BOARD
ORDINANCE” adopted on December 20, 1982 and the December 8, 1983 amendment thereto
are hereby repealed.
ORDINANCE HISTORY
ADOPTED: 12/20/82
AMENDED: 12/08/83
AMENDED: 07/01/86
PLANNING BOARD REGULATIONS
Pursuant to Section 3G of the Glenburn Planning Board Ordinance, the following rules for
transaction of business are hereby adopted.
A. AGENDA AND MINUTES
1. Agendas for all meetings shall be developed by the Planning Board Chairman in
conjunction with the Code Enforcement Officer. Office staff will assist with typing,
mailing, and posting. Copies of the agenda will be distributed to the Planning Board
members and will be posted in conspicuous locations about town. Such posting will be
accomplished at least seven days before the meeting.
2. Action taken by vote of the Planning Board during regular or special meetings will
normally be limited to prior stated agenda items. To accomplish this end, applications for
Planning Board review must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer at least 14 days
prior to the meeting at which the application will be considered.
3. The Secretary will prepare minutes of each regular and special Planning Board meeting.
Copies of the minutes shall be mailed to each Planning Board member, the Code
Enforcement Officer, and the Town Office no later than the Friday prior to the meeting.
Office staff will assist with the typing and mailing if the draft is submitted in sufficient
time.
B. GENERAL CONDUCT AT PLANNING BOARD MEETINGS
1. All meetings will be called to order promptly at the scheduled time.
2. All Planning Board members including alternates are expected to attend all meetings. It
shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board Assistant to notify the members and
alternate members of any regular or special meetings.
3. During Planning Board review of land use applications, the Chairman shall at all times
maintain strict control of the meeting. It shall be at the discretion of the Chairman whether
a podium is desired for the meeting. The Chairman shall follow the following procedure in
reviewing applications.
a. The Chairman will allow the applicant or his representative to present information
concerning the proposal.
b. The Chairman will then allow comments in favor of the proposal to be made by any
interested parties.
c. The Chairman will then allow comments against the proposal to be made by any
interested parties.
d. The Chairman will then allow comments of inquiry about the proposal to be made by
any interested parties.
e. The Chairman will then allow comments from Town Officials.
f. The Chairman will then allow the applicant to respond to any previous comments.
g. The Chairman will then close discussion.
h.The Planning Board will then proceed with the review of the application.
4. After the review is complete, the Board will vote on the application. The Secretary will
record the affirmative or negative vote of each member.
C. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
Following receipt of the minutes of the meeting, the CEO shall prepare the Land Use Permit. The
Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to sign in behalf of the Planning Board on the
permit.
D. RECORD KEEPING
1. The Secretary shall be responsible for the maintenance of complete Planning Board
Records. Original records will be kept in proper files in the vault in the town office.
2. The types of records to be kept will include but will not be limited to the following:
a. Official minutes of all Planning Board meetings, special workshops, on—site
inspections, and any other gathering of the Board members.
b. Case records of all permit applications reviewed by the Board under the zoning or land
use ordinances. A case record will be opened for each permit application submitted.
The case record will contain the application, a record of pertinent discussion of the
case, a record of any conditions imposed and reasons therefore, final action on the
case, and a copy of the permit issued. The case record will contain any other pertinent
information. All documents related to a particular case will be kept in one or more file
folders bearing the case number, the name of the applicant, and the tax map and lot
numbers of the parcel of land involved.
c. Case records of all subdivisions. A case record will be opened for each subdivision
application submitted. The case record will contain all documentation relating to the
particular subdivision. The case record will be given a case number, the name of the
applicant, the name of the subdivision, and the tax map and lot numbers of the parcel
being subdivided.
ADOPTED BY PLANNING BOARD VOTE ON 07/08/86
AMENDED BY PLANNING BOARD VOTE ON 03
Land Use Ordinance
of the
Town of Glenburn, Maine
Adopted November 6, 2012
Effective December 6, 2012
As Amended 6/15/16, Effective 7/15/16
Land Use Ordinance
of the
Town of Glenburn, Maine
Adopted November 6, 2012
Effective December 6, 2012
As Amended 6/15/16, Effective 7/15/16
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
-1-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. TITLE 1.1
B. AUTHORITY 1.1
C. PURPOSES 1.1
D. APPLICABILITY 1.2
E. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES 1.2
F. SEVERABILITY 1.2
G. AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 1.2
H. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW 1.4
I. EFFECTIVE DATE 1.4
J. REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 1.4
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMITY
A. BURDEN OF PROOF 2.1
B. CONVERSION TO CONFORMANCE ENCOURAGED 2.1
C. CONTINUANCE 2.1
D. NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 2.3
E. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP 2.4
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 3.1
B. STANDARDS ESTABLISHING DISTRICTS/DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS 3.1
C. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 3.2
D. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 3.3
E. DIVISION OF LOTS BY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 3.3
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES
A. ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED 4.1
B. SYMBOLS USED IN SCHEDULE OF USES 4.1
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 2 -
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
C. USES SIMILAR TO PERMITTED USES 4.2
D. USES SIMILAR TO PROHIBITED USES 4.2
E. COMPLIANCE WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS REQUIRED 4.2
F. SCHEDULE OF USES 4.3
1. RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 4.3
2. RESOURCE EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES 4.4
3. RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITIES 4.5
4. INSTITUTIONAL ACTIVITIES 4.6
5. COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES 4.7
6. INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES 4.9
7. TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITIES 4.10
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS
A. GENERAL STANDARDS
1. ACCESS REQUIREMENTS 5.1
2. ADULT BUSINESS/ENTERTAINMENT 5.2
3. AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 5.2
4. AIR POLLUTION 5.2
5. BUFFERS 5.3
6. CAMPGROUNDS 5.3
7. CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER LAWS 5.3
8. CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 5.4
9. CONVERSIONS 5.4
10. DENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS 5.5
11. DUST,FUMES,VAPORS,GASES, ODORS, GLARE AND
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS 5.5
12. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS 5.5
13. GARAGE/YARD SALES 5.7
14. HOME OCCUPATIONS 5.7
15. INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 5.8
16. JUNKYARDS/AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS/AUTOMOBILE
RECYCLING 5.8
17. LANDSCAPING 5.10
18. LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS 5.11
19. LOT SIZE, SETBACK AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS 5.11
20. MANUFACTURED HOUSING 5.11
21. MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION 5.12
22. OFF STREET PARKING 5.14
23. OFF STREET LOADING 5.14
24. OIL AND CHEMICAL STORAGE 5.15
25. PESTICIDE APPLICATION 5.15
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 3 -
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
26. REFUSE DISPOSAL 5.15
27. SEWAGE DISPOSAL 5.15
28. SIGNS 5.16
29. SITE CONDITIONS 5.18
30. SOILS 5.19
31. TEMPORARY STORAGE 5.19
32. TOPSOIL AND VEGETATION REMOVAL 5.20
33. TOWERS 5.20
34. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS “BED AND BREAKFAST” 5.24
35. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS “MOTEL/HOTEL” 5.24
36. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS “RENTAL CABINS AND
COTTAGES” 5.24
37. UTILITY INSTALLATION 5.25
38. FINANCIAL CAPACITY AND TECHNICLA ABILITY 5.26
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 5.26
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS 6.1
B. APPROVAL REQUIRED 6.1
C. APPLICATION REQUIRED 6.1
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT 6.1
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW 6.4
F. OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED BEFORE APPROVAL 6.7
G. POSITIVE FINDINGS REQUIRED 6.7
H. VIOLATIONS 6.8
I. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK 6.8
J. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED 6.8
K. ENFORCEMENT 6.8
L. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS 6.9
M. VARIANCES RECORDED 6.14
N. FEE SCHEDULE 6.14
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS
A. CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE 7.1
B. DEFINITIONS 7.1
-1.1-
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that the following ordinance be enacted
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Land Use Ordinance of the
Town of Glenburn, Maine", and will be referred to herein as the "Ordinance".
B. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII
of the Maine Constitution, Title 30-A, Section 3001 and Title 30-A, Section 4352 of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
C. PURPOSES
The purposes of the Ordinance are as follows:
1. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN IMPLEMENTATION: To implement the policies
and recommendations of the Glenburn Comprehensive Plan;
2. PROTECTION OF THE GENERAL WELFARE: To assure the comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the
Town of Glenburn;
3. PRESERVATION OF THE TOWN CHARACTER: To preserve and protect the
character of Glenburn by dividing the Town into districts according to the use of
land and buildings and the intensity of such uses;
4. PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT: To protect and enhance the natural,
cultural, and historic resources of the Town from unacceptable adverse impacts
and to integrate new development harmoniously into the Town's natural
environment;
5. PROMOTION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: To promote the
development of an economically sound and stable community;
6. REDUCTION OF TRAFFIC CONGESTION: To lessen the danger and
congestion of traffic on roads and highways, limit excessive numbers of
intersections, driveways, and other friction points, minimize hazards, and insure
the continued usefulness of all elements of the existing transportation systems for
their planned function;
7. BALANCING OF PROPERTY RIGHTS: To protect property rights and values
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont.)
C. PURPOSES (Cont.)
- 1.2 -
by balancing the rights of landowners to use their land with the corresponding
rights of abutting and neighboring landowners to enjoy their property without
undue disturbance from abutting or neighboring uses;
8. REDUCTION OF FISCAL IMPACT: To provide a means of evaluating
development proposals to determine their fiscal impacts on the municipality's
ability to provide and improve necessary public facilities and services; and
9. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES/STANDARDS: To establish procedures
whereby the Town Officials may review the developments regulated by this
Ordinance by providing fair and reasonable standards for evaluating such
developments; to provide a public hearing process through which interested
persons may raise questions and receive answers regarding how such
developments may affect them; and to provide procedures whereby aggrieved
parties may appeal decisions made under this Ordinance.
D. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to all land areas within the Town of Glenburn. This ordinance
does not apply to the shoreland zones of the Town of Glenburn. All buildings or
structures thereinafter constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved, and the
uses of buildings and land, including the division of land, shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance. No existing or future building, structure, or land area shall
be used for any purpose or in any manner except as provided in this Ordinance.
E. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rule, regulation or ordinance, that imposing the most restrictive or
higher standards shall govern.
F. SEVERABILITY
In the event that any section, subsection, or any provision of this Ordinance shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such decision
shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, subsection, or other portion
of this Ordinance; to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be
severable.
G. AMENDMENTS
1. INITIATION
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont.)
G. AMENDMENTS (Cont.)
- 1.3 -
An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by one of the following:
a. The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted.
b. Request of the Town Council to the Planning Board.
c. Written petition pursuant to Article VIII of the Town Charter.
d. Request of the Owner to the Town Council or Planning Board.
2. HEARINGS
All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for its review
and recommendation. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on any
proposed amendment in accordance with Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4352. Within
30 days of conducting a public hearing on a proposed amendment, the Planning
Board shall, by majority vote, make a written recommendation to the Town
Council.
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP
The Planning Board shall not recommend a proposed amendment to the Zoning
Map without making written findings of fact that:
a. The proposed amendment would be consistent with: the standards of the
District boundaries in effect at the time; the Comprehensive Plan; and the
purpose, intent, and provisions of this Ordinance; and
b. The proposed amendment will satisfy a demonstrated need in the community
and will have no undue adverse impact on existing uses or resources; or that a
new District designation is more appropriate for the protection and management
of existing uses and resources within the affected area. The Planning
Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment for a change in District
boundaries unless notice is first given to all owners of land abutting or located
within 1000 feet of the parcel for which a change in boundaries is sought. The
Planning Board may require, as a part of any petition for a change in District
boundaries, that the petitioner submit the names and addresses of all such
surrounding landowners as well as notify all registered voters.
3. MAJORITY VOTE
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (Cont.)
G. AMENDMENTS (Cont.)
- 1.4 -
After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Board, the Town Council
may submit the proposed amendment(s) to the Annual Town Meeting or a Special
Town Meeting, either for consideration at the open Meeting or by secret ballot
pursuant to 30-A MRSA, Section 2528. The amendment(s) may be adopted by a
majority vote of those voters voting on the matter.
H. ANNUAL ADMINSTRATIVE REVIEW
The Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board, and Board of Appeals each shall report
annually to the Town Manager and the Town Council on their respective experience with
the administration of this Ordinance during the previous year. Their reports to the
Manager and Town Council shall include any recommended amendments they may have
that would:
1. Enhance their ability to more effectively meet their respective administrative
responsibilities under this Ordinance;
2. Enhance the implementation of the purposes of this Ordinance contained in
subsection C, paragraphs 1 through 9, above.
I. EFFECTIVE DATE
Pursuant to Section 3.10(c) of the Town Charter, the effective date of this Ordinance shall
be 30 days after its adoption at the Annual Town Meeting or Special Town Meeting. A
copy of this Ordinance, certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed with the Town Clerk
and the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds.
J. REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE
The “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine” adopted October 19, 1987, as
amended, shall be repealed upon the effective date of this Ordinance. Provided, however,
that the Official Zoning Map (Revised 04-1-06) shall not be repealed with respect to the
Shoreland Zoning Districts depicted thereon, and shall continue to constitute the Official
Shoreland Zoning Map under the “Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Municipality of
Glenburn, Maine.” The adoption of this Ordinance, however, shall not affect nor prevent
any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, any violation of this Ordinance
repealed by this Section. It is further the intention and direction of this Section that if this
Ordinance is held to be invalid or void in its entirety by a court of competent jurisdiction,
then the Ordinance repealed by this Section shall be automatically revived.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 2.1 -
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
A. BURDEN OF PROOF
The burden of establishing that any non-conforming structure, use, or lot is a lawfully
existing non-conforming structure, use or lot as defined in this Ordinance, shall, in all
instances, be upon the owner of such non-conforming structure, use, or lot and not upon
the Town of Glenburn.
B. CONVERSION TO CONFORMANCE ENCOURAGED
Owners of all existing non-conforming structures and uses shall be encouraged to convert
such existing non-conforming structures and uses to conformance whenever possible and
shall be required to convert to conforming status as required by this Ordinance.
C. CONTINUANCE
The lawful use of any building, structure, or parcels of land, which is made nonconforming
by reason of the enactment of this Ordinance, or which shall be made nonconforming
by reason of a subsequent amendment, may be continued, subject to the
following provisions:
1. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND
Continuance of lawful non-conforming uses of land shall be subject to the
following provisions:
a. An existing non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land, than that occupied at the effective
date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto that made the use nonconforming,
by more than 50%. The owner of said non-conforming use may
acquire additional land to accommodate the allowable expansion;
b. If any non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more
than twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent use of land shall
conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which
such land is located; and
c. A non-conforming use may be moved within the boundaries of the lot
provided that the Planning Board finds that the change in location on the lot is
appropriate in regards to:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening;
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
C. CONTINUANCE (Cont)
- 2.2 -
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting; and
(6) Potential nuisance.
2. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Continuance of lawful non-conforming structures shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. No such structure shall be enlarged or altered in any way that increases its
non-conformity;
b. Should any structure, exclusive of the foundation, be destroyed, or damaged
by any means, exclusive of the planned demolition, said structure may be
rebuilt on the existing foundation to the dimensions of the structure which was
destroyed provided rebuilding is begun within one year; and
c. A non-conforming structure may be moved within a lot in a manner which
would decrease its non-conformity in terms of setback requirements, provided
that the Planning Board finds that the change in location is appropriate in
regards to:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening;
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting; and
(6) Potential nuisance.
3. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES
Continuance of non-conforming structures shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. No existing structure devoted to a non-conforming use as of the effective date
of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto that made the use nonconforming,
shall be enlarged or extended by more than 50%. Provided,
however, that any such enlargement or extension of the structure shall comply
with all applicable dimensional requirements of Section V.B.;
b. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building
which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of the
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
C. CONTINUANCE (Cont)
- 2.3 -
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such uses shall be extended
to occupy any land outside such building;
c. Any non-conforming use of a structure or premises may be changed to another
non-conforming use provided that the Planning Board shall find that the
proposed use is more consistent with the District's purpose than the existing
non-conforming use, at no time shall a use be permitted which is less
conforming nor revert back to the previous non- conforming use;
d. If a non-conforming use of a structure or premises is superseded by a
permitted use, the non-conforming use shall not thereafter be resumed;
e. If any such non-conforming use of a structure ceases for any reason for a
period of more than twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent use of
such structure shall comply with standards specified by this Ordinance for the
district in which such structure is located; and
f. A structure housing an existing non-conforming use may be moved, within the
lot, in a manner which would be a more appropriate location, provided that the
Planning Board finds that the change in location is appropriate in regards to:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening;
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting; and
(6) Potential nuisances.
4. CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ORDINANCE
This Ordinance shall not require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use for any building, structure, or part thereof for which a completed
application for a local permit has been made, provided application has been
subject to substantive review, or a permit that has been issued and upon which
construction has been lawfully commenced prior to the adoption or amendment of
the Ordinance. Such construction shall start within one year after the issuance of
the permit.
D. NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
1. A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance, does not meet the area or dimensional requirement, or both, of this
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
D. NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD (Cont.)
- 2.4 -
ordinance, may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such
lot is not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all other
provisions of this ordinance and state law shall be met. No division of the lot shall
be made which reduces any dimension or area below the requirements of this
ordinance. Variance of setback or other requirements involving area or
dimensions shall be obtained only by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. If two (2) or more contiguous lots of record are in the same ownership on or after the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the area or dimensional requirements, or both, of this ordinance, the
lands involved shall be considered to be a single lot for the purposes of this
ordinance, and may be built upon provided that all other provisions of this ordinance
shall be met. Variance of setback or other require-ments involving area or dimensions
shall be obtained only by action of the Board of Appeals. No division of the lot shall
be made which reduces any dimension or area below the requirements of this
ordinance. This provision shall not apply to municipally approved subdivision lots
created after September 22, 1971 under previous land use standards and which are
recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
3. On or after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, no lot
shall be created and conveyed which does not meet or exceed the area and
dimensional requirements of this ordinance, except for conveyance to an abutting
owner, in which case the provisions of Subsection (2) above shall apply.
4. Contiguous non-conforming lots of record, which at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance are the site of permitted principal structures, shall
be considered single lots of record, even if they subsequently come under the
same ownership. Contiguous, non-conforming lots of record, which, at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, are vacant or are the
site of permitted accessory structures, shall conform to the provisions of this
ordinance.
E. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
Ownership of land and structures which remain lawful but become non-conforming by
the adoption or amendment of the Ordinance may be transferred and the new owner may
continue the non-conforming use or structure subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 3.1 -
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Glenburn is hereby divided into the
following districts.
Growth Areas:
Village District
Residential/Commercial District
Industrial District
Rural Areas:
Rural District
B. STANDARDS ESTABLISHING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
1. VILLAGE DISTRICT (VD)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Village District is to reinforce the “village concept” by
providing an area of the community where higher density development can
occur. This development is to include: commercial, institutional, recreational,
single and multi-family residential structures, and mobile home parks.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Village District is shown on the “Official Zoning Map of
the Town of Glenburn”.
2. RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (RCD)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Residential/Commercial District is to provide developable
land which is accessible to transportation corridors. This area is intended to
accommodate: retail, warehousing, wholesale, service related businesses and
residential uses in order to provide an area within the community for both
residential and business development.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS (Cont.)
B. STANDARDS ESTABLISHING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS
(Cont.)
- 3.2 -
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Residential/Commercial District is shown on the “Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Glenburn”.
3. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (ID)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Industrial District is to provide an area in the community
for various scale industrial development, appropriately situated to
accommodate that development.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Industrial District is shown on the “Official Zoning Map of
the Town of Glenburn”.
4. RURAL DISTRICT (RD)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Rural District is to maintain the rural character of
Glenburn with the allowance and encouragement of natural resource based
industries such as agriculture, commercial forestry, tree farms, timber
harvesting, crop raisings, mineral extraction, recreational uses and low density
residential development.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Rural District is shown on the “Official Zoning Map of the
Town of Glenburn”.
C. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Districts established by this Ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on the “Official
Zoning Map” of the Town of Glenburn dated March 22, 2011, which map is hereby made
a part of this Ordinance.
The official copy of the map, as may be amended from time to time, shall be that map
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS (Cont.)
C. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP (Cont.)
- 3.3 -
which bears the certification that it is true and correct, signed by the Chairman of the
Planning Board and attested by the Town Clerk, and on file in the office of the Town
Clerk.
D. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to boundary lines of Districts as shown on the “Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Glenburn", the following rules of interpretation shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, public utilities or right of ways shall be construed as following such
center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as being approximately following shorelines of any lake or
pond shall be construed as following the normal high water mark;
3. Boundaries indicated as being the extension of centerlines of streets shall be
construed to be the extension of such centerlines;
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers
or other continuous flowing watercourses shall be construed as following the
channel center line of such watercourses;
5. Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extension of features listed above
shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official map
shall be determined by the scale of the map;
6. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the official map, or in other circumstances where uncertainty
exists with respect to the location of a boundary, the Planning Board shall
interpret the district boundaries.
E. DIVISION OF LOTS BY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
In the event that a District boundary line divides a lot or parcel of land of the same
ownership of record, at the time such line is established by adoption or subsequent
amendment of this Ordinance, the Planning Board, after written findings of fact finds that
such extensions will not create unreasonable adverse impacts on the existing uses of the
adjacent properties, may:
1. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS (Cont.)
E. DIVISION OF LOTS BY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES (Cont.)
- 3.4 -
greater than ten (10) acres, extend the regulations applicable to the less restrictive
portion into no more than twenty (20) percent of the more restrictive portion.
2. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is less
than ten (10) acres, extend the regulations applicable to the less restrictive portion
into no more than fifty (50) percent of the more restrictive portion.
3. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is
equal to that which is located in the less restrictive District, extend the regulations
applicable to the less restrictive portion to the entire more restrictive portion.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 4.1 -
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES
A. ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED
A matrix listing the uses permitted in the various Districts, under this Ordinance begins
on page 4.3.
The various land uses contained in the matrix are organized according to the following
seven (7) activity classifications:
1. Resource Management Activities
2. Resource Extraction Activities
3. Residential Activities
4. Institutional Activities
5. Commercial Activities
6. Industrial Activities
7. Transportation Activities
B. SYMBOLS USED IN SCHEDULE OF USES
The following symbols contained in the Schedule of Uses have the following meanings:
1. DISTRICT SYMBOLS
SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
VD Village District
RCD Residential/Commercial District
ID Industrial District
RD Rural District
2. PERMIT SYMBOLS
SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
Y Uses Allowed Without a Permit
N Uses Prohibited Within District
C Use Requires a Code Enforcement Permit
P Use Requires a Planning Board Permit
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.2 -
C. USES SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO PERMITTED USES MAY BE
PERMITTED
1. USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: Uses substantially similar to those
allowed without a permit, but that are not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be
permitted upon a finding by the Code Enforcement Officer that such use is
substantially similar to uses listed in the Schedule.
2. USES REQUIRING A CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT: Uses
substantially similar to those requiring a Code Enforcement Officer Permit, but
which are not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be permitted upon a finding by
the Code Enforcement Officer that such use is substantially similar to uses listed
in the Schedule.
3. USES REQUIRING A PLANNING BOARD PERMIT: Uses substantially
similar to those requiring a Planning Board Permit, but which are not listed in the
Schedule of Uses, may be permitted upon a finding by the Planning Board that
such use is substantially similar to uses listed in the Schedule.
D. USES SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO PROHIBITED USES ARE
PROHIBITED.
Uses substantially similar to any uses listed as a Prohibited Use in the Schedule of
Uses shall be prohibited.
E. COMPLIANCE WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS REQUIRED
All uses permitted must occur and be maintained in compliance with the
applicable requirements and performance standards contained in Section V.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.3 -
F. SCHEDULE OF USES
Activities
1. RESOURCE MANAGEMENT VD RCD ID RD
a) Wildlife/fishery mgmt practices;
Y Y Y Y
b) Emergency operations conducted for the
public health, safety, or general welfare, such as
resource protection, law enforcement, and
search and rescue operations;
Y
Y
Y
Y
c) Surveying and other resource
analysis;
Y
Y
Y
Y
d) Forest management activities not
including timber harvesting, pesticide and
fertilizer application;
Y
Y
Y
Y
e) Agricultural management activities,
not including pesticide and
fertilizer application;
Y
Y
Y
Y
f) Mineral exploration to discover or verify the
existence of mineral deposits, including the
removal of specimens or trace quantities,
provided such exploration is accomplished by
methods of hand sampling, including panning,
hand test boring, diggings, and other nonmechanized
methods which create minimal
disturbance and take reasonable measures to
restore the disturbed area to its original
condition;
Y
Y
Y
Y
g) Non-commercial uses for scientific,
educational, or nature observation purposes,
which are not of a size or nature which
would adversely affect the resources protected by
the district in which it is located;
Y
Y
Y
Y
h) Accessory uses and structures that
are essential for the exercise of uses
listed above.
C
C
C
C
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.4 -
Activities
2. RESOURCE EXTRACTION VD RCD ID RD
a) Commercial timber harvesting;
Y
Y
Y
Y
b) Production of commercial
agricultural products;
Y
Y
Y
Y
c) Mineral extraction for road
purposes only, affecting an area
of less than 2 acres in size;
Y
Y
Y
Y
d) Mineral extraction operations for
any purpose affecting an area 2
acres or greater in size;
P
P
P
P
e) Filling, grading, draining, dredging
or alteration of water table or water
level, not including individual wells;
P
P
P
P
f) Accessory use and structures that
are essential for the exercise of uses
listed above.
C
C
C
C
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.5 -
Activities
3. RESIDENTIAL
VD RCD ID RD
a) Single-Family Detached Dwelling;
C
C N C
b) Single-Family Mobile Home, in Park;
C N N C
c) Single-Family Mobile Home;
C C N C
d) Multi-Family Dwelling: Two Unit or Duplex;
C C N C
e) Multi-Family Dwelling: 3 or more families,
including apartments;
P N N P
f) Mobile Home Park;
P N N P
g) Nursing Home/Boarding Care;
P P N P1
h) Home Occupations;
P C N P
i) In-Law Apartment C C N C
j) Accessory uses or structures that are essential
for the exercises of uses listed above.
C C C C
P1 - RD zone up to 5 residents
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.6 -
Activities
4. INSTITUTIONAL VD RCD ID RD
a) Hospital and Medical Clinic;
P P N N
b) Government Facilities and Services;
C C C C
c) Public Schools;
P P N N
d) Private Schools;
P P N P
e) Day Care Centers;
C1 C1 N P
f) Churches;
C C N P
g) Cemeteries;
P P N P
h) Fraternal Orders and Service Clubs;
P P N P
i) Post Secondary Education Facilities;
P P N N
j) Municipal Fire Stations
C C P P
k) Fish &Game/Recreation based facilities;
P P N P
l) Accessory uses and structures that are
essential for the exercise of uses listed above.
C
C
C
C
C1 - Over 12 children requires PB approval
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.7 -
Activities
5. COMMERCIAL VD RCD ID RD
a) Adult Entertainment;
N P N N
b) Automobile Body Repair;
P P P N
c) Automobile Recycling Facility;
N P P N
d) Automobile Repair/Service;
P P P N
e) Automobile Sales;
P P N N
f) Automobile Supply Store; P P P N
g) Banks/Credit Unions;
P P N N
h) Bar/Pub;
P P N N
i) Beauty Shops;
P P N N
j) Bed and Breakfast;
P P N P
k) Campgrounds;
N P N P
l) Clothing Store;
P P N N
m) Florist Shop/Craft Shop;
P P N P
n) Fuel Oil Sales;
P P P N
o) Funeral Home;
P P N N
p) Greenhouse;
P P P P2
q) Grocery Store;
P P N P2
r) Hardware Store;
P P N N
s) Kennel, Commercial N P N N
t) Motel, Hotel and Inns, Maximum 10 rooms;
P P N N
u) Motel, Hotel and Inns, More than 10 rooms;
N P N N
v) Professional Offices;
P P P N
P2 – Under 5,000 square feet
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.8 -
Activities
5. COMMERCIAL (cont.) VD RCD ID RD
w) Professional Office Complex;
P P P N
x) Pharmacy;
P P N N
y) Radio Station;
P P P P
z) Restaurant;
P P N P
aa) Recreation Vehicles Sales and Service;
P P N N
bb) Redemption Center;
P P N P
cc) Retail Establishments ;
P P N N
dd) Sporting Cabins;
P P N P
ee) Sporting Goods;
P P N N
ff) Take Out Restaurant (No interior seating);
P P N N
gg) Towers 195 feet and less than 195 feet tall
P P P P
hh) Towers greater than 195 feet tall
N P1 P1 P1
ii) Veterinary Clinic/Hospital;
P P N P
jj) Video Rentals;
P P N N
kk) Warehouse/Storage Facility;
N P P N
ll) Accessory uses and structures that are essential
for the exercise of uses listed above.
P P P P
P1 - FAA Approval needed
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.9 -
Activities
6. INDUSTRIAL VD RCD ID RD
a) Automobile Graveyard;
N N P N
b) Bulk Oil and Fuel Tank Storage in excess of
500 gallons except for on-site heating and
cooking purposes;
P
P P P
c) Concrete Plant;
N P P N
d) Disposal of Hazardous/Leachable Materials;
N N N N
e) Disposal of Solid Waste other than
agriculture;
N N N N
f) Junkyard; N N P N
g) Light Manufacturing Assembly Plant;
N P P N
h) Lumber Yard/Sawmill;
N P P P
i) Pulp Mill;
N N N N
j) Sewage Treatment Facility;
P P P P
k) Transportation Facility and Terminal Yard;
N P P N
l) Wholesale Business Facility;
N P P N
m) Accessory uses and structures that are
essential for the exercise of uses listed above.
P
P P P
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (Cont.)
- 4.10 -
Activities
7. TRANSPORTATION AND
UTILITIES
VD RCD ID RD
a) Airport terminal building and airport uses;
N P P P
b) Land management roads and water crossings
of minor flowing waters;
Y Y Y Y
c) Land management roads and water crossings
of standing waters and of major flowing
waters;
P P P P
d) Major utility facilities, such as transmission
lines, water supply and sewage treatment
facilities, but not including service drops;
P P P P
e) Road construction projects, other than land
management roads;
P P P P
f) Road construction projects, other than land
management roads, which are part of projects
requiring Planning Board review;
P P P P
g) Accessory uses and structures that are
essential for the exercise of uses listed above.
P P P P
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 5.1 -
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS
_____________________________________________________________________________
SECTION USERS GUIDE: This section contains general performance standards with
which all development proposals submitted for approval pursuant to this Ordinance must
comply.
_____________________________________________________________________________
The purpose of the regulations contained in this section is to allow maximum utilization of land
while insuring against adverse impacts on the environment, neighboring properties, and the
public interest. This assurance is provided by separating the areas of the Town of Glenburn into
districts and permitting specific land uses within each, provided that a use meets all the
additional criteria specified in this Ordinance.
This regulatory approach has been termed "performance zoning" because it permits a use to be
developed on a particular parcel only if the use on that parcel meets "performance" standards
which have been enacted to insure against the use causing (or having the potential to cause)
adverse impacts.
The following Land Use Standards shall govern all Land Use Permits issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board.
In reviewing applications submitted pursuant to this Ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Planning Board shall consider the following performance standards and make written
findings that each applicable standard has been met prior to issuing final approval. In all
instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.
A. GENERAL STANDARDS
1. ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
Access to public roads shall be strictly controlled in both location and design.
Provision shall be made for adequate access to the development to safeguard
against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in the road and within the development,
to avoid traffic congestion on any road and to provide safe and convenient
circulation on public roads.
Guidelines: Development shall employ the following guidelines to the extent
possible in designing access points:
a. Where a residential lot will front on two or more streets, access shall be to the
street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to
traffic and pedestrians.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.2 -
b. All access points should be located so as to provide adequate sight distance for
vehicular movement. Adequate sight distance means an unobstructed view of
the road in each direction for at least one hundred (100) feet for every 10 MPH
of speed limit. (E.g., for access to a 25 MPH road, an access point shall have
a clear view of two hundred fifty (250) feet in each direction).
c. Every effort shall be made to reduce the number of access points onto the
public road. Measures to be taken may include shared driveways and frontage
roads.
d. All entry and exit points shall be kept free from visual obstructions higher
than three (3) feet above street level for a distance of twenty-five feet (25)
from the edge of the traveled way in order to provide visibility for entering
and leaving vehicles.
e. Driveways or entrances onto a state or state aid highway located outside the
urban compact area of an urban compact municipality as defined by Title 23,
Section 754, must conform to Title 23, Section 704 and any rules adopted
under that section.
2. ADULT BUSINESS / ENTERTAINMENT
a. No adult business/entertainment shall be in any location that is closer than five
hundred (500) feet, measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest point on the boundary of any property
which is owned or used by/for: any religious institutions, K-12 educational
institutions, parks and playgrounds, libraries, day-care centers or residences.
b. No materials or devises displaying or exhibiting sexual explicit activities shall be
visible from the exterior of the building in which the adult business is located.
3. AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
Agricultural practices shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent soil
erosion, sedimentation, and contamination or nutrient enrichment of surface
waters. Phosphorous allocation is addressed through implementation of the Town
of Glenburn Subdivision Regulations.
4. AIR POLLUTION
Air pollution control and abatement shall comply with applicable minimum
Federal and State requirements.
- 5.3 -
5. BUFFERS
All non-residential development located within forty (40) feet of a residential
structure must provide landscaped buffer strips in the form of evergreen,
deciduous vegetation or fencing. The buffering shall be sufficient to minimize the
impacts of expected uses such as exposed machinery, outdoor storage areas,
vehicle loading and parking, mineral extraction and waste collection and disposal
areas.
6. CAMPGROUNDS
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
a. Camping areas shall contain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of
suitable land, not including roads and driveways, for each recreational vehicle
and trailer site and a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of suitable
land, not including roads and driveways, for tent sites except it shall be a
minimum five thousand (5,000) square feet for all sites when within the
Shoreland Zone.
b. Campgrounds shall provide water and sewer systems, sanitation stations, and
convenience facilities in accordance with the regulations set for by the Maine
Department of Human Services and the Town of Glenburn.
c. The area intended for placement of an RV, trailer, tent, or shelter, and utility and
service buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the
exterior lot lines of the camping area.
d. All campgrounds shall be screened from adjacent land areas by a continuous
landscaped area containing evergreen shrubs, trees, fences, walls, or any
combination which forms an effective visual barrier of not less than six (6) feet
high.
e. No travel trailer, camper, self-contained vehicles, or similar vehicles shall be
used as a permanent place or abode, dwelling, or business for indefinite periods
of time. Continuous occupancy extending beyond six (6) months in any twelve
(12) month period shall be presumed to be permanent occupancy. Occupancy
from October 1st to April 30th for any individual or unit is allowed only if the
campground can furnish sewer and water on site during this period.
7. CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER LAWS
All proposed development shall be in conformity with the provisions of all
applicable local ordinances, rules and regulations, and State and Federal laws,
rules and regulations.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.4 -
8. CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
When any part of a development is located in a Flood Hazard Area as identified
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and locally adopted Floodplain
Management Ordinance, the plan shall indicate that all principal structures on
lots in the development shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the
basement, at least one foot above the one hundred (100)-year flood elevation.
9. CONVERSIONS
a. Conversions of existing structures into multi-family units, in Districts
permitting multi-family dwellings, may be permitted provided that:
(1) Off-street parking for two (2) vehicles per dwelling unit plus
maneuvering space will be provided;
(2) Approval of conversion plans by the fire, electrical and plumbing
inspector(s) is required prior to issuance of a land use permit;
(3) Each dwelling unit shall be at least three-hundred fifty (350) square
feet in area for one (1) bedroom units plus one-hundred and fifty
(150) square feet for each additional bedroom; and
(4) Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet and kitchen facilities and
no dwelling unit will share these facilities with any other dwelling
unit.
(5) Each unit shall be provided with adequate rubbish disposal facilities.
b. Conversions of Mobile Home Parks
(1) No lot or lots in a mobile home park may be sold or conveyed
without:
(a) The prior approval of the Planning Board; and
(2) The following conveyance is exempt from the conversion provisions
of this section:
(a) Sale or conveyance of the mobile home park in its entirety to one
entity, provided no change in use occurs.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.5 -
10. DENSITY BONUS PROVISIONS
If a project is a planned development or cluster development, the minimum lot
area per dwelling unit may be reduced by the amount shown below within all
district designations. In no case shall lots served by subsurface sewage disposal
systems be less than 20,000 square feet.
a. A density bonus of ten (10) percent, if ten (10) percent to less than twenty-five
(25) percent on the site shall be permanently preserved as open space;
b. A density bonus of twenty (20) percent, if twenty-five (25) percent to less than
forty (40) percent of the site shall be permanently preserved as open space;
c. A density bonus of thirty (30) percent, if forty (40) percent or more of the site
shall be permanently restricted as open space.
11. DUST, FUMES, VAPORS, GASES, ODORS, GLARE, AND EXPLOSIVE
MATERIALS
a. Emission of odors, dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which could
damage: human health, animals, vegetation, or property, must comply with
State and Federal standards.
12. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS
The following measures relating to conservation, erosion, and sediment control
shall be included where applicable as part of all projects submitted for review and
approval under this Ordinance.
a. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan,
prepared and submitted by the applicant, shall be implemented during the site
preparation, construction, and clean-up stages; and
b. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be
minimized by employing the following best management practices:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, soil removal and re-grading or other
development shall be done in such a way as to minimize erosion;
(2) Development shall preserve outstanding natural features, keep cutfill
operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography
so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the
volume and velocity of surface water runoff;
(3) The development shall not unreasonably increase the rate or volume
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.6 -
of surface water runoff from the proposed site;
(4) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented;
(5) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum;
(6) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect disturbed
areas during development;
(8) Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures in accordance with the provisions of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Best Management Practices for Erosion
and Sedimentation Control or the Maine Soil and Water
Conservation Commission shall be installed as soon as practicable
after construction ends;
(9) Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, silt traps or other
acceptable methods;
(10) The top of the cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer
than ten (10) feet to an adjacent property, unless otherwise specified
by the Planning Board;
(11) During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be
employed wherever practicable;
(12) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, regrading
or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to repair
any damage at his expense as quickly as possible; and
(13) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to
the point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
(14)
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.7 -
13. GARAGE/YARD SALES:
A land use permit for a garage/yard sale shall be issued for a single sale or for a
one-year period. The permit shall cover no more than three (3) separate sales
during the period. Duration of any one sale shall not exceed three (3) days. No
more than three (3) sales shall be held at the same location in any given year.
14. HOME OCCUPATIONS
a. The purpose of the Home Occupation provision is to permit the conduct of
those businesses that are compatible with the Districts in which they are
allowed. Home occupations are limited to those uses which may be conducted
within a residential dwelling without substantially changing the appearance or
condition of the residence or accessory structure;
b. Any home occupation or profession which is accessory to and compatible with
a residential use may be permitted if:
(1) It is carried out in a dwelling unit or in a structure customarily
accessory to a dwelling unit;
(2) It is conducted only by a member or members of the family residing
in the dwelling unit; and/or not more than two employees;
(3) It does not materially injure the usefulness of the dwelling unit or
accessory structure for normal residential purposes.
c. All home occupations shall conform with the following conditions:
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the dwelling
or accessory structure;
(2) It is conducted only by a member or members of the family residing
in the dwelling unit; and/or not more than two employees;
(3) Exterior signs shall be not greater than 2 square feet, no exterior
storage of materials, and no other exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal
building;
(4) Objectionable conditions such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
electrical disturbance, odors, heat, glare, or activity at unreasonable
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Mai8e
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
A. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.8 -
hours, shall not be permitted;
(5) The traffic generated by such home occupation shall not increase the
volume of traffic so as to create a traffic hazard or disturb the
residential character of the immediate neighborhood;
(6) In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal
requirements of the dwelling, adequate off-street parking shall be
provided for the vehicles of the maximum number of users the home
occupation may attract during peak operating hours;
(7) The home occupation may utilize:
(a) Not more than forty percent (40%), but not to exceed 1,000
square feet, of the dwelling unit floor area, provided that for the
purposes of this calculation, unfinished basement and attic
spaces are not included;
(b) The total amount of allowable space, as determined above, can
be located in a combination of one or more parts of the primary
dwelling (including the basement) and/or one accessory
structure as identified in the application.
(c) Unfinished attic spaces may be used for storage only, and are
not to be counted as part of the area limitation in (a).
(d) Unfinished attic spaces to be used for storage only.
(8) Home occupations which involve use or storage of hazardous or
leachable materials in excess of normal residential use are not
permitted.
(9) The home occupation shall be allowed to be open to the public at
times no earlier than 7 AM and no later than 7 PM. Additional hours
for special circumstances must be approved by the Planning Board.
15. INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following provisions shall apply to all permitted industrial uses:
a. Danger
No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard,
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.9 -
chemical hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured,
processed or assembled except in accordance with applicable State and
Federal codes and regulations.
b. Vibration
With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the construction or
demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be transmitted outside the lot where
it originates.
c. Wastes
No offensive wastes shall be discharged or dumped into any river, stream,
watercourse, storm drain, pond, lake, or swamp. Industrial wastewater may be
discharged to municipal sewers only and in such quantities and quality as to be
compatible with existing municipal facilities.
d. Noise
Offensive noise shall not be transmitted beyond lot lines so as to cause
disturbance to neighboring residential properties.
16. JUNKYARDS/GRAVEYARD/AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING
The following performance standards are required of all automobile graveyards,
junkyards and automobile recycling businesses, whether new or existing.
a. The site must be enclosed by a visual screen at least 6 feet in height and built
in accordance with the requirements of Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3754-
A(1)(A)(1)-(4), and any regulations of the Maine Department of
Transportation;
b. No vehicle shall be stored within any protected zone of any water body or
inland wetland.
c. No vehicle shall be stored within three hundred (300) feet of public or private
well (excluding owners), school, church or public playground or public park;
d. No vehicles shall be stored over a sand and gravel aquifer or aquifer recharge
area as mapped by the Maine Geological Survey or by a licensed geologist;
e. No vehicle shall be stored within a floodplain;
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.10 -
f. Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the battery shall be removed, and the engine
lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant (air conditioners
included) shall be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be
recycled or disposed of according to all applicable Federal and State laws,
rules and regulations regarding disposal of such waste material. No discharge
of fluids from any motor vehicle shall be permitted into or onto the ground.
g. No vehicle shall be closer than twenty (20) feet from a lot line.
h. All vehicles, once stripped of valuable parts shall be crushed and removed
from the lot to a metal recycler. Any vehicle remaining over one (1) year shall
be considered as junk metal to be recycled.
i. No more than four (4) tires per vehicle shall be allowed to be stored in the
yard. Scrap tires shall not be allowed to accumulate into a scrap tire pile. All
tires shall be disposed of in an appropriate facility and manner in accordance
with State and Federal regulations.
j. No open burning of salvage materials or junk shall be permitted on the
premises. Waste fluids and unusable materials shall be disposed of in a duly
licensed disposal facility.
k. The Planning Board and/or Code Enforcement Officer may attach reasonable
conditions to the permit covering the operation and use of the automobile
graveyard, junkyard or automobile recycling business to ensure compliance
with the foregoing standards, and any other applicable ordinances, laws or
regulations.
17. LANDSCAPING
Non-residential development proposed within the Industrial and Residential/
Commercial districts shall be landscaped to the extent possible so as to maintain
the aesthetic appearance of the property and preserve as much natural vegetation
as possible on the site.
18. LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS
All exterior lighting shall be designed to minimize adverse impact on neighboring
properties.
19. LOT SIZE, SETBACK AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS
See B. Dimensional Requirements in this Section.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.11 -
20. MANUFACTURED HOUSING
a. Intent: It is the intent of this Ordinance to provide a variety of housing
alternatives to all economic levels within the community, while continuing to
insure the minimum standards of health, safety and welfare of the community.
To this end, this ordinance allows the siting of all types of manufactured
housing within designated areas of the Town regardless of their construction
date or compliance with all the standards of the Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards adopted by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development in 1976, as amended. The Town does hereby require
however, that all manufactured housing sited within the Town of Glenburn
meet certain minimum safety and design criteria.
b. Minimum Safety Standards: All manufactured housing as defined in this
Ordinance, regardless of date of manufacture, and sited within the Town of
Glenburn after the effective date of this ordinance, shall meet or exceed the
following minimum standards before a "Certificate of Occupancy" shall be
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer in conformance with Section VI. J. of
this Ordinance.
c. HUD Approval Sufficient: All manufactured housing, as defined, constructed
after July 1, 1976 and bearing the seal of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development which certifies the manufactured home was built
pursuant to the provisions of the Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards, as amended, shall be deemed to have fulfilled the
requirements of this section.
d. Minimum Electrical Safety Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet
the following minimum safety requirements for electrical installation and
maintenance as provided for by the National Electrical Code as said code
pertains to the following:
(1) 100 Ampere Entrance required;
(2) Copper wiring required;
(3) Two means of grounding required;
(4) Ground faulting receptacles required;
In addition, all electrical installations or modifications to existing
manufactured housing shall be inspected and certified by an electrician
licensed by the State of Maine or the Code Enforcement Officer if duly
appointed as electrical inspector.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.12 -
e. Minimum Fire Prevention Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet
the following minimum fire safety requirements as provided for by the
National Electrical Code and the Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards, as amended:
(1) All homes shall contain at least one operable fire extinguisher which
is readily accessible at all times;
(2) All homes shall have at least one operable AC smoke detector and
carbon monoxide detector centrally located within the home and one
operable smoke detector in each of the bedrooms;
(3) The installation and maintenance of all heating systems including
vents, chimneys, and encompassing secondary and tertiary as well as
primary heating sources, shall meet the standards of NFPA 211 and
NFPA 31 as applicable. In addition, no wood stove shall be used for
heating purposes in a manufactured home in the Town of Glenburn
without first being inspected and approved by the Glenburn Fire
Department for safe installation;
(4) All automatic dryers, whether electric or gas, shall meet the venting
requirements of the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards, as amended; and
(5) All manufactured housing shall meet the requirements of the
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards, as
amended, to wit, all manufactured homes shall provide for at least
two means of egress from each bedroom, one of which must be
directly to the outside of the home and may be accomplished by way
of a window of suitable size which can be opened easily without
tools, and two doors exiting directly to the outside of the home
separated by distances as established by the standards.
f. Minimum Plumbing Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet the
minimum standards of the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards, as amended. All exterior plumbing and hook-ups to a disposal
system shall comply with the Maine State Plumbing Code, as amended.
g. Minimum Design Standards: All manufactured housing shall be sited and
maintained in such a manner as to blend harmoniously with other residential
structures in close proximity, to this end all manufactured housing located
within the Town of Glenburn after the effective date of this ordinance shall:
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.13 -
(1) Have and maintain external siding which is residential in appearance
for the manufactured home as well as any additions thereto or
accessory structures located on the same lot;
(2) Be located on a permanent foundation at a minimum of a gravel pad.
Pad must be 8" compacted and the manufactured home must be
blocked at the blocking points, unless otherwise specified by a duly
adopted building code.
(3) Permanent skirting shall be installed within thirty (30) days of siting;
(4) Provide a safe means of egress and ingress to and from the
manufactured home including stairs with handrails when applicable.
21. MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION
The following requirements for mineral exploration and extraction activities,
including the removal of topsoil, shall apply in all Districts:
a. All exploration/extraction activities, including test pits and holes, shall be
promptly capped, refilled, or secured by other equally effective measures so as
to reasonably restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and
safety;
b. No portion of any ground area disturbed by the extraction activity shall be
closer than fifty (50) feet from a public roadway;
c. Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any water body, the extraction areas
shall be protected from soil erosion by ditches, sedimentation basins, dikes,
dams, or such other control devices which are effective in preventing
sediments from being eroded or deposited into such water body;
d. A natural vegetation screen of not less than fifty (50) feet in width shall be
retained from any facility intended primarily for public use, excluding
privately owned roads;
e. If any mineral extraction operation located within seventy-five (75) feet of any
property line or public roadway or facility intended primarily for public use,
excluding privately owned roads, is to be terminated or suspended for a period
of one year or more, the site shall be rehabilitated by grading the soil to a
slope of 2 horizontal to 1 vertical, or flatter;
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.14 -
f. Extraction operations (gravel pit, etc.,) shall not be permitted within one
hundred (100) feet of any property line without a written agreement of consent
between property owners;
g. In no case shall a mineral extraction operation be conducted at times earlier
than 7:00 A.M. nor later than 9:00 P.M.; and
h. At no time shall any mineral extraction operation location be used for the
storage or dumping of any substance, including but not limited to hazardous
materials or petroleum products that could produce a harmful leachate, both
during the extraction operation and following its termination.
22. OFF-STREET PARKING
a. Off-street parking, either by means of open air spaces or by garage space, in
addition to being a permitted use, shall be considered as an accessory use
when required or provided to serve conforming uses located in any District;
b. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided;
c. The following minimum off-street parking requirements shall be provided and
maintained in case of new construction, alterations and changes of use or as
deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
(1) Dwellings - Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit;
(2) Transient Accommodations:
(a) Bed and Breakfast accommodations and motels, hotels,
boarding houses, and inns with 10 rooms or less -- Two (2)
parking spaces plus one space for each guest room; and
(b) Motels, hotels, boarding houses, and inns with more than 10
rooms -- One (1) parking space for each guest plus one (1) space
for each three (3) employees;
(3) Schools -- Five (5) parking spaces for each classroom plus one (1)
space for each four (4) employees;
(4) Hospitals (bed facilities only) – One (1) parking space for every
three (3) beds, plus one (1) for each employee based on the expected
average employee occupancy;
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.15 -
(5) Theaters, churches, and other public assembly places – One (1)
parking space for every four (4) seats or for every one hundred (100)
square feet or major fraction thereof of assemblage space if no fixed
assets;
(6) Retail Stores – One (1) parking space for every two hundred (200)
square feet of retail area, plus one for every two employees, unless
public parking is provided;
(7) Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments – One (1) parking
space for every four (4) seats, plus one (1) for every two (2)
employees, unless public parking is provided;
(8) Professional Offices and Public Buildings – One (1) parking space
for every two hundred (200) square feet of gross leasable area,
exclusive of cellar and bulk storage areas, unless public parking is
provided;
(9) Other Commercial Recreation Establishments (mini golf courses,
etc.) - The number of spaces deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board; and
(10) Industrial – One (1) parking space for each 1.5 employees, based on
the highest expected average employee occupancy, plus visitor and
customer parking to meet the needs of specific operations.
23. OFF-STREET LOADING
Adequate off-street loading areas shall be provided for appropriate land uses.
Loading areas cannot be included as parking spaces when meeting parking
requirements.
24. OIL AND CHEMICAL STORAGE
a. All storage of petroleum or liquid products shall be in conformance with the
provisions of Title 38 MRSA, Section 561 et.seq., which among other things
establishes a ten-year compliance schedule for the discontinuance and removal
of non-conforming underground oil storage facilities and requires qualified
personnel to oversee the removal of certain underground facilities; and
compliance with any duly adopted building codes and ordinances of the Town
of Glenburn.
b. When applicable, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to assure the
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.16 -
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer that all provisions of the above
statutes have been met before the issuance of any permits may take place.
25. PESTICIDE APPLICATION
Pesticide application in any of the Districts shall not require a permit provided
such application is in conformance with applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations. Any pollutant introduced into soil on the site shall not exceed a
concentration in the ground water that is greater than the guidelines established
for it in the Safe Drinking Water Standard, EPA Health Advisory. Any violation
of this standard shall be cause to order the immediate stop of the use or activity
responsible for the contamination. The landowner shall be responsible for the
cost of all remedial actions.
26. REFUSE DISPOSAL
a. The applicant shall provide for the disposal of all solid and liquid wastes on a
timely basis and in an environmentally safe manner.
b. The impact of particular industrial or chemical wastes or by-products upon the
sanitary facilities (in terms of volume, flammability or toxicity) shall be
considered and the applicant may be required to dispose of such wastes
elsewhere, in conformance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
The applicant must specify the amount and exact nature of all industrial or
chemical wastes to be generated by the proposed operation.
27. SEWAGE DISPOSAL
a. Subsurface Sewage Disposal - No permit shall be issued for a project with
subsurface sewage disposal unless:
(1) There is an area of suitable soils according to the Subsurface Waste
Water Disposal rules of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed
system;
(2) An acceptable plan to construct the absorption area is prepared in
accordance with the Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules; and
(3) In lieu of (1) and (2) above, the applicant demonstrates that any
deficiencies of the soil for purposes of sewage disposal can and will
be overcome by a suitable engineering solution;
No development shall be permitted which utilizes, for on-site subsurface
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.17 -
sewage disposal purposes, any soil listed in the Soil Suitability Guide as
having a very poor rating for the proposed use, unless the proposed sewage
disposal system is approved under the Subsurface Waste Water Disposal
Rules.
28. SIGNS
a. Conformance of Signs
No sign shall be hereafter erected, altered or maintained, within the limits of
the Town of Glenburn, Maine except in conformance with the provisions of
this section.
b. Signs Prohibited
No sign, whether new or existing, shall be permitted within the Town of
Glenburn, Maine which causes a traffic sight, health or welfare hazard, or
results in a nuisance, due to illumination, placement, display, or obstruction of
existing signs.
c. Temporary Signs
The following temporary signs are permitted provide said signs conform to all
standards of this section and all other municipal, federal and state ordinances,
statutes and/or regulations:
(1) Temporary Signs Giving Notice
Signs of a temporary nature, such as political posters, advertisements
or charitable functions, notices of meetings, other non-commercial
signs of a similar nature, are permitted for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days, provided that the persons who posted the signs shall
be responsible for their removal.
(2) Temporary Yard Sale Signs
Temporary yard sale signs are permitted provided they do not exceed
the size standards of Subsection (e) and provided they are removed
within 24 hours of the completion of the sale. Yard sales which
extend for more than three (3) consecutive days are considered
commercial use.
d. Sign Requirements
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.18 -
All signs within the limits of the Town of Glenburn shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) No sign shall project over a walkway or interfere in any way with the
normal flow of foot or vehicular traffic. All free standing signs shall
be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from property lines in all
Districts.
(2) No sign shall contain, include, or be illuminated by flashing,
blinking, intermittent, or moving lights;
(3) No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height;
(4) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights so as
to effectively prevent beams of light from being directed at
neighboring residential properties or any portion of the main traveled
way of a roadway, or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to
cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or
otherwise interfere with the operation thereof.
(5) Roof signs shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the roof
line;
(6) Signs in Industrial District. No more than two free standing signs
per use. Signs may be double faced. No larger than 100 square feet
in area and no higher than twenty-five (25) feet in height.
(7) Signs in Village District will be submitted to and reviewed by the
Planning Board for consistency determination and approval with
District aesthetics.
e. Off Premise Signs
No off premise sign shall be erected or maintained in the Town of Glenburn
except in conformity with the Title 23 MRSA, Sections 1901-1925, and The
Maine Traveler Information Services Law. Off premises official business
directional signs may be located in the Town of Glenburn in such a location
and in such a manner as allowed under Title 23 MRSA, Sections 1901-1925
and under the rules and regulations of the Maine Department of
Transportation.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.18 -
f. Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this section except as
otherwise provided for herein:
(1) Traffic control signs, signals, and/or other devices regulating or
enhancing public safety erected by a governmental body.
29. SITE CONDITIONS
a. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a safe
and sanitary manner, and any condition which could lead to personal injury or
property damage shall be immediately corrected by the developer upon order
of the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized personnel. The
developer shall make provision for disposal of oil and grease from equipment
and the site area should be regularly treated to control dust from construction
activity.
b. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap building materials
shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the request and to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer prior to issuing an occupancy
permit; and
c. No changes shall be made in the elevation or contour of the lot or site by the
removal of earth to another lot or site other than as shown on an approved site
plan. Minimal changes in elevations or contours necessitated by field
conditions may be made only after approval by the Code Enforcement Officer.
30. SOILS
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse
environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, and water
pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring
subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and similar
intensive land uses, shall require a soils report, prepared by a duly licensed
individual as appropriate for the project.
31. TEMPORARY STORAGE
Portable or mobile trailers, vans, and similar vehicles or temporary buildings may
be used for storage, only upon approval of the Code Enforcement Officer and only
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.20 -
for temporary period not to exceed six (6) months. Such approval may be granted
by the Code Enforcement Officer and may be extended for successive periods of
six (6) months each, if a finding can be made that the use:
a. Does not diminish area requirements of set forth for the District in which it is
located;
b. There is a valid temporary need which cannot be met with the principal
structure and that adequate economic hardship can be shown;
c. The initial approval, or any renewal, of the use will not in any way be
detrimental to the neighboring properties including aesthetic appearance;
d. The use is not intended as a permanent or long-term use;
e. The use is not intended to circumvent building area limitations for the District
in which it is located or prolong the use of facilities that have been outgrown;
f. Will be adequately screened from neighborhood properties and the street;
g. Will not be used as or intended for advertising for on or off premise purposes;
and
h. Is not intended for retail sales.
The above provisions do not prohibit the use of such temporary facilities as
construction or job site office or equipment storage facilities during construction
provided that no advertising other than the contractors name shall be permitted
and that such signs meet the sign requirements of this Ordinance.
32. TOPSOIL AND VEGETATION REMOVAL
a. Topsoil shall be considered part of the development and shall not be removed
from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building
excavations;
b. Except for normal thinning, landscaping, cutting or trees to provide access to
direct sunlight, existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion.
The Planning Board shall require a developer to take measures to correct and
prevent soil erosion in the proposed development.
33. TOWERS
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.20 -
No tower shall be hereinafter erected, altered or maintained, within the limits of
the Town of Glenburn, Maine except in conformance with the provisions of this
section. The Town may elect to require a surety prior to the construction of any
tower.
a. Tower Requirements: All towers within the limits of the Town of Glenburn
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Priority of Location: New wireless telecommunications facilities
must be located according to the priorities listed below. The
applicant shall demonstrate that a facility of a higher priority cannot
reasonably accommodate the applicant's proposed facility.
Priority 1: Co-location on an existing wireless telecommunications
facility or other existing structure within the Industrial District.
Priority 2: A new facility on public or private property in the
Residential/Commercial District (RCD) or permitted as a
commercial use.
Priority 3: A new facility on public or private property in the Village
District (VD).
Priority 4: A new facility on public or private property in the Rural
District (RD).
(2) Siting on Municipal Property: If an applicant proposes to locate a
new wireless telecommunications facility, or expand an existing
facility on municipal property, the applicant must show the
following:
(a) The proposed location complies with applicable municipal
policies and ordinances.
(b) The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended
purpose of the property.
(c) The applicant has adequate liability insurance and a lease
agreement with the municipality that includes reasonable
compensation for the use of the property and other provisions to
safeguard the public rights and interests in the property.
(3) Structural Standards: A new wireless telecommunications facility
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.20 -
must comply with the current Electronic Industries Association/
Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision
Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures."
(4) Lighting: A new wireless telecommunications facility must be
illuminated only as necessary to comply with FAA or other
applicable state and federal requirements. However, security lighting
may be used as long as it is shielded to be down directional to retain
light within the boundaries of the site.
(5) Color and Materials: A new wireless telecommunications facility
must be constructed with materials and colors that match or blend
with the surrounding natural or built environment, to the maximum
extent practicable. Unless otherwise required, muted colors, earth
tones, and subdued hues shall be used.
(6) Landscaping: A new wireless telecommunications facility shall be
screened with native plants from the view of abutting property
owners to the maximum extent possible and landscaped to conform
with the surrounding area.
(7) Fencing: A new telecommunications facility must be fenced to
discourage trespass on the facility. As deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board, sufficient anti-climbing measures and other security
measures preventing access to the site shall be incorporated into the
permit to reduce the potential for trespass and injury.
(8) Visual impact: The proposed wireless telecommunications facility
will have no unreasonable adverse impact upon scenic resources
within the Town, as identified either in the municipally adopted
comprehensive plan, or by a State or federal agency. The following
submissions are required as a basis for the Planning Board to
determine visual impact:
(a) A tree line elevation drawing depicting vegetation within twohundred
(200) feet of the proposed facility;
(b) Details regarding the type, number, height, and proximity of
existing structures and features, and background features within
the same line of sight as the proposed facility;
(c) Details or drawings indicating the extent to which the proposed
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.21 -
wireless telecommunications facility would be visible from the
viewpoint(s) such as passing motorists;
(d) A description of the amount and location of proposed vegetative
screening;
(e) The distance of the proposed facility from scenic areas and
scenic views the viewpoint and the facility's location within the
designated scenic resource; and
(f) A narrative regarding the presence of reasonable alternatives
that would allow the facility to function consistently with its
purpose.
(9) Setbacks: The center of the base of any proposed telecommunications
tower must be setback a minimum of one hundred percent
(100%) of the tower’s height, or the required minimum setback of
the district in which it is located, whichever is greater, from the
property line of any abutting lot. No part of the tower structure,
including anchors, guy wires, overhead lines, masts, etc., shall be
located in the required minimum setback of the district in which it is
located or in any required buffer area, both on the ground or in the
air space above the ground. A tower’s setback may be reduced by the
Planning Board to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or
proposed structure such as a church steeple, power line support
device, water tank or other similar structure.
(10) Historic and Archaeological properties: The proposed facility, to the
greatest degree practicable, will have no unreasonable adverse
impact upon a historic district, site or structure which may be listed
on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
b. Abandonment: A wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for
a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
CEO shall notify the owner of an abandoned facility in writing and order the
removal of the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice.
The owner of the facility shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
notice to demonstrate to the CEO that the facility has not been abandoned. If
the Owner fails to show that the facility is in active operation, the owner shall
have sixty (60) days to remove the facility. If the facility is not removed within
this time period, the municipality may remove the facility at the owner's
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.22 -
expense. The owner of the facility shall pay all site reclamation costs deemed
necessary and reasonable to return the site to its pre-construction condition,
including the removal of roads, and reestablishment of vegetation. If a surety
has been required by the Planning Board and given to the municipality for
removal of the facility, the owner of the facility may apply to the Planning
Board for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment are
removed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
c. Exempt Towers: The following towers are exempt from the provisions of this
section:
(1) Emergency wireless telecommunications facilities.
(2) Amateur (ham) radio stations.
(3) Parabolic Antenna. Parabolic antennas less than seven (7) feet in
diameter, that are an accessory use of the property.
(4) Maintenance or repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a
wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment,
provided that there is no change in the height or any other dimension
of the facility.
(5) Temporary wireless telecommunications facilities.
(6) Antennas as a residential accessory use.
34. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: "BED AND BREAKFAST"
"Bed and Breakfast" accommodations shall be permitted in the private, year round
residence of the host family who live on the premises provided that:
a. The maximum number of guests at any time is ten (10) persons;
b. The maximum number of guestrooms is three (3);
c. Breakfast is the only meal provided by the host family;
d. One (1) sign not to exceed four (4) square feet is permitted on the premises;
and
e. The "Bed and Breakfast" operation shall not have any adverse effect on the
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
B. GENERAL STANDARDS (Cont.)
- 5.23 -
neighbors.
35. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: “MOTELS AND HOTELS”
“Motel and Hotel” accommodations include buildings where rooms are provided
for compensation and may include accessories uses such as restaurants, lounges,
gift shops, conference rooms, and recreational facilities such as swimming pools
and game rooms.
36. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: "RENTAL CABINS AND COTTAGES"
To insure the health, safety, and welfare of guests and the occupants of
neighboring properties, the following requirements shall be met:
a. Each cabin or cottage site shall meet the minimum lot size requirements of a
single family detached dwelling in the applicable District;
b. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of off street parking plus
maneuvering space shall be provided for each cabin or cottage;
c. Each cabin or cottage shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the
exterior lot lines;
d. Each cabin or cottage shall be provided with a safe and adequate means of
sewage, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply and fire protection;
e. Adequate storm water drainage shall be provided for each cabin or cottage 38.
f. Each cabin or cottage site shall be appropriately landscaped.
37. UTILITY INSTALLATION
The installation of utilities such as electrical service, transmission lines and
associated cables shall be installed underground as determined by the Planning
Board so as to blend harmoniously with the adjacent land uses and district design.
38. FINANCIAL CAPACITY AND TECHNICAL ABILITY
For new commercial construction the applicant must provide evidence that the
developer has the financial capacity and technical ability to carry out the project as
proposed.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 5.24 -
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
All structures and uses shall conform to the following dimensional requirements:
Village District (VD)
Dimensional Village
Requirements District
_______________ _______________
Minimum Lot Size* 1 Acre
Minimum Lot Size 1 Acre (For first dwelling unit)
Per Dwelling Unit ¾ Acre (For second dwelling unit)
½ Acre (For each additional dwelling unit)
Minimum Road Frontage 100 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 20’
From Edge of Road Right of
Way or Fee Title (not edge of 10’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
travelled way)
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Maximum Building Height 35’
Maximum Lot Coverage 75% (For non-residential or mixed uses)
* Planning Board may apply a density bonus to cluster developments in
accordance with Section V.A.11.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
C. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (Cont.)
- 5.25 -
All structures and uses shall conform to the following dimensional requirements;
Residential/Commercial District (RCD)
Dimensional Residential/Commercial
Requirements District
______________________ _________________
Minimum Lot Size*
Per Dwelling Unit 1 ¾ Acres
Minimum Lot Size
Per Commercial Structure 1 acre
Minimum Lot Size
Mixed Use 2 acres
Minimum Road 100’
Frontage
Minimum Front Yard Setback 30’
From Edge of Road Right of 10’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Way or Fee Title (not edge of
travelled way)
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Maximum Building Height 35’
Maximum Lot Coverage 80% (For nonresidential uses)
* Planning Board may apply a density bonus to cluster developments in
accordance with Section V.A.11.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
C. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (Cont.)
- 5.26 -
.
All structures and uses shall conform to the following dimensional requirements.
Industrial District (ID)
Dimensional Industrial
Requirements District
____________________ ______________
Minimum Lot Size 2 Acres
Minimum Road Frontage 200’
Minimum Front Yard Setback 30’
From Edge of Road Right of 10’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Or Fee Title (not edge of travelled way)
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Maximum Building Height 35’
Maximum Lot Coverage 90%
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
C. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (Cont.)
- 5.27 -
All structures and uses shall conform to the following dimensional requirements:
Rural District (RD)
Dimensional Rural District
Requirements District
_________________ _________________
Minimum Lot Size* 1.75 acres
Minimum Lot Size 1.75 acres
Per Dwelling Unit
Minimum Road Frontage 175’ **
Minimum Front Yard Setback 20’
From Edge of Road Right of
Way or Fee Title (not edge 10’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
of travelled way)
Minimum Side Yard Setback 20’
6’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20’
10’ (Accessory structures less than 150 square feet)
Maximum Building Height 35’
Maximum Lot Coverage 35%
* Must accommodate a one hundred fifty (150) foot square somewhere within its
boundaries. * Planning Board may apply a density bonus to cluster developments in
accordance with Section V.A.11.
** With the following exceptions:
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS (Cont.)
C. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (Cont.)
- 5.28 -
a. On cul-de-sacs the road frontage may be reduced to eighty feet (80’). The resulting lot
must still be able to accommodate a one hundred fifty foot square (150).
b. On Town Ways and Public Easements, this road frontage may be reduced to fifty feet
(50’) provided that the resulting lot can accommodate two hundred feet square (200)
exclusive of any rights-of-way, somewhere within its boundaries. On Privately Owned
Roads, the deed for each lot shall either show ownership of the land underlying the
Privately Owned Road in fee simple or it shall grant to the owner of such lot a right over
such Privately Owned Road. In no case shall the Privately Owned Road or the
right-of-way have a minimum width of less than fifty feet (50’) for the entire portion of
such right or Privately Owned Road beginning at a Town Way or a Public Easement and
extending sufficiently far as to allow the lot to meet the one hundred seventy five feet
(175) frontage requirements.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 6.01 -
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION USERS GUIDE: This section contains provisions for the administration of this
Ordinance including specific provisions for certificates of compliance, conditions of
approval, and public hearings.
A. ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS
1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny those applications on which the
Officer is employed to act as provided in this Ordinance. Approval shall be granted only if
the proposed use is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. PLANNING BOARD
The Glenburn Planning Board established by the “Glenburn Planning Board Ordinance” is
hereby designated as the Planning Board for the purposes of this Ordinance.
The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny those applications on
which it is empowered to act as stated in this Ordinance. Approval shall be granted only if
the proposed use or structure is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. BOARD OF APPEALS
The Glenburn Board of Appeals established by the “Ordinance Establishing Board of
Appeals” is hereby designated as the Board of Appeals for the purposes of this Ordinance.
B. APPROVAL REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no person shall engage in any activity requiring a
permit under this Ordinance without first obtaining the approval of the Planning Board or
Code Enforcement Officer, as provided herein.
C. APPLICATION REQUIRED
Applications for approval shall be submitted in writing, on forms provided, to the Code
Enforcement Officer who shall oversee the permitting process and record keeping. The
Code Enforcement Officer may require the submission of additional information deemed
necessary to determine conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT
A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required before beginning or
undertaking any of the following activities:
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT (Cont.)
- 6.2 -
1. ACTIVITIES REQUIRING PERMIT
a. FLOOD HAZARD AREAS: All construction or earth moving activities or
other improvements within the one hundred (100)-year flood plain designated
on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
b. NEW CONSTRUCTION: New construction of buildings or structures.
c. ALTERATION: Alteration of a building, structure, or land, or parts thereof,
including, but not limited to:
(1) Interior renovations for change in use;
(2) Removal of interior walls to create new rooms;
(3) Enclosing open frame porch, for the creation of additional sleeping
space or any activity which increases the existing amount of water used
daily;
d. PLACEMENT OF SIGNS: Placement of signs except temporary signs.
e. MOVING OR DEMOLITION: All buildings or structures which are removed
from or moved onto, or moved around within a lot, or demolished.
f. CHANGE OR USE: The change of any premises from one category of land use
to any other land use.
g. SECTION IV: F. SCHEDULE OF USES. Any activity requiring a Land Use
Permit in accordance with the Land Use Ordinance Schedule of Uses.
2. PROCEDURE
a. APPLICATION: All applications for a Code Enforcement Officer Permit shall
be submitted, with the appropriate fee(s), in writing to the Code Enforcement
Officer on forms provided.
b. SUBMISSIONS: All applications for a Code Enforcement Officer Permit shall
be accompanied by a sketch plan, accurately drawn to scale and showing actual
dimensions or distances, and showing:
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT (Cont.)
- 6.3 -
(1) The actual shape and dimensions of the lot for which a permit is sought;
(2) The location and size of all buildings, structures, and other significant
features currently existing on the lot, as well as all water bodies and
wetlands within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property lines;
(3) The location and building plans of new buildings, structures or portions
thereof to be constructed. Plans to be submitted if deemed necessary by
the Code Enforcement officer;
(4) The existing and intended use of each building or structure;
(5) Where applicable, the location of soil test pits, subsurface sewage
disposal system, parking lots and driveways, signs, buffers, private
wells; and
(6) Such other information as may be reasonable required by the Code
Enforcement Officer to provide for the administration and enforcement
of this Ordinance.
c. TO WHOM ISSUED: No permit shall be issued except to the owner of record
or the owner’s authorized agent. Written proof of legal standing shall be
required.
d. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND USE ORDINANCE: All activities undertaken
pursuant to a permit issued under this Section shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
e. DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS: Within fifteen (15) days of the
date of receipt of the required application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the notice shall specify the
additional material needed to make the application complete.
f. DEADLINE FOR DECISION: The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within
thirty (30) days after a determination that the application is complete: issue the
permit, if all proposed construction and uses meet the provisions of the
Ordinance, or deny the application. All decisions of the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be in writing, and shall be mailed to the applicant.
g. COPIES: One (1) copy of the application, with the permit or other written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be returned to the applicant,
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT (Cont.)
- 6.4 -
and one (1) copy, with a copy of the permit or written decision, shall be retained
by the Code Enforcement Officer as a permanent public record.
h. POSTING: The applicant shall cause any permit issued to be conspicuously
posted on the lot on which the activity will occur at a location clearly visible
from the street.
i. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK: Construction and
alteration activities on projects for which a permit has been granted under this
Section shall commence within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the
permit and shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of that date.
Activities which are not commenced or completed within the time limits
provided above shall be subject to new application and the permit issued under
this Section shall be considered void.
The deadlines may be extended for up to twelve (12) months by the Code
Enforcement Officer, for good cause, if an application for an extension is
submitted not later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the prior permit.
j. APPEALS: Appeals from decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer may be
taken pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW
The Planning Board shall review all applicable Land Use Permit applications pursuant to
Section IV, F., Schedule of Uses.
1. APPLICATION: All applications for a Planning Board Permit shall be submitted,
with applicable fee(s), in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms
provided.
2. SUBMISSION: All applications for a Planning Board Permit shall be accompanied
by a sketch plan, accurately drawn to scale and showing actual dimensions or
distances, and showing:
a. Map drawn to scale.
b. Name of applicant
c. Boundaries of the tract of land.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW (Cont.)
- 6.5 -
d. Location of existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including use
and proposed use thereof.
e. Location of buildings on abutting properties or within three hundred (300) feet
of the property line of the proposed development.
f. Names, addresses, and map and lot numbers of abutting property owners
g. Location of existing public streets.
h. Location of proposed access drives to the lot from public streets.
i. Location and arrangement of proposed off-street parking and loading areas and
their appurtenant drives and maneuvering areas.
j. Location of existing and proposed pedestrian walkways.
k. Location of existing and proposed utilities and easements therefore, including
sanitary sewerage, water, and electricity.
l. Location of existing natural drainage ways and proposed storm drainage
facilities, including dimensions of culverts, pipes etc.
m. Location, intensity, type, size and direction of all outdoor lighting.
n. Location and proposed use for areas proposed for outdoor recreation.
o. Location and type of existing and proposed fences, hedges, and trees of twelve
(12) inch diameter and over measured from a point four and one-half (4.5) feet
above ground level or filled surface level.
p. Contour lines at appropriate intervals to show the effect on the land of existing
and proposed grades for areas proposed to be excavated or filled if deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
q. Location and size of signs and all permanent outdoor fixtures.
r. District classification.
s. Setback dimensions from property lines and center of road.
3. TO WHOM ISSUED: No permit shall be issued except to the owner of record or the
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW (Cont.)
- 6.6 -
owner’s authorized agent. Written proof of legal standing shall be required.
4. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND USE ORDINANCE: All activities under taken
pursuant to a permit issued under this Section shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
5. DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS: Within 15 days of the date of receipt of
the required application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in
writing whether the application is complete. If the application is determined to be
incomplete, the notice shall specify the additional material needed to make the
application complete. Once the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the
application is complete, the Officer shall refer the application to the Planning Board.
6. PUBLIC HEARING DEADLINE: Within thirty (30) days after the referral of an
application for a Land Use Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer, and before
taking action thereon, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application. Provided, however, that if there is insufficient time between the date of
referral and the next regular meeting of the Planning Board to accommodate the
required notices, the public hearing shall be held at the next regular, or at the
discretion of the Planning Board, special meeting of the Planning Board. Notice of
the hearing shall be published in a local newspaper at least seven (7) days in advance
of said hearing. A notice of said hearing shall be mailed to each landowner abutting
the parcel involved. Land owners shall be considered to be those against whom
property taxes are assessed. Failure of any land owner to receive a notice of public
hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the Planning
Board. Responsibility for such notification shall be assumed by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall bear all associated costs of advertisements
and notifications. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to receive input from
the general public relative to the applicable sections of the review standards. At the
beginning of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall verify that the application is
complete.
When a Planning Board review is required for home occupations under Section IV.
Schedule of Uses, Activities, 3. Residential (h) Home Occupations of this ordinance, the
Public Hearing may be waived upon the recommendation of the code enforcement
officer and the Planning Board.
7. PLANNING BOARD REVIEW AND ACTION: Within thirty (30) days after the
public hearing, in which the permit application is reviewed, the Planning Board shall
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. The Board shall
limit its review to the criteria and standards established within this Ordinance. The
Board shall inform the applicant of its decision in writing, and in cases of disapproval
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW (Cont.)
- 6.7 -
or approval with modifications, reasons for such action shall be stated. A copy of the
Board's decision shall be retained on file with the Code Enforcement Officer. A Land
Use Permit shall not be issued unless approval of the application has been granted.
8. COPIES: One (1) copy of the application, with the permit or other written decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be returned to the applicant, and one (1)
copy, with a copy of the permit or written decision, shall be retained by the Code
Enforcement Officer as a permanent public record.
9. POSTING: The applicant shall cause any permit issued to be conspicuously posted
on the lot on which the activity will occur at a location clearly visible from the
street.
10. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK: Construction and
alteration activities on projects for which a permit has been granted under this
Section shall commence within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the permit
and shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of that date.
Activities which are not commenced or completed within the time limits provided
above shall be subject to new application and the permit issued under this Section
shall be considered void.
The deadlines may be extended for up to twelve (12) months by the Code
Enforcement Officer, for good cause, if an application for an extension is submitted
not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the prior permit.
11. APPEALS: Appeals from decisions of the Planning Board may be taken pursuant
to the provisions of this Ordinance.
F. OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED BEFORE APPROVAL
Applications for approval under this Ordinance will not be considered complete for
processing until all other required local, state, and federal permits have been secured and
evidence that they have been secured has been provided unless state or federal regulations
require local approval first.
G. POSITIVE FINDINGS REQUIRED
Approval shall be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, after
receipt of a complete application, only upon a positive finding by the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board that the proposed use:
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
G. POSITIVE FINDINGS REQUIRED (Cont.)
- 6.8 -
1. Is a permitted use in the district in which it is proposed to be located;
2. Is in conformance with the applicable performance standards of Section V of this
Ordinance;
3. Will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
4. Will not result in undue land, water or air pollution;
5. Will not result in undue erosion or sedimentation;
6. Will avoid problems associated with development in flood hazard areas;
7. Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and other
wildlife habitat;
8. Will conserve significant natural, archaeological and historical resources;
9. Will not adversely impact public infrastructure; and
10. Be consistent with the long-range goals of the Comprehensive Plan, other adopted
plans of the town, and the goals and purposes of the established districts.
H. VIOLATIONS
Violations of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall be corrected within 30 days
of receipt of Notice of Violation, unless an extension of time is granted by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
I. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED
After a building, structure, or part thereof has been erected, altered, enlarged, or moved,
pursuant to approval under this Ordinance, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer for the proposed use before the same may be occupied
or used. A Certificate of Occupancy is required for all activities granted approval under the
provisions of this Ordinance except for the following:
a. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and
similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
b. Decks not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in area, that are not more than
thirty (30) inches above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling, and do not
serve an egress exit door.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
I. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED (Cont.)
- 6.8 -
c. Accessory structures not greater than 3,000 square feet in floor area, and not over two
stories in height, the use of which is customarily accessory to and incidental to that of
the dwelling(s) and which is located on the same lot.
.
J. ENFORCEMENT
1. NUISANCES
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of
this Ordinance is being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct the violation, including discontinuance of illegal use
of land, buildings, structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of
such notices shall be maintained as a permanent record.
3. LEGAL ACTIONS
When the above does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or
nuisance condition, the Town Council, upon notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer, are hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations
and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of the Ordinance in the name of the municipality.
4. CIVIL PENALTY
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be liable for civil
penalties pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4452(3). Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
5. CONTRACTOR LIABILITY
Any contractor involved in any activity regulated by the provisions of this
Ordinance may be held liable for violating this Ordinance if the necessary permits
for said activity have not been obtained or if work performed by the contractor does
not conform to all conditions of approval of the permit or the terms of this
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
J. ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
- 6.9 -
Ordinance.
K. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS
1. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis, where it is alleged
by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the
administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on
a de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the
Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application
under this Ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision or determination made, or
failure to act, in the enforcement of this Ordinance is not appealable to the Board of
Appeals.
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer,
the Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At the hearing, the Board
shall receive and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When
acting in a “de novo” capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the
matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of the evidence and the
law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, the Board of
Appeals shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of the
Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to specific
provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning
Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals shall not receive or consider any
evidence which was not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals
may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals
determines that the record of the Planning Board proceedings is inadequate, the
Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact
finding.
2. VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals may grant variances upon application, within the limitations
set forth in this Ordinance and state law.
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including
frontage, lot area, lot width, height, and setback requirements.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
K. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS (Cont.)
- 6.11 -
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any use otherwise prohibited
by this Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(1) The proposed structure or use would meet the performance standards
of this Ordinance except for the specific provision which has created
the alleged undue hardship and from which relief is sought; and
(2) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in an
undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" shall mean all of the following:
(a) The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(b) That the need for a variance is due to the circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(c) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
(d) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant
or a prior owner.
d. Notwithstanding Section 2(c) above, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance
to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling
accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the
dwelling. The Board shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection
solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. The Board may impose conditions on the variance, including
limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the
person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary
for access to or egress from the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof
systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure. For the
purposes hereof, “disability” has the same meaning as a physical or mental
disability under Title 5 MRSA, Section 4553-A.
e. Pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4353(4-B), the Board may grant a
setback variance to an owner of a single-family dwelling that is the primary
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
K. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS (Cont.)
- 6.12 -
year-round residence of the applicant, but only when strict application of the
Land Use Ordinance to the applicant and the applicant's property would cause
undue hardship. A variance under this section may not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of a setback requirement and may not be granted if the variance would
cause the area of the dwelling to exceed the maximum permissible lot coverage
(if applicable). If the applicant has obtained the written consent of the affected
abutting landowner(s), the twenty percent (20%) limitation may be exceeded,
except for minimum setbacks from a wetland or water body required within
shoreland zones by rules adopted pursuant to Title 38 MRSA, subchapter I,
article 2-B. The term "undue hardship" for this subsection means:
(1) The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(2) The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality;
(3) The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner;
(4) The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair
the use of abutting property; and
(5) That the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need, not
convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
3. APPEAL PROCEDURE
a. Administrative Appeal or Variance Application
(1) An administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any action of the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Planning Board as set forth in Section VI.K.1 above. Such an
appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the official
action appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon
a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
(2) A variance application may be taken to the Board of Appeals seeking
a variance authorized by Section VI.K.2 above.
(3) Applications for an administrative appeal or a variance shall be made
by filing with the Board of Appeals a written application, on forms
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
K. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS (Cont.)
- 6.13 -
provided, which includes:
(a) A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested
and why the appeal or variance should be granted.
(b) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing
buildings and structures and other physical features of the lot
pertinent to the relief sought.
b. Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all of the matters constituting the record of the decision
appealed from. The applicant shall be responsible for transcribing any audio or
video recording of the prior proceedings.
c. Upon receiving an application for a variance, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the
application.
d. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or
an application for a variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a
complete written application, unless this time period is extended by the parties.
e. Decision by Board of Appeals.
(1) A combination of three regular or associate members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an
administrative appeal or variance application.
(2) The person filing the administrative appeal or variance application
shall have the burden of proof.
(3) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance
applications within thirty-five (35) days after the close of the hearing,
and shall issue a written decision on all appeals. A vote granting the
requested relief must include a majority vote of the Board members
present and eligible to vote, provided that such a vote shall include at
least two votes in favor of the requested relief.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision,
including a statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by
the Board. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall
be mailed to the applicant and be given to the Planning Board, Code
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT (Cont.)
K. APPEALS-POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF APPEALS (Cont.)
- 6.13 -
Enforcement Officer, and the Town Council.
4. APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT
Except as provided by Title 30-A MRSA, Section 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party
who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may
take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure within forty-five (45) days from the date of the decision of the
Board of Appeals.
5. RECONSIDERATION
Reconsideration. In accordance with Title 30-A MRSA, Section 2691(3)(F), the
Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its
prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within
ten (10) days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the
action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five
(45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a
decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members
originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to the landowner,
applicant, petitioner for reconsideration, Planning Board, Code Enforcement
Officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who testified at
the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive
additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen
(15) days after the decision on reconsideration.
L. VARIANCES RECORDED
If the Board of Appeals grants a variance under this section, a certificate indicating the
name of the current property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last
recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a variance, including any
conditions on the variance, has been granted and the date of the granting, shall be prepared
in recordable form. Applicant is responsible for recording this certificate in the Penobscot
County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date of the final written approval of the
variance or the variance is void. A variance is not valid until recorded as provided in this
section. The date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written
approval.
M. FEE SCHEDULE
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
- 7.1 -
All applications fees for permit applications shall be paid to the Town of Glenburn in
accordance with the fee schedule as established by the Glenburn Town Council. Fees
shall be for the cost of processing the permits and shall not be refundable regardless of
the final decision to issue or deny a permit. Advertising costs, technical or legal
assistance and associated costs deemed necessary by the Town for the review of
applications shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS
A. CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
1. In this Ordinance, certain terms or words should be interpreted as follows:
a. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, corporation, or other legal entity, as well as an individual;
b. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the
plural and plural includes the singular;
c. The word "shall" is mandatory;
d. The word “may" is permitted;
e. The words "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended", "designed", or
"arranged to be used or occupied"; and
f. The word "dwelling" includes the word "residence".
In the case of any difference or meaning or implication between the text of this
Ordinance and any map or illustration, the text shall control.
2. Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary meaning.
B. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of interpreting this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by an
alley, right-of-way or easement.
Access: A means of approach or entry to or exit from property.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.2 -
Accessory Structure: See Structural Terms
Acre: A measure of land containing forty-three thousand, five hundred sixty (43,560) square
feet.
Adult Entertainment: Any business in any use category, of which a substantial or significant portion
consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying, or otherwise dealing in materials or
devices of any kind which are sexually explicit or appeal to prurient interest and which depict or
describe sexual activities.
Aggrieved Person: A person whose interests are damaged or adversely affected by a decision, an
action, or the failure to act by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer.
Agricultural Activity: Land clearing, tilling, fertilizing, including spreading and disposal of
animal manure and manure sludge, liming, planting, pesticide application, harvesting of
cultivated crops, pasturing of livestock and other similar or related activities, but not the
construction, creation or maintenance of land management roads.
Alteration: As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural
parts or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing height; or in moving from one location or position to another.
Amateur (ham) Radio Stations: Amateur (ham) radio stations as licensed by the Federal
communications Commission (FCC).
Antenna, Accessory Use: An antenna that is an accessory use to a residential dwelling unit.
Appeal: A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order or failure to act
pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance as expressly authorized by this Ordinance.
Attic: That part of a building that is immediately below, and wholly or partly within, the roof
framing.
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field or other outdoor area used as a place of storage for three
(3) or more unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles, as defined in Title 29-A MRSA, Section
101(42), or parts of the vehicles. The term also includes an area used for automobile
dismantling, salvage and recycling operations. The term does not include an area used for any of
the purposes specified in Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3752(1)(A)(1) through (8).
Automobile Recycling Facility: An automobile recycling business is a business which
purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component
parts, rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for resale. (See Title 30-A MRSA 3752)
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.3 -
Automobile Repair Service: A place where, with or without the attendant sale of engine fuels,
the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening
and repair; over-all painting and undercoating of automobiles.
Automobile Sales: A lot arranged, designed, or used for the storage and display for sale of any
motor vehicle and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles or
trailers displayed and sold on the premises.
Automobile Supply Store: An establishment engaged primarily in the retail sales of automobile
goods, parts and accessories.
Basement: The substructure of a building that is partially or wholly below ground level which
may or may not be used for living spaces.
Bed and Breakfast: Accommodations provided for compensation as a business in the private
year-round residence of the host family, consisting of a maximum of three (3) guest rooms and
ten (10) guests at any one time. Breakfast is the only meal, if any, to be provided for
compensation.
Buffers: Units of land, together with specified types and amounts of planting thereon and any
structures which may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts between
them.
Building: A roofed structure. See Structural Terms.
Building Front Line: Line parallel to the front lot line transecting that point in the building face
which is closest to the front lot line. This face includes porches whether enclosed or unenclosed
but does not include steps.
Campground: Any land area specifically designed and developed, containing two (2) or more
individual campsites which accommodate that segment of the traveling public seeking temporary
camping accommodations for tents, recreational vehicles and/or towed travel trailers for
compensation. Accessory uses include camper services and facilities such as shower and laundry
facilities, electricity, fresh water, propane and gas sales, ice, outlet for camping supplies and
equipment, recreational services etc.
Certificate of Occupancy: Official certification that a premises conforms to provisions of the
Land Use Ordinance (National Electric Code, Maine State Plumbing Code, American Disabilities
Act, Life Safety 101 and NFPA 31) and may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted
for new construction or for alteration or additions to existing structures. Unless such a certificate
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.4 -
is issued, a structure cannot be lawfully occupied.
Cluster Development: The development, according to an approved plan, of a large tract of land
where three (3) or more buildings are constructed on lots smaller than normally required in the
district where located, provided the overall density of the development of the tract does not
exceed the density or requirements of the district; and land not built upon is permanently
preserved as common "open space". The term also refers to a Planned Unit Development.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the Town Council to administer and enforce
this Ordinance.
Day Care Center: A house or place in which a person or combination of persons maintains or
otherwise carries out a regular program, for consideration, for any part of a day, providing care
and protection for three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) unrelated to the
operator, not to include nursery schools, summer camps, formal public or private schools, and
further defined by the Department of Human Services as follows:
Day Care Center: A Day Care Facility as defined in State statutes for thirteen (13) or
more children on a regular basis; and
Day Care Home: A Day Care Facility as defined in State statutes for three (3) to
twelve (12) children on a regular basis.
Developer: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion
in a development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
District: A specified portion of the Town, delineated on the Official Zoning Map, within which
certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions
of this Ordinance.
Drainage: The removal of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading or other means.
Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
development, and includes the means necessary for water-supply preservation or alleviation of
flooding.
Easement: Legally binding authorization by a property owner of the use by another and for a
specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
Emergency Operations: Emergency operations shall include operations conducted for the
public health, safety or general welfare, such as protection or resources from immediate
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.5 -
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings and livestock from
the threat of destruction or injury.
Emergency Wireless Telecommunications Facility: Temporary wireless communication
facilities for emergency communications by public officials.
Enlargement or To Enlarge: An "enlargement" is an addition to an existing building, an
increase in the size of any other structure, or an increase in that portion of a tract of land occupied
by an existing use. To "enlarge" is to make an enlargement.
Essential Services: The construction, alteration, maintenance of gas, electrical, communication
facilities, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection supply or disposal
systems. Such systems include towers ( with exception of cellular towers), poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar accessories. These systems are exempt from definition of a structure.
Extension or To Extend: An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an existing
use within an existing building. To "extend" is to make an extension.
Family: Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or not
more than five (5) persons not so related occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit; such a group to be distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, club, or fraternity, or hotel.
Fire Station: A building constructed for the purpose of housing municipal fire equipment and
related items for fire protection and prevention.
Garage, Residential: An accessory building for parking or temporary storage of automobiles of
residential occupants of the premises, or a part of the residence usually occupying the ground
floor area of principal one-or-two family dwellings. Not more than one (1) space may regularly
be used by the private passenger automobile or a person not resident on the premises.
Garage Sales/Yard Sales: Garage sales shall mean and include all sales entitled “garage sale”,
“lawn sale”, “porch sale”, “attic sale”, “rummage sale”, or “flea market” sale or any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means or is made evident by
articles being set out in a yard, porch, or garaged whereby the public at large is/can be made
aware of such sale.
Grocery Store: A small neighborhood establishment retailing food and related commodities, as
distinguished from a supermarket, defined as a "Major Retail Outlet".
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.6 -
Guest Room: A room in a hotel, motel, tourist home or "bed and breakfast" residence offered to
the public for compensation in which no provision is made for cooking.
Home Occupation: A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support
and located entirely within a residential building or a structural accessory thereto, which use is
accessory, incidental and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes, and does not
change the residential character or appearance of such building.
Hospital: An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related
facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and
staff offices.
Hotel: An establishment that provides lodging and usually meals, entertainment and various
personal services for the public.
Industry: Use of a premises for assembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, or
processing. These include but are not limited to assembly plants, laboratories, power plants,
pumping stations and repair shops.
In-Law: A parent or grandparent, child or grandchild or individuals related by blood marriage or
adoption.
In-Law Apartments: See “Structural Terms”
Inn: An establishment for lodging and entertaining of travelers.
Junkyard: A yard, field or other outside area used to store, dismantle or otherwise handle: (a)
discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or industrial equipment,
household appliances or furniture; (b) discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and (c) old or scrap
copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste and scrap iron, steel and
other scrap ferrous and non-ferrous material.
Kennel, Commercial: Any place in or at which any number of dogs or cats are kept for the
purpose of sale or in connection with boarding, care, training or breeding, for which a fee is
charged.
Land Use Permit: A permit for proposed land use activity as defined in this Ordinance and
issued by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
Light Manufacturing: The fabrication or processing of materials into a finished product.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.6 -
Fabrication relates to the stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping of the processed materials into
objects/products. Light manufacturing does not include the refining or other initial processing of
basic raw materials such as metal ore, lumber or rubber.
Loading Space: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of
access.
Lot: A parcel of land undivided by any street or public road and occupied by, or designated to be
developed for, one (1) building or principal use and the accessory buildings or uses incidental to
such building, use or development, including such open spaces and yards as are designed, and
arranged or required by this Ordinance for such building, use or development.
Lot Area: The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot.
Lot Coverage: That portion of a lot that is covered by buildings, structures or other improvements
on the ground surface which are more impervious than the natural surface, such as paving
driveways, etc.
Lot Corner: A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within
the lot boundaries.
Lot Frontage: Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more than one street lot
line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width required by the Ordinance shall be
provided, on at least one street.
Lot Line: A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another, or from a street or any other
public or private space, as defined below:
Front Lot Line: In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the street line
separating such lot from such street; in the case of a double
frontage lot, each street line separating such lot from a street shall
be considered to be the front lot line, except where the rear yard
requirement is greater than the front yard requirement in which
case one of two opposing yards shall be a rear yard. In the case of
a lot with no road frontage, the front lot line shall be considered to
be the lot line in front of the building.
Rear Lot Line: That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.7 -
line of the lot; in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped
lot, a line twenty (20) feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel
to and at the maximum possible distance from, the front lot line
shall be considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of lots that
have frontage on more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall
be opposite the lot line along which the lot takes access to a street.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Lot of Record: Any validly created lot described in a deed or shown on a plan recorded in the
Penobscot County Registry of Deeds which, at the time of the recording of the deed or plan,
complied with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
Lot Standards: The combination of controls that establishes the maximum size of a building
and its location on the lot. Components of lot standards, also known as "space and bulk"
regulations in size and height of building; location or exterior walls at all levels with respect to
lot lines, streets and other buildings; building coverage; gross floor area of buildings in relation
to lot area; open space (yard) requirements; and amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
Manufactured Housing: A structural unit or units designed for occupancy, and constructed in a
manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis, or an independent
chassis, to a building site.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, three (3) types of manufactured housing will be referred to:
1. NEWER MOBILE HOME: Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, that the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning structures
transportable in one or more sections, that in the traveling mode are fourteen (14)
body feet or more in width and are seven hundred fifty (750) or more square feet, and
that are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or
without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities including the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit. This
term also includes any structure that meets all of the preceding requirements, except
the size requirement, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
United States Code, Title 42, Sections 5401, et seq.
2. OLDER MOBILE HOMES: Those units constructed before June 15, 1976, and not in
compliance with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.9 -
1974, which are constructed on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, but does not include those smaller
units commonly called "travel trailers"; and
3. MODULAR HOMES: Those units which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in
compliance with the Title 10 MRSA, chapter 951 and rules adopted under that
chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, that are not
constructed on a permanent chassis and area designed to be used as dwellings on
foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
Marina: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water within the Town and
providing for hire off-shore mooring or docking facilities for boats and accessory services and
facilities such as: boat sales, rental and storage, marine supplies and equipment, marina engine
and hull repairs, construction and outfitting for pleasure craft, fuel and oil, electricity, fresh
water, ice, shower and laundry facilities and on-premise restaurant.
Medical Clinic: An office building used by members of the medical profession for the diagnosis
and outpatient treatment of human ailments.
Mineral Extraction: The removal of sand, gravel, bedrock or soil from its natural site of
geologic deposition or formation; the screening, sorting, crushing or other processing of any part
of the geologic material so removed; the storage of sand, gravel, crushed stone, or soil in stock
piles or other forms.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Town of
Glenburn for the placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes.
Motel: An establishment that provides lodging and parking and in which rooms are accessible
from an outdoor parking area.
Motor Vehicle: Every vehicle that is self-propelled and designed for carrying persons or
property or which is used for the transportation of persons.
Municipal Facilities: Buildings or land that is owned by a Public entity and operated under its
supervision for a public purpose.
Non-Conforming Use: See USE TERMS
Normal Maintenance and Repair: Any work necessary to maintain an improvement or
structure in its original or previously improved state or condition. Normal maintenance and
repair shall not include reconstruction, change in design, change in structure, change in use,
change in location, change size or capacity.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.10 -
Owner: The person or persons having the right of legal title to, beneficial interest in, or a
contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land.
Parcel: The entire area of a tract of land before being divided by a development.
Parking Lot: An open area other than a street used for the parking of more than two automobiles
and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or an accommodation for clients or
customers.
Parking Space: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one
automobile together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a street, road or alley and
permitting ingress and egress of that automobile without the necessity of moving any other
automobile.
Performance Standard: A criterion established to control the use of land and structures. The
purpose of performance standards is to provide detailed regulations and restrictions by means of
minimum criteria which must be met by users in order to protect neighbors from adverse impacts
of adjoining land uses and to protect the general health, safety and welfare of citizens of
Glenburn.
Professional Office: An office of a professional such as an architect, accountant, dentist, doctor
of medicine, lawyer, etc., but not including any manufacturing, commercial or industrial activity.
Radio Station: An establishment engaged primarily in the use of electromagnetic waves for the
wireless transmission of electric impulses into which sound is converted for the purposes of
entertainment, education, news or weather.
Restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverages to
consumers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or
both of the following characteristics:
1. Customers normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and
beverages are consumed; or
2. A cafeteria type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed within
the restaurant building.
Retail Establishment: Any business, housed in a permanent structure, engaged primarily in the
sale of goods and services to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use, but not
for resale.
Road: A thoroughfare or way consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or
other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.11 -
Private Road: A thoroughfare or way designated for private use and maintained
by a property owner or group of property owners.
Public Road: A public thoroughfare, way, or easement permanently established
and maintained by the Town of Glenburn or the State of Maine for
the passage and use of the general public by motor vehicle. The
term shall include town ways, state highways, and state aid
highways as defined in Title 23 MRSA, Sections 53 and 3021.
Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line, rear lot line, or side lot
line of a lot and the nearest part of a building or structure. For the purposes of this definition, a
structure shall not include a fence or retaining wall.
Sexually Explicit: The displaying or depiction of sex organs during actual or simulated sexual
intercourse or sexual acts as defined in Title 17-A MRSA, Section 251.
Sign Items: Device, model, banner, pennant, insignia, flag, or other representation, which is used
as, or is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or direction.
Signs:
Free Standing: A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces permanently
affixed into the ground.
Portable: A sign not designed or intended to be permanently affixed into the
ground or to a structure.
Roof: A sign that is attached to a building and is displayed above the
eaves of such building.
Temporary: A sign of a temporary nature, erected less than ninety (90) days,
exemplified by the following: political poster, charitable signs,
construction signs, carnival signs, garage sale signs, lawn sale
signs, rummage sale signs, and all signs advertising sales of
personal property, and for rent signs.
Wall: Any sign painted on, or attached parallel to, the wall surface of a
building and projecting therefrom not more than six (6) inches.
Window: Any on-premise, non-temporary sign visible from the exterior of
the building or structure which is permanently painted, attached,
glued, or otherwise affixed to a window.
Area of a Sign: The exposed surface of the sign including all ornamentation,
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.12 -
embellishment, background, and symbols.
Sporting Cabin: A series of cottages or structures that provide lodging for the public typically
associated with a sporting or nature activity.
Street Line: The outermost edge of a Public Road or Private Road that separates a lot from the
Public Road or Private Road. (Note: the outermost edge of a Public Road means the outermost
edge of the right of way or fee simple title interest of the Town or State in the Public Road, as
opposed to the travelled portion (travel lanes, shoulders, and ditches) of the Public Road. The
outermost edge of a Private Road means the outermost edge of the right of way in which the
Private Road is located.
Structural Terms:
Building: Any structure, maintained, or intended for use as shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind. This term is inclusive of
any use thereof. Where independent units with separate entrances are
divided by walls, each unit is a building.
Building, Accessory:
A building which (1) is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the
principal building or use served, (2) is located on the same lot as the
principal building or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized
by the provisions of this Ordinance, and (3) is customarily incidental to the
principal building or use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or
intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building.
Building, Principal:
A building (structure) in which is conducted or in which is intended to be
conducted, the main or primary use of the lot on which it is located.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings.
Dwelling Unit/Apartment:
A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
living quarters for only one (1) family, including provisions for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached:
A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) family and
having no roof, wall or floor in common with any other dwelling unit. The
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.13 -
term shall include manufactured and prefabricated homes.
Dwelling, Two Family:
A detached or semi-detached building used for residential occupancy by
two (2) families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Multiple Family:
A building or portion thereof used for residential occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking in the building, including apartments, group houses and row
houses.
In-Law Apartment:
The portion of a home, with or without separate entrance, plumbing and
cooking facilities which serves the purpose of providing living space to In-
Laws of the people residing in the principal dwelling. A single structure
containing two dwelling units may be created on a lot or on an existing lot
of record if the following additional criteria are met:
a. The two dwelling units are part of the same structure and share at least
one contiguous wall;
b. There is free accessibility between the living spaces of the two units
through an interior doorway (access between the two units without the
need to exit the structure);
c. The smaller of the two dwelling units does not exceed 650 square feet
in total floor area and has only one (1) bedroom;
d. All setback requirements are met
Non-conforming Structure:
A structure which does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
location on, above or below the surface of the land, including a patio or
deck. (See Essential Services)
Structure, Accessory:
A structure (including a building that does not exceed one hundred fifty
(150) square feet) which (1) is subordinate to the principal building or use
served, (2) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use
served, and (3) is customarily incidental to the principal building or use
served.
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.14 -
Temporary Wireless Telecommunications Facility: A temporary wireless communications
facility that is in operation for a maximum period of one hundred (180) days.
Transient: A non-resident person residing within the Town of Glenburn less than thirty (30)
days.
Tower: A building or structure typically higher than its diameter and high relative to its
surroundings that may stand apart or be attached to a larger structure and that may be fully walled
in or of skeleton framework. See Section 5 Land Use Performance Standards
Use: The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Accessory Use: A use subordinate to a permitted use located on the same lot, and
customarily incidental to the permitted use.
Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
Conforming (Permitted) Use:
A use that may be lawfully established in a particular district,
provided it conforms with all the requirements, standards and
regulations of such district.
Non-Conforming Use:
A use which does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Open Space Use: A use that does not disturb the existing state of the land except to
restore this land to a natural condition.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such a variance would not be
contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in
unnecessary or undue hardship.
Warehouse and Storage Facility: A commercial structure for the storage of personal items
merchandise or commodities, including bulk storage and bulk sales outlet.
Wholesale Business Establishment: Any business, housed in a permanent structure, engaged in
the sale of goods in large amounts to retailers or jobbers, rather than directly to consumers.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities: Any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which
provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, Maine
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
B. DEFINITIONS (Cont.)
- 7.15 -
services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common
carrier wireless exchange access services, personal communications service (PCS) or pager
services.
Yard: The area of land on a lot not occupied by buildings.
Front Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building
between the front lot line and the nearest part of any building or structure
on the lot, and extending the entire width of the lot.
Rear Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building
between a rear lot line and the nearest part of any building or structure on
the lot, and extending the entire width of the lot.
Side Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building
between a side lot line and the nearest part of any building or structure on
the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Adopted 11/06/12, effective 12/06/12 (Zoning Ordinance repealed and replaced with this ordinance)
Amended 06/10/15, effective 07/10/15 Section V. (6) Add Campgrounds; Section VI(I) a., b., & c.
Amended 06/15/16, effective 07/15/16 Section V. (A)(38) Add Financial Capacity& Technical Ability; Section VI,
E.(2)(f) Add names, addresses, and map and lot numbers of abutting
property owners; Section VI(E)(6) Public Hearing Deadline; Section
VI(E)(6) Add paragraph two
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
II. PERMIT REQUIRED
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT’S FEE
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
VII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
VIII. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
IX. APPEALS AND VARIANCES
X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
XI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
XII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
XIII. DEFINITIONS
XIV. ABROGATION
60.3 (d) Rev. 4/05
1
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Glenburn, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious
damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Glenburn, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the
National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Glenburn, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood
hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood
hazards.
The Town of Glenburn has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce
future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 44014407, and
Title 38 MRSA, Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of
the Town of Glenburn having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard
areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review
procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of
Glenburn, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, and AE, are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a report entitled “Flood Insurance Study - Town of Glenburn, Maine,
Penobscot County,” dated August 16, 1993 with accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Map”
dated August 16, 1993, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the
placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in
Article I, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to
the codes and ordinances of the Town of Glenburn, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not
limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and
filled, and lot dimensions;
2
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[ Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zone AE, from data contained in the “Flood Insurance Study - Town of Glenburn,
Maine,” as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and VIII.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a
line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be
floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for
which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are
accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 8 1-65, 01/03, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing
criteria of Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
3
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result
of’ the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development
standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT’S FEE
A non-refundable application fee for all minor development and for all new construction or
substantial improvements shall be paid to the Town Treasurer in accordance with the Town’s Fee
Schedule, and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals
need the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert’s fee shall be paid in
full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay
the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop
work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until
the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be
heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance
may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent
requirements of Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the “Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Glenburn, Maine,” as described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not
provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources,
including information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.l.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article
VIII.D., in order to administer Article VI of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain
Management Program in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the
maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
4
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from
which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or
relocation of a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of
the following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize
the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the
base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer
with an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit construction, “as built”, for
verifying compliance with the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H.
Following review of the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours
of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood
Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the
construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that
are new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being
elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VIG.l.a.,b., and
c. The application for this permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a
registered professional engineer or architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is
not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance,
renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure.
Minor development also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for
in Article VU., mining dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private
sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural
projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including decisions of
the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this
Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of
Compliance and certifications of design standards required under the provisions of Articles
III, VI, and VII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI- DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
5
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. The top of all well casings shall be
terminated above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods. On site
waste disposal systems for new construction shall not be installed within the 100 year flood
zone.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated
portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no
reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.l.b.; Article
V.B; or Article VIII.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
6
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofmg
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided
with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article
III.K. and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the
structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article IIL.H.1.b.;
Article V.B; or Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodprooflng standards of
Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls,
with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which
support the manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles;
and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(l)&(2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.l.b., such that
the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot
above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article
III.H.l.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.l.c.
Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A, and AE shall either:
7
a. be on the site for fewer than 120 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for
“manufactured homes” in Article VT.H. 1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIII, located within Zones
AF, and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G. above, if
all other requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory
Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of
the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than
is the primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard
Area.
K. Floodways
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway
which is designated on the community’s “Flood Insurance Rate Map,” unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless
a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled “Hydraulic
Analyses,” Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Spec for Study Contractors, (FEMA
37/ January 1995, as amended).
8
3. In Zones AE, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the
regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and
the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured
from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of
any structure in Zones AE, and A that meets the development standards of Article VI,
including the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on
posts, columns, piers, piles, “stilts,” or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood
elevation requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not “basements” as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE, and A
shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation
requirements of this section and the floodway standards of Article VIK.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all structural components. Water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall
located within:
9
1. Zones AE, and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods
of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a
Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
0. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers,
and docks are permitted in Zones AE, and A, in and over water and seaward of the mean high
tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop
or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII- CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is
constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant
shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate completed by a
Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance
with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the
development is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this
ordinance, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VIII- REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that
require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all
projects on 5 or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into
two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
10
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain,
floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special
Flood Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance.
Such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or
document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or
structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly
articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement
and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously described.
The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
A. Administrative Appeals.
1. The Board of Appeals of the Town of Glenburn may, upon written application of an
aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
2. Any appeal from an action of the Planning Board shall be in accordance with Town’s
Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Variance Applications.
1. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance
consistent with state law and the following criteria:
a. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances shall be granted only upon:
(1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
(2) a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting
of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
(3) a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal
or local laws or ordinances; and,
(4) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in “undue hardship,”
which in this sub-section means:
(a) that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
and,
11
(b) that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to
the general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
(c) that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
(d) that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
2. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
3. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
a. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
b. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
4. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
Historic Structures upon the determination that:
a. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
b. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
5. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs B.1 through B.4 shall be
notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board
of Appeals that:
a. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
b. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
c. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is filly aware of all the risks inherent in
the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and
defend the municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the
applicant’s decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant may have against
the municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
C. Appeal Procedure for Administrative Appeals.
1. An administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer. The
appeal shall be on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any appeal hereunder
shall be a de novo appeal.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit to the Board
of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from, along
12
with such other documentation as the officer deems appropriate. A copy of the transmittal
to the Board shall also be sent to the appellant by U.S. mail.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
D. Procedure for Variance Applications.
1. Any application for a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance shall be filed with
the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by the Officer.
2. Upon being notified of the variance application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
transmit the application to the Board of Appeals, along with relevant supporting
documentation. A copy of the transmittal to the Board shall also be sent to the applicant by
U.S. mail.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the variance application within thirtyfive
days of its receipt of the application.
4. The person filing the variance application shall have the burden of proof on all variance
criteria.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all variance applications within thirty-give days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all variance applications, unless
withdrawn by the applicant.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the
Code Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes
any conditions to be attached to said permit.
E. Further Appeals.
1. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within fortyfive
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this
Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a
violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist
of:
13
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient
to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local
law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a
citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the
prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 13 16 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI- VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII- CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this
Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
ARTICLE XIII- DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same
meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular. The word “may” is permissive; “shall” is mandatory and
not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited
in Article I of this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
14
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all
applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building.
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE, or A, to have the top of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or “stilts;” and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE, or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L.
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 02/06, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a
result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural
body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study- see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see flooding).
15
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance,
grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal,
state, and local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
16
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and
is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Article VI.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured
home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 120 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than
50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in Article VI.J, mining dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve
structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves,
and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard
was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NF1P). NGVD
was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean
Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or
after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including
slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
17
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be
the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of onehalf
the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the
upland limit of the floodplain.
Repetitive Loss — A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood
related damages on two occasions during a ten year time period ending on the date of the event
for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the
average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each
such flood event.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), steam,
brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or
modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
18
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions
or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the
community’s Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community’s
floodplain management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90488, as amended), including but not limited to
the “Floodplain Management Ordinance” adopted by the Town of Glenburn on October 28, 1993
with effective date of November 28, 1993.
Ordinance History:
Resolution Adopted: 05/28/75
Ordinance Adopted: 05/26/77
Ordinance Superseded: 05/07/87
Ordinance Superseded: 04/04/91
Ordinance Superseded: 01/28/93, effective 11/28/93
Ordinance Superseded 07/19/07, effective 08/18/07
60.3 (d) Rev. 4/05
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
for the Municipality of Glenburn
i
Table of Contents
Section 1. Purposes ...................................................................................................................................... 1
Section 2. Authority .................................................................................................................................... 1
Section 3. Applicability ............................................................................................................................... 1
Section 4. Effective Date & Repeal of Formerly Adopted Ordinance ........................................................ 1
Section 5. Availability ................................................................................................................................. 1
Section 6. Severability ................................................................................................................................. 1
Section 7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ................................................................................................. 2
Section 8. Amendments ............................................................................................................................... 2
Section 9. Districts and Zoning Map ........................................................................................................... 2
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map ....................................................................................................... 2
B. Scale of Map ..................................................................................................................................... 2
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map............................................................................... 2
Section 10. Interpretation of Boundaries ..................................................................................................... 2
Section 11. Land Use Requirements ............................................................................................................ 2
Section 12. Nonconformance ....................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................................. 3
B. General ............................................................................................................................................. 3
C. Nonconforming Structures ............................................................................................................... 3
(1) Expansions .................................................................................................................................. 3
(2) Foundations ................................................................................................................................. 4
(3) Relocation .................................................................................................................................... 4
(4) Reconstruction or Replacement ................................................................................................... 4
(5) Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure ............................................................................ 5
D. Nonconforming Uses ....................................................................................................................... 5
ii
E. Nonconforming Lots ........................................................................................................................ 5
Section 13. Establishment of Districts ......................................................................................................... 6
A. General Concerns in the Establishment of districts ......................................................................... 6
B. Resource Protection District ............................................................................................................. 6
C. General Development District .......................................................................................................... 6
D. Stream Protection District ................................................................................................................ 9
E. Limited Residential District.............................................................................................................. 9
Section 14. Table of Land Uses ................................................................................................................... 9
Section 15. Land Use Standards ................................................................................................................ 12
A. Minimum Lot Standards ................................................................................................................ 12
B. Principal and Accessory Structures ................................................................................................ 12
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over and Beyond the
Normal High- Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland ................................................. 13
D. Campgrounds ................................................................................................................................. 14
E. Individual Private Campsites .......................................................................................................... 14
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses ..................................................................................................... 15
G. Parking Areas ................................................................................................................................. 15
H. Roads and Driveways ..................................................................................................................... 15
I. Signs ............................................................................................................................................... 17
J. Storm Water Runoff ....................................................................................................................... 17
K. Septic Waste Disposal .................................................................................................................... 17
L. Essential Services........................................................................................................................... 17
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction ............................................................................................... 18
N. Agriculture ..................................................................................................................................... 18
O. Timber Harvesting .......................................................................................................................... 19
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting ....................... 19
Q. Hazardous Trees, Dead Trees, and Storm Damaged Trees……………………………………….21
iii
R. Revegetation Requirements……………………………………………………………………….22
S. Erosion and Sedimentation Control………………………………………………………………..23
T. Soils……………………………………………………………………………………………….24
U. Water Quality……………………………………………………………………………………..24
V. Archaeological Sites………………………………………………………………………………24
16. Administration ..................................................................................................................................... 24
A. Administering Bodies and Agents ................................................................................................. 24
B. Permits Required ............................................................................................................................ 25
C. Permit Application ......................................................................................................................... 25
D. Procedure for Administering Permits ............................................................................................ 25
E. Expiration of Permit. ...................................................................................................................... 26
F. Installation of Public Utility Service .............................................................................................. 26
G. Appeals .......................................................................................................................................... 26
H. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................... 28
17. Definitions............................................................................................................................................ 29
1
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE MUNICIPALITY OF
GLENBURN, MAINE
Section 1. Purposes
The purpose of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control
water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings
and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect
freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and
visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to
anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in Shoreland areas.
Section 2. Authority
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 Sections 435-449 of the Maine
Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
Section 3. Applicability
This Ordinance applies to all land within the Town of Glenburn that is: within two-hundred fifty (250) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of Pushaw Lake, the Kenduskeag Stream, and Black Stream;
within two-hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetlands #2, 3, 180, 181,
183, 184, 186, 187, 188, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 249, 250, 255, and 260 as identified on the Official Shoreland
Zoning Map; and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of Lancaster
Brook. This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
Section 4. Effective Date and Repeal of Formerly Adopted Ordinance
This Ordinance was adopted by the Inhabitants of the Town Of Glenburn at a Town Meeting on June 15, 2016 with
an effective date of July 15, 2016. This Ordinance however shall not become effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the Ordinance, attested and
signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to
act on this Ordinance within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of the Ordinance, it shall be deemed approved. Upon
approval of this Ordinance, the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance previously adopted on June 12, 1991 and effective on
July 30, 1991 is hereby repealed.
Any complete application for a permit submitted to the municipality prior to July 15, 2016 shall be considered under
the then effective Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
Section 5. Availability
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible to any member of
the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the
request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted.
Section 6. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
2
Section 7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance or
of any ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 8. Amendments
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Inhabitants of the Town Of Glenburn at a Town Meeting.
Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the Inhabitants of the Town Of Glenburn at a Town
Meeting and shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any
amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically
approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
Section 9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the following districts as shown on
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map (s) which is (are) made a part of this Ordinance:
1. Resource Protection
2. General Development
3. Stream Protection
4. Limited Residential
B. Scale of Map
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less than: 1 inch = 2000 feet. District
boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for each district shall be placed on
the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and
shall be located in the municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within
thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
Section 10. Interpretation of District Boundaries
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are property lines, the
centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and the boundaries of the Shoreland area as defined herein. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority
as to location.
Section 11. Land Use Requirements
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be
3
created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a
variance is granted.
Section 12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that non-conforming conditions that
existed before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set
forth in this section.
B. General
1. Ownership Transfer of: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the new
owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot,
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance
of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations which do not involve expansion
of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a non-conforming use or structure as
federal, state, or local building and safety codes may require.
C. Non-conforming Structures
1. Expansions: A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit from the
same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the
non-conformity of the structure, and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a), and (b) below. In addition,
the applicant must demonstrate that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements
of State Law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules) or that a new system
can be installed in compliance with the laws and said Rules.
(a) Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet the water body or
wetland setback requirements may be expanded or altered as follows, as long as all other applicable
standards contained in this Ordinance are met.
i. Expansion of any portion of a structure within twenty-five feet (25’), horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is prohibited,
even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland setback requirement.
ii. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure is prohibited, even if
the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream, or wetland
setback requirement.
iii. For structures located less than seventy-five feet (75’) from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total footprint for all
structures within that 75-foot distance is 1,000 square feet, and the maximum height of any structure
is twenty feet (20’) or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
iv. For structures located less than one hundred feet (100’) from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great Pond classified as GPA, the maximum combined
total footprint for all structures is 1,500 square feet, and the maximum height of any structure is
twenty-five feet (25’) or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except that any
portion of those structures located less than seventy-five feet (75’) from the normal high-water line or
4
upland edge of a wetland must meet the footprint and height limits requirements of Section
12(C)(1)(iii).
2. Foundations: Whenever a new, expanded or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the shoreline setback requirement is met
to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board basing its decision on the criteria
specified in Section 12(C)(3) below.
3. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the
structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Planning Board, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the
present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State Law and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law
and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more
non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the
Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the
location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and
other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to
accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a
structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed
vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native tree, three (3)
feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species of tree shall
make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from
the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to
relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation
and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area.
The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that
was disturbed, destroyed, or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the structure shall be
replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
4. Reconstruction or Replacement: Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required
setback from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland and
which is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within one year of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and
provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water setback requirement to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity.
If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not be any larger than
the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as determined by the nonconforming
footprint of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total footprint of the
original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the
relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a
5
new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure,
vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(3) above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water body, tributary
stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or damaged or destroyed by
fifty percent (50%) or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair,
may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of
such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the water setback to the greatest
practical extent the Planning Board shall consider in addition to the criteria in Section 12(C)(3), paragraph
two (2) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
5. Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure
The use of a non-conforming structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board after
receiving a written application determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body or wetland or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require written
documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and
sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public
access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain management, archaeological and historic resources, and
functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Uses
1. Expansions: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming residential
uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing residential
structures or within expansions of such structures as permitted in Section 12(C)(1)(a) above.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is discontinued
for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to
a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up
to a one year extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a
residential structure provided that the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during
the preceding five (5) year period.
3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided
that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources
than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse impact
shall be made according to criteria listed in Section 12 (C) (4) above.
E. Non-conforming Lots
1. Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of records as of the effective date of this Ordinance or
amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in separate
ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this
Ordinance except lot size and frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not
involving lot size or frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint ownership of
record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming
lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law and
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
6
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of this
ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Contiguous Lots-Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or
joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, if any of these
lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments,
and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure the lots shall be combined to the
extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
Section 13. Establishment of Districts
A. General Concerns in the Establishment of Districts
1. Written descriptions of district lines as included in this ordinance must be read in conjunction with the
Official Shoreland Zoning Map of Glenburn, and ambiguities in written language must be resolved by
reference to such map.
Official Shoreland Zoning Map of Glenburn and ambiguities in written language must be resolved by
reference to such map.
To the extent the district and Shoreland zone lines shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map of Glenburn
are based on the mean high-water mark of a specified body of water or on the upland edge of a specified
designated freshwater wetland, the lines are approximations drawn from aerial photo interpretation, soils
mapping, and other wetlands inventories. In case of any doubt as to the exact boundary of any such zone or
district, the applicant for any land use permit shall have the burden of establishing the normal high-water
mark of any such water body or the upland edge of any such designated freshwater wetland. Such
determination shall be made and certified by a person properly certified by the State of Maine as being
qualified to make such boundary determinations.
2. In the event of overlap or intersection of district lines, the provisions of the more restrictive district shall
control. For purposes of this section, the order of restrictiveness from most to least restrictive shall be
Resource Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential, and General Development.
3. In the following descriptions, numbered Freshwater Wetlands refer to Freshwater Wetlands as shown on the
Town of Glenburn Fresh-Water Wetlands Map as prepared by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection 1989.
B. Resource Protection District
1. General Inclusion Criteria
The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development would adversely affect water quality,
productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district shall include the following
areas when they occur within the limits of the Shoreland zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, except
that areas which are currently developed and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited Commercial, General
Development, or commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities Districts need not be included with the Resource
Protection District.
a. Flood plains along rivers and flood plains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers, defined by the
100-year flood plain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by
soil types identified as recent flood plain soils. This district shall also include 100- year flood plains adjacent
to tidal waters as shown on FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps.
7
b. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of twenty percent (20%) or greater.
c. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils, which are not
normal spring part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected to a water body
during high water.
d. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement.
2. The Resource Protection District in the Glenburn Shoreland Zone shall consist of the following areas:
a. Bangor & Aroostook Railroad trestle and extending upstream to the Kenduskeag Stream’s most westerly
crossing of the Glenburn/Kenduskeag town line except for the land along the generally northerly side of the
section of the Kenduskeag Stream which lies between the portion of the Glenburn/Kenduskeag town line
which forms westerly boundary of land now or formerly of Richard A. Reynolds as described in a deed
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Volume 3027, page 213 and extending downstream to
the generally southeasterly boundary of land now or formerly of H. Vernon & Helen H. Andrews as described
in a deed recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Vol. 3526, page 197. There is also excepted
from the Resource Protection District the land within the Shoreland Zone now or formerly owned by David &
Diane Simpson as evidenced by a deed dated June 6, 1989 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of
Deeds in Book 4458, Pg. 094 and the land within the Shoreland Zone now or formerly owned by Harold C. &
Arlene Cunningham as evidenced by a deed dated June 25, 1969 and recorded in the Penobscot County
Registry of Deeds in Book 2163, Pg. 448. There is also excepted from the Resource Protection District a
portion of the land within the Shoreland Zone now or formerly owned by Reginald L. Danforth, Sr. as
evidenced by a deed dated October 13, 1977 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in
Book 2828, Pg. 344, with said portion of land being that encompassed by Ohio Street; a line 250’ (feet) from
the normal high water mark of Kenduskeag Stream; the contour line at 116.0 feet N.C.V.D., 1929; and the
southerly boundary of land now or formerly owned by Reginald L. Danforth Jr., as evidenced by a deed
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds on February 28, 1991 in Book 4797, Pg. 341. The above
excepted land is excluded from the Resource Protection District because the land is already developed.
b. All land on both sides of the Kenduskeag Stream starting at the Bangor & Aroostook Railroad trestle and
extending downstream to the Glenburn/Bangor town line which lies within the Shoreland Zone and which is
within the 100-year flood plain as shown of the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s most current
Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
c. On Pushaw Lake, beginning at the westerly boundary of land now or formerly of Charles R. and Darlene
Morse as evidenced by a deed dated June 7, 1988 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in
Book 4242, Pg. 148 and thence continuing in a generally clockwise direction around the said Pushaw Lake
and Freshwater Wetland #3 to the generally easterly and southerly boundaries, where it inhibits a small
portion of land now or formerly of Kathy M. Shaw, as evidenced by a deed dated December 1, 1987, and
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book 4148, Pg. 227, and extending two-hundred fifty
feet (250’) horizontal distance from the shore of Pushaw Lake or the upland edge of said Freshwater
Wetlands #3 except that the Resource Protection District shall be limited by the upland edge of said
Freshwater Wetland #3, property lines of developed lots and roads all as shown on the Official Shoreland
Zoning Map. There shall also be included in the Resource Protection District that parcel of land bounded on
the south by the French’s Point Road, on the west by land now or formerly of John F. McEachern as
evidenced by a deed dated May 3, 1988 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book
4221, Pg. 286, on the north by the same brook that forms the said John F. McEachern’s north line, and on the
east by the northwesterly extension of the westerly line of the said Vivian Prue.
d. On Pushaw Lake, beginning at the generally northwesterly boundary of lots 30 through 36 of the Plan of
Pushaw Lake Sites as recorded in the plan section of the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Volume 14,
Pg. 10 and thence proceeding in a generally northerly and then easterly direction along the shore of Pushaw
Lake and the upland edge of Freshwater Wetland #189 to a line drawn directly to the shore of Pushaw Lake
from the most southeasterly corner of a hayfield on the property now or formerly owned by Richard G.
Stanhope as evidenced by a deed dated October 12, 1973 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of
8
Deeds in Book 2420, Pg. 168, a distance of two-hundred fifty feet (250’) from the normal high water mark of
Pushaw Lake and along the upland edge of said Freshwater Wetland #189, except that on land now or
formerly owned by Jackie L. Barnard as evidenced by a deed dated August 1, 1990 and recorded in the
Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book 4694, Pg 146, the Resource Protection District shall encompass
only that portion of the said Barnard property which lies below the 100- year Base Flood Elevation of 120.7’
N. C. V. D. 1929.
e. The undeveloped portions of the Sandy Beach Peninsular as shown on the Shoreland Zoning Map.
f. The wetland between the South Shore Road and Sandy Beach containing approximately two (2) acres.
g. Freshwater Wetlands #2, #180, #183, #184, and #193 and all land within two-hundred fifty feet (250’) of the
upland edge of said Freshwater Wetlands except that; in wetland #2, the Resource Protection District only
extends to the upland edge of the wetland in areas already developed as fields or gravel pits as delineated on
the Shoreland Zoning Map; the Resource Protection District shall not include the already developed field at the
very southwest corner of wetland #193: and in wetland #193, the Resource Protection District only
encompasses the land westerly of the railroad tracks. In case of any doubt as to the exact boundary of any
wetland and listed herein, the applicant for any land use permit shall have the burden of establishing the upland
edge of the wetland in question.
C. General Development District
The General Development District includes the following types of areas:
1. Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive recreational activities, or a
mix of such activities, including but not limited to the following:
a. Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
b. Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other commercial activities;
and
c. Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but not limited to amusement
parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
2. Areas otherwise discernable as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or recreational uses.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential development. However, no area shall
be designated as a General Development District based solely on residential use.
In areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and adjacent to rivers flowing to great ponds classified GPA, the
designation of an area as a General Development District shall be based upon uses existing at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance. There shall be no newly established General Development Districts or expansions in
area of existing General Development Districts adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and adjacent to rivers
which flow to great ponds classified GPA.
The General Development District in the Glenburn Shoreland Zone shall consist of the following areas:
1. The portion of the property owned by the Town of Glenburn at Lakeside Landing that lies within the
Shoreland Zone. The property owned by the Town Of Glenburn is described in a deed from the Jewish
Community Council to the Inhabitants of the Town Of Glenburn dated May 26, 1989 and recorded in the
Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book 4448, Pg. 292.
2. The portion of Parcel 3 of the property now or formerly of Timothy and Kathy Hodgkins located at Luckey’s
Landing that lies within the Shoreland Zone. Parcel 3 of the property of Timothy and Kathy Hodgkins is
9
described in a deed from Robert A. and Janet B. Chapmen to Timothy D. and Kathy K. Hodgkins dated
October 3, 1988 and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book 4325, Pg. 197.
3. The land bounded on the north by Pushaw Lake, on the east by the Glenburn/Orono town line, on the south
by the Double A Landing Road, aka the Pond Road, and on the west by the easterly boundary of property
now or formerly owned by Roland L. & Patricia A. Averill as described in a deed dated April 25, 1988 and
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Book 4219, Pg 318.
D. Stream Protection District
The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventy-five feet (75’), horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within two-hundred and fifty feet (250’) horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond or river, or within two hundred and fifty feet (250’),
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated Shoreland
area is located within two-hundred and fifty feet (250’), horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or
wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the Shoreland district associated with that water
body or wetland.
The Stream Protection District in the Glenburn Shoreland Zone shall consist of the following areas:
1. All land within seventy-five feet (75’) of Lancaster Brook, starting at the most southerly boundary of
Freshwater Wetland #184 and extending southerly to the point where Lancaster Brook empties into the
Kenduskeag Stream except for areas which overlap the Resource Protection District surrounding
Freshwater Wetland #184 or the Kenduskeag Stream. Such overlapping areas shall be considered a part of
the Resource Protection District.
E. Limited Residential District
The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for residential and recreational development. It
includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which
are used less intensively than those in the General Development District.
The Limited Residential District in the Glenburn Shoreland Zone shall consist of all areas within the Town of
Glenburn Shoreland Zone which are not included in the Resource Protection, Stream Protection, or General
Development Districts.
Section 14. Table of Land Uses
All Land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all of the
applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district designation for a particular site shall be determined from
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes – Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use standards)
No – Prohibited
PB – Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO – Requires permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI – Requires permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP – Resource Protection
GD – General Development
SP – Stream Protection
LR – Limited Residential
10
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES DISTRICTS
RP GD SP LR
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring
structures such as hunting, fishing, and hiking Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and
trails Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Forest Management activities except for timber harvesting Yes Yes Yes Yes
4. Timber Harvesting9
5. Clearing of vegetation for approved construction
and other allowed uses CEO1 Yes CEO Yes
6. Fire Prevention Activities Yes Yes Yes Yes
7. Wildlife Management Practices Yes Yes Yes Yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices Yes Yes Yes Yes
9. Mineral Exploration Yes2 Yes2 No Yes2
10. Mineral extraction including sand gravel extraction PB3 PB No PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis Yes Yes Yes Yes
12. Emergency Operations Yes Yes Yes Yes
13. Agriculture PB Yes Yes Yes
14. Aquaculture PB Yes PB PB
15. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential No CEO PB4 CEO
B. Multi-unit residential No PB No PB
C. Commercial No PB No No
D. Industrial No PB No No
E. Government and Institutional No PB No No
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational,
scientific, or nature interpretation purposes PB CEO PB4 CEO
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB Yes PB4 CEO
11
LAND USES DISTRICTS
RP GD SP LR
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures
and uses extending over or below the normal highwater
line or within a wetland
A. Temporary CEO CEO CEO CEO
B. Permanent PB PB PB PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round
residences No LPI LPI LPI
19. Home occupations No Yes PB PB
20. Private Sewage No LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential Services PB6 PB PB6 PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses Yes Yes Yes Yes
23. Public and private recreational areas involving
minimal structural development PB CEO PB PB
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds No PB No PB
26. Road & driveway construction No8 PB PB PB
27. Parking facilities No7 PB No PB
28. Marinas No PB PB PB
29. Filling and earthmoving of < 10 yds3 CEO Yes CEO Yes
30. Filling and earthmoving of > 10 yds3 PB CEO PB CEO
31. Signs Yes Yes Yes Yes
32. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO
33. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO Permit CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB Permit PB PB PB PB
1 In RP not permitted within 75 feet of normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety hazards
2 Requires permit from CEO if more than 100 ft of surface area, in total, is disturbed
3 In RP not permitted in areas so designated because of wildlife value
4 Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals
6 See further restrictions in Section 15 (L)(2)
7 Except when area is zoned RP Due to flood plain criteria in which case a PB permit is required
8 Except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or where no reasonable alternative route or location
is available outside the RP area, in which case a permit is required from the PB.
9 Managed by the Maine Forest Service
12
Section 15. Land Use Standards
All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone shall conform with the following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
1. Minimum area and shore frontage
a. Residential lots and public and private recreational facilities in all districts shall have a minimum shore
frontage of two-hundred feet (200’), a minimum area of one (1) acre, and shall be laid out so as to
accommodate a one-hundred-fifty foot (150’) by one-hundred fifty foot (150’) square somewhere within its
boundaries.
b. Governmental, Institutional, or Commercial uses shall have a minimum lot area of 60,000 square feet and
shall have a minimum shore frontage of three-hundred feet (300’).
2. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land beneath roads
serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
3. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of
land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one-hundred feet (100’), horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage
requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
5. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or industrial
structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional
requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
6. Each lot shall contain one hundred-seventy-five feet (175’) of road frontage with the following exceptions:
a. On cul-de-sacs the road frontage may be reduced to eighty feet (80’). The resulting lot must still be able to
accommodate a one-hundred fifty foot (150’) by one-hundred fifty foot (150’) square somewhere within its
boundaries.
b. On town ways and public easements, this road frontage may be reduced to fifty feet (50’) provided that the
resulting lot can accommodate a two hundred foot (200’) by two hundred foot (200’) square somewhere
within its boundaries. On privately owned roads, the deed for each lot shall either show ownership of the
land underlying the privately owned road in fee simple, or it shall grant to the owner of such lot a right-ofway
over such privately owned road. In no case shall the privately owned road or the right-of-way have a
minimum width of less than fifty feet (50’) for the entire portion of such right-of-way or privately owned
road beginning at a town way or a public easement and extending sufficiently far as to allow the lot to meet
the one-hundred seventy-five foot (175’) frontage requirement.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one- hundred feet (100’) from the normal
high-water line of great ponds classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds classified GPA, and
seventy-five feet (75’) from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland
edge of a wetland except that in the General Development District the setback from the normal high water
mark shall be at least twenty-five feet (25’). The water body or wetland setback provision shall not apply to
structures which require direct access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks and
retaining walls, or to other functionally water-dependent uses.
13
2. On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not possible to place
an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the code
enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage
of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area
nor eight feet (8’) in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and
shall meet all other applicable standards, including non-vegetated surfaces and vegetation clearing
limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the
principal structure.
3. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in the Resource
Protection, Limited Residential, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed thirty-five feet (35’) in
height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmissions towers, windmills, antennas, and
similar structures having no floor area.
4. The first floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including basements shall be elevated at
least one-foot above the elevation of the 100-year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the
flood as defined by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
5. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within the Shoreland zone shall
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the lot or a portion there of, located within the Shoreland zone, including
land area previously developed.
6. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils
provided; that the structure is limited to a maximum of four feet (4’) in width; that the structure does not
extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act,
Title 38, Section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the
property.
7. All structures shall be set back at least twenty feet (20’) from the outermost limit of the road and at least twenty
feet (20’) from the side and rear lot lines except that accessory structures with a footprint of less than onehundred
and fifty (150) square feet shall be set back at least ten feet (10’) from the outermost limit of the road
and at least six feet (6’) from the side and rear lot lines.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Beyond the Normal High-
Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland.
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control
erosion.
2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with
existing conditions, use, and character of the area.
5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond
the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to
the water as an operational necessity.
6. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure extending beyond the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in
any district.
14
7. Except in the General Development District, structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other
structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed
twenty feet (20’) in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
8. No more than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located below the normal high-water
line of a water body or within a wetland is allowed on a single lot; except that when a single lot contains at
least twice the minimum shore frontage as specified in Section 15(A), a second structure may be allowed and
may remain as long as the lot is not further divided.
D. Campgrounds
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures and the
following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five- thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not including roads and
driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and service buildings
shall be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) from the normal high-water line of great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75) feet from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual Private Campsites
Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are permitted provided the following conditions
are met:
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty-thousand (30,000) square feet
of lot area within the Shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
2. When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that contains another principal use and/or structure,
the lot must contain the minimum lot dimensional requirements for the principal structure and/or use, and the
individual private campsite separately.
3. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be
set back one hundred feet (100’) from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or river
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five feet (75’) from the normal high-water line of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
4. Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. Recreational vehicles shall not be located on
any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad and no structure(s) except canopies shall be
attached to the recreational vehicle.
5. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a Resource
Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1,000) square feet.
6. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal shall be
required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site,
written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required.
7. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred and twenty
(120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
15
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses
The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the Shoreland zone adjacent to great
ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
1. Auto washing facilities
2. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers other than amounts normally
associated with individual households or farms.
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
6. Dry cleaning establishments
7. Electronic circuit assembly
8. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
9. Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use occurs
and except for storage and sales associated with marinas.
11. Photographic processing
12. Printing
G. Parking Areas
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream set-back requirements for structures for the district
in which such areas are located. The set-back requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching
facilities in Districts other than the General Development District may be reduced to no less than fifty feet (50’)
from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that no other
reasonable alternative exists.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent storm-water runoff
from flowing directly into a water body, and where feasible, to retain all run-off on-site.
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
a. Typical parking space: Approximately ten feet (10’) wide and twenty feet (20’) long, except that parking
spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty feet (40’) long.
b. Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty feet (20’) wide.
H. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts
and other related features.
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred feet (100’) from the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA or a river that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five feet (75’) from
the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no
reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
Planning Board may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement to no less than fifty feet (50’) upon
clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water
body. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty percent (20%) the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by ten feet
(10’) for each five percent (5%) increase in slope above twenty percent (20%).
16
This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water crossing nor to roads or driveways that provide access
to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of its setback from a water
body.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except to provide access to permitted
uses within the district, or as approved by the Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative
route or location is available outside the district, in which case the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far
as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and shall be
graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in
subsection Q.
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten percent (10%) except for short segments of less than two
hundred feet (200’).
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, roads, and
driveways shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least fifty
feet (50’) plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Road and driveway
surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the run-off and minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective
in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume of head to erode the
road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway
at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten percent (10%) or
less.
c. On road or driveway sections having slopes greater than ten percent (10%), ditch relief culverts shall be
placed across the road or driveway at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle down slope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for effective
functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations associated
with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning.
17
I. Signs
The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Stream Protection, and Limited
Residential Districts:
1. Signs and billboards relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be permitted, provided that such
signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises. Billboards and
signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
2. Name signs shall be permitted, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises.
3. Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to the sale, rental or
lease of premises.
4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be permitted without restriction as to number provided that no
such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be permitted without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than twenty feet (20’) above the ground.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Run-off
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water run-off from the site in
excess of the natural pre-development conditions. Where possible, existing natural run-off control features,
such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce run-off and encourage
infiltration of storm waters.
2. Storm water run-off control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules
2. No owner of a property with an existing private sewage disposal system within 250 feet of a classified body
of water shall convert to a primary place of residency (30-A MRSA § 4215, Subsection 2, as amended) or sell
or have titles transferred for the purpose of habitation by a new owner until the local plumbing inspector
issues a written certification that one of the following conditions is met:
1. A subsurface waste water disposal application, completed after July 1, 1974 exists indicating that the
dwelling’s waste water disposal system substantially complies with State of Maine Department of
Human Services rules and applicable municipal ordinances provided that the disposal system was
installed with the required permit and certificate of approval and is not malfunctioning or
2. A replacement for an existing wastewater disposal system has been constructed so that it substantially
complies with departmental rules and applicable municipal ordinances.
L. Essential Services
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and existing
service corridors.
18
2. The installation of essential services is not permitted in a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District,
except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates
that no reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand
sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal disturbance of less than one-hundred (100) square
feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration
which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped,
filled or secured by other equally effective measures, so as to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such
plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of paragraph 4 below.
2. Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, M. R. S. A., Section 480-C no
part of any extraction operation, including drainage and run-off control features shall be permitted within one
hundred feet (100’) of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great
pond classified GPA, and within seventy-five feet (75’) of the normal high-water line of any other water body,
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within seventyfive
feet (75’) of any property line, without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
3. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site, which
operations shall be deemed complete when less than one-hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are removed in
any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the
following:
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved location, or shall be
buried on site. Only materials generated on site may be buried or covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1) slope or flatter.
c. Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized
with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained from off-site sources if
necessary to complete the stabilization project.
4. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such conditions as are
necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses
and resources.
N. Agriculture
1. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the former Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one-hundred feet (100’), horizontal distance, of a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond, classified GPA, or within seventy-five feet (75’) horizontal
distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. Within five (5) years of the effective date of this
ordinance all manure storage areas within the Shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the
facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water. Existing facilities which do not meet
19
the set-back requirement may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision within the above five (5) year
period.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in surface area or
The spreading, disposal or storage of manure within the Shoreland zone shall require a Soil and Water
Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall
be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
4.There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred feet (100’), horizontal distance, of the normal high
water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five feet (75’), horizontal distance, from other water
bodies; nor within twenty-five feet(25’) , horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands. Operations in
existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
5. After the effective date of this Ordinance, newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted
within one hundred feet (100’), horizontal distance, of other water bodies, nor within twenty-five feet (25’),
horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm
activities, and which are not in conformance with the above set-back provisions may continue, provided that
such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Soil and Water Conservation Plan.
O. Timber Harvesting
The Maine Bureau of Forestry shall administer and enforce all forestry activities within the municipality in
accordance to statewide standards.
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
1. Within a Shoreland area zoned for Resource Protection abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of
vegetation within the strip of land extending seventy-five feet (75’) horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line, except to remove safety hazards in accordance with Section 15(Q).
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited to that
which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
2. Except in areas as described in Section P(1) above, within a shoreline buffer extending one-hundred feet
(100’), horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond, or within a shoreline buffer
extending seventy-five feet (75’), horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two-hundred fifty (250) square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer limits of the
tree or shrub crown. However, a single footpath not to exceed six feet (6’) in width as measured between
tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the shoreline provided that a cleared line of sight to
the water through the shoreline buffer is not created.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the shoreline buffer is allowed provided that a well-distributed stand of trees
is maintained. For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to a great
pond or a river or stream flowing to a great pond, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of twelve
(12) or more in an twenty-five foot (25’) by twenty-five foot (25’) square (six hundred twenty-five (625)
square feet) area as determined by the following rating system:
Diameter of Tree at 4 ½ feet
Above Ground Level (inches) Points
2-4 in. 1
4-12 in. 2
>12 in. 4
20
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a “well-distributed stand of trees” is defined
as maintaining a minimum rating score of eight (8) per twenty-five foot (25’) square area.
Note: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a twenty-five foot (25’) x twenty-five foot (25’) plot
contains three (3) trees between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, three trees between 4 and 12 inches in diameter,
and three (3) trees over 12 inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(3x1) + (3x2) + (3x4) + 21 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 25-foot plot contains trees worth 21 points. Trees totaling 9 points (21 – 12 = 9) may be
removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings are created.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 25-foot square plots must be established where the landowner or lessee proposes
clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except as otherwise
allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the minimum points
required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 25-foot square area
may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining existing vegetation
under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at least three (3) saplings less than two
(2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet above ground level for each 25-foot by 25-foot square
area. If three (3) saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed
until 3 saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty percent (40%) of the total volume of trees four (4)
inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above the ground level may be removed in any ten (10)
year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and
other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed,
except to provide for a footpath as described in Section 15(P) paragraphs (2) and (2)(a) above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is permitted.
e. In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, removal of storm-damaged, hazard or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species in
accordance with Section Q, below, unless existing new tree growth is present.
f. In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer, clearing or removal of vegetation for allowed
activities, including associated construction and related equipment operation, within or outside the shoreline
buffer, must comply with the requirements of Section 15(P)(2).
3. At distances greater than one hundred feet (100’), horizontal distance, from a great pond, and seventy-five
feet (75’), horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting
of not more than forty percent (40%) of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4½
21
feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be
included in the forty percent (40%) calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for development, including but not limited to, principal and accessory
structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot
area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously developed.
4. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance may be maintained, but shall not
be enlarged, except as permitted by this Ordinance.
5. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the
provisions of this section.
Q. Hazard Trees, Dead Trees and Storm-Damaged Trees
1. Hazard trees may be removed without a permit after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer, provided
the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree results in a cleared opening in the tree canopy
greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, the opening shall be replaced with native tree species,
unless there is new tree growth already present near to where the hazard tree was removed. New tree
growth is considered to be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4½) feet
above ground level. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native species, be
at least four feet (4’) in height and be no less than two (2) inches DBH. Stumps shall not be removed.
(b) Outside the shoreline buffer, if the removal of hazard trees results in more than forty percent (40%) of the
volume of trees, four (4) inches or more in diameter as measured at four and one half (4½) feet above
ground level, being removed in any ten (10) year period; or results in cleared openings of more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the Shoreland zone or more than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, whichever is greater; then replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new
tree growth already present near to where the hazard tree was removed. New tree growth is considered to
be at least two (2) inches DBH. If new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of native
species and be no less than two (2) inches DBH.
(c) The code enforcement officer may require the applicant to submit an evaluation from a licensed forester or
arborist before any hazard tree can be removed within the Shoreland zone.
(d) The code enforcement officer may require more than a one-for-one replacement for removed hazard trees
that exceeded eight (8) inches in diameter at four and one half (4½) feet above ground level.
2. Dead trees may be removed without a permit, provided the following requirements are met:
(a) The trees are dead from natural causes. Dead trees are those that contain no foliage during the growing
season.
(b) The removal of dead trees does not result in the creation of new lawn areas or other permanently cleared
areas.
(c) Stumps shall not be removed.
3. Storm-damaged trees may be removed without a permit after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer,
provided the following requirements are met:
(a) Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm-damaged trees results in a cleared opening in the tree
canopy greater than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, the following shall be required:
22
(i) The area shall be required to naturally revegetate. If after one growing season, no natural regeneration
or regrowth is present, replanting of native tree seedlings or saplings shall be required at a density of
one seedling/sapling per every eighty (80) square feet of open canopy.
(ii) The removal of storm-damaged trees does not result in the creation of new lawn areas or other
permanently cleared areas.
(iii) Stumps shall not be removed.
(iv) Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if they extend beyond the bottom one-third
(1/3) of the tree.
(b) Outside the shoreline buffer, if the removal of storm-damaged trees results in more than forty (40) percent
of the volume of trees, four (4) inches or more in diameter as measured at four and one half (4.5) feet
above ground level, being removed in any ten (10) year period; or results in cleared openings of more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the lot area within the Shoreland zone or more than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, whichever is greater; replacement with native tree species is required, unless there is new tree
growth already present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where the hazard tree was
removed and be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and hone half (4.5) feet above the
ground level. If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or regrowth is present, replanting of
native tree seedlings or saplings shall be required on a one-for-one basis. Replacement trees shall consist
of native species and be at least two (2) inches in diameter, measured at four and one half (4.5) feet above
the ground level.
R. Revegetation Requirements
When revegetation is required to address the removal of non-native invasive species of vegetation, to address
removal of vegetation in conjunction with shoreline stabilization, in response to violations of the standards set
forth in Section 15(P), or as a mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not be permissible due
to the standards of Section 15(P), then revegetation shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The applicant must submit a revegetation plan, prepared with and signed by a qualified professional that
describes revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include a scaled site plan, depicting where
vegetation was, or is to be removed, where existing vegetation is to remain, and where vegetation is to be
planted, including a list of all vegetation to be planted.
2. Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and in the same area where vegetation was
removed, and must occur at a density comparable to the pre-existing vegetation. If this is not feasible due to
shoreline stabilization, then revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline and as close as
possible to the area where vegetation was removed.
3. If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the expiration of the permit. If the activity or
revegetation is not completed before the expiration of the permit, a new revegetation plan shall be
submitted with any renewal or new permit application.
4. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for trees and saplings:
(a) All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native noninvasive species;
(b) Replacement vegetation must consist of saplings at a minimum;
(c) If more than three (3) trees or saplings are planted, then at least three (3) different species shall be
used;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of trees and saplings planted;
23
(b) If revegetation is required for shoreline stabilization, and it is not possible to plant trees and saplings in
the same area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees or saplings must be planted in a
location that effectively reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and structures; and
(f) A survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent of planted trees/saplings is required for a minimum of five
(5) years.
5. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for all woody vegetation and for other
vegetation under three (3) feet in height:
(a) All woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height must be replaced with native
noninvasive species of woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height as applicable;
(b) Woody vegetation and vegetation under three (3) feet in height shall be planted in quantities and
variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
(c) If more than three (3) woody vegetation plants are to be planted, then at least three (3) different species
shall be planted;
(d) No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of planted woody vegetation plants; and
(e) Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height must be sufficient to
remain in compliance with the standards contained in Section 15(P) for a minimum of five (5) years.
6. Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for ground vegetation and ground cover:
(a) All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be replaced with native herbaceous vegetation,
in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater;
(b) Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, the area must be supplemented with leaf
mulch and/or bark mulch at a minimum of four (4) inches deep to prevent erosion and provide for
effective infiltration of stormwater; and
(c) Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground cover must be sufficient to remain in
compliance with the standards contained within this Ordinance for a minimum of five (5) years.
S. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result in unstabilized
soil conditions and which require a permit shall require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where applicable,
provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary run-off control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the topography and
soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
24
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project involving land
disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every
phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week from the time it
was last actively worked, by use of rip-rap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases
permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial due date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred (500) square feet
and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to maintain the
mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures
may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion from water flowing
through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25)
year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with rip-rap.
T. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can be established or
maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement,
improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring
subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses shall
require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified
persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State
Certified Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil
properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and
water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data
which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to
counteract soil limitations where they exist.
U. Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the State any pollutant that, by itself
or in combination with other activities or substances will impair designated uses or the water classification or the
water body.
V. Archaeological Sites
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed
on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority
shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at
least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall
consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
Section 16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
1. Code Enforcement Officer
A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed by July 1st.
2. Board of Appeals
25
A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A Section 2691.
3. Planning Board
A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions of State Law.
B. Permits Required
After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any
activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or use would occur; or
expand, change, or replace an existing use of structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use.
C. Permit Application
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site plan, on a form provided
by the municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property or other person authorizing the work,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct. If the person signing the application is
not the owner or lessee of the property then that person shall submit a letter of authorization from the owner or
lessee.
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note
upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed application for a
plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted
whenever the nature of the proposed structure would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits
Within thirty-five (35) days of the date of receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application
is a complete application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to
make the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within thirty-five (35) days of
receiving a completed application. However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision
on the application shall occur within thirty-five (35) days after the first available date on the Planning Board’s
Agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within thirty-five (35) days of the public hearing, if
one is held. Permits shall be approved if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the
purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity with the
purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall approve an application or
approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information presented that the proposed
use:
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual as well as actual, points of access to inland waters;
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the Comprehensive Plan;
7. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and use;
26
8. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards; and
9. Meets the intent of the Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
If a permit is either denied, or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in
writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the structure would be located
in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance or regulation, or any State Law which
the municipality is responsible for enforcing.
E. Expiration of Permit
Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the
use of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit,
the applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall expire.
F. Installation of Public Utility Service
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may install services to any
new structure located in the Shoreland zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of
all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal
officials. Following installation of service, the company or district shall forward the written authorization to the
municipal officials, indicating that installation has been completed.
G. Appeals
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board in the enforcement or administration of this Ordinance.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in the Ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals
Variances may be permitted only under the following conditions:
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including but not limited to, lot width,
structure height, percent of lot coverage, and set-back requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(1) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the specific provision
which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is sought; and
(2) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship. The term “hardship”
shall mean:
1. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
2. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
3. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
27
4. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
d. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to insure conformance
with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply
with any conditions imposed.
e. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information supplied by the
applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments
received from the Commissioner prior to action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and
shall be taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
f. A copy of all variances granted by the Board of Appeals shall be submitted to the Department of
Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of decision.
3. Appeal Procedure
a. Making an Appeal
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party from
any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board. Such appeal shall be taken within
thirty (30) days of the date of the decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon
a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
(2) Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal which includes:
i. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why it should be granted.
ii. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and structures and other
physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(3) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt
of an appeal request.
b. Decision by Board of Appeals
(1) A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal. A member who
abstains shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum exists.
(2) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals present and voting shall be
necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to decide
under this Ordinance, or to affect any variation in the application of this Ordinance from its stated terms.
The board may reverse the decision, or failure to act, of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
only upon a finding that the decision, or failure to act, was clearly contrary to specific provisions of this
Ordinance.
(3) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(4) The Board shall decide all appeals within thirty-five (35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall
issue a written decision on all appeals.
28
(5) All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions
as well as the reasons or basis therefore, and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof.
4. Appeal to Superior Court
Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take
an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within thirty (30) days from the date of any decision
of the Board of Appeals.
5. Reconsideration
The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within thirty (30) days of its prior decision. The Board may
conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony.
H. Enforcement
1. Nuisances
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer
1. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the
Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of the Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance
conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a
permanent record.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with all applicable
laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all
complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the office,
including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied, revocation
actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and fees
collected.
3. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the
Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition
of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering
fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless there
is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result
of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in
bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety
or will result in substantial environmental damage.
29
4. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a contractor, who orders or
conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, Maine
Revised Statutes Annotated, Subsection 4452.
Section 17. Definitions
Accessory Structure or Use: A use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or similar
extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is
considered part of the principal structure.
Agriculture: The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not
limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house products. Agriculture does not include
forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a
permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance has been
granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting
or denial of such permit or variance.
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater plant or animal species.
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and which
may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Campground: Any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living quarters,
including but limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a “home occupation,” defined below, the
intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services,
exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not limited to setback,
lot area, shore frontage and height.
Driveway: A vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500’) feet in length service two lots or less.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as protection
of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property
and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential Services: The construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical or communication facilities;
stream, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone
cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage
lines, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not
limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a use’s operating season; additional hours of operation; or
the use of more footprint devoted to a particular use.
30
Family: One or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls.
Footprint: The entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on a lot, including but not limited to cantilevered
or similar overhanging extensions, as well as unenclosed structures such as patios and decks.
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall (approximately
twenty feet (20’) or taller.
Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities, pesticide or
fertilizer application management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest
stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports,
but including basements, slabs, frost walls, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested wetlands, which
are:
1. Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface water
body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of
ten (10) acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for duration sufficient to support, and
which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria
of this definition.
Functionally Water-dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on submerged
lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters and which cannot be located away from these
waters, The uses include, but are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish
and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port
facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, and industrial uses
dependent upon water-borne transportation.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten (10) acres, and
any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres
except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is
completely surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Great Pond Classified GPA: any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to Title 38 Article4-A Section 465-A. This
classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.
Height of a Structure: The vertical distance between the mean original grade at the downhill side of the structure
and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances which have
no floor area.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential structure or
property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members
residing in the home.
31
Individual Private Campsite: an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is developed
for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements
which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fire places, or tent platforms,
Industrial: The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods, or the
extraction of minerals.
Lot Area: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
Marina: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use, providing for hire
off shore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as boat and
related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, boat and
tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market
conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
Minimum Lot Width: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or extent of mineral
resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to restore the land to
its original condition.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than one hundred
(100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location
and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Multi-Unit Residential: A residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Non-Conforming Lot: A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional
requirements; setback, height, lot coverage, or footprint but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-Conforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not permitted in the
district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal High-Water Line: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due
to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic
and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland
vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond
during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership, association, two
or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over of Beyond the Normal High-
Water Line or Within a Wetland:
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months.
32
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months.
Principal Structure: A structure other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the
use of another structure or use on the same lot.
Principal Use: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the same lot.
Public Facility: Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and roads, which
are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body of public entity.
Recent Flood Plain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the National Cooperative Soil
Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other
customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for temporary
sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent
trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must
remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement System: A system intended to replace: 1) an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being
upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or 2.) any existing overboard wastewater
discharge.
Residential Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as permanent,
seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet
facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities
regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Rip-Rap: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil
stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from that point at which it
provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material
constructed for, or created by, the repeated passage of motorized vehicles.
Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water body provided
that:
1. In the case of electric service
a. The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the
customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
b. The total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
33
2. In the case of telephone service
a. The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to existing utility
poles, or
b. The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less than one
thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Set-back: The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shore Frontage: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line between the
intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline at normal high-water elevation.
Shoreland Zone: The land area located within two hundred and fifty (250’) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of any great pond, river, or saltwater body; within two hundred and fifty (250’) feet of the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75’) feet of the normal high-water line of a stream.
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial
streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic
map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river.
Structure: Anything temporarily or permanently located, built, constructed or erected for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind or anything constructed or erected on or in the ground.
The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes. Structure
does not include fences; poles and wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops,
including guy wires and guy anchors; subsurface waste water disposal systems as defined in Title 30-A, section
4201, subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 3-C; or wells
or water wells as defined in Title 32, section 4700-E, subsection 8.
Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of
estimated total cost.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s) and
pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other devices and
associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath
the surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under 38 MRSA
Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system licensed under 38 MRSA Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any
public sewer. The term shall not include a wastewater disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in
whole or in part hazardous waste as defined in 38 MRSA Chapter 13, subchapter 1.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or exceeded
throughout the measured area.
Timber Harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or processing forest
products. The cutting or removal of vegetation in the Shoreland zone associated with any other land use activity, and
the cutting or removal of trees in the Shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the Shoreland
zone, shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of vegetation shall be regulated pursuant to
Section 15 (P), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Tributary Stream: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water, whether intermittent
or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by
the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock,
and which flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not include the term “stream” as
34
defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the
Shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland Edge: The boundary between upland and wetland.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under four (4”) inches in diameter, measured at 4 ½ above ground level.
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as
measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water Body: Any great pond, river, stream or tidal area.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river or stream, whether under,
through or over the water course. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts,
water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings.
Wetland: A freshwater wetland.
Wetlands Associated with Great Ponds and Rivers: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to a great pond or
river, and which during normal high water are connected by surface water to the great pond or river. Also included
are wetlands which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm, causeway, or similar feature less than one
hundred (100’) feet in width, and which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the great
pond or river Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
35
HISTORY OF SHORELAND ZONING IN THE TOWN OF GLENBURN, MAINE
COMPLETE HISTORY OF SHORELAND ZONING IN GLENBURN COMPLIED FROM ALL KNOWN
RECORDS IN THE TOWN OFFICE AND FROM INFORMATION PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
DECEMBER 29, 1958 to MARCH 26, 1973 See History at end of regular Zoning Ordinance for the complete
history during this period.
MAY 6, 1975 The Town received notification that on April 18 and April 30 LURC and the DEP had imposed a
temporary Shoreland Zoning Ordinance on the Town Of Glenburn. It was a temporary Ordinance which was
scheduled to be superseded on August 7, 1975 by a more Comprehensive Ordinance unless the town first enacted a
suitable Ordinance. This imposed Ordinance placed into the Resource Protection District all land within twohundred
and fifty (250’) feet of Pushaw Lake, Kenduskeag Stream, and Black Stream.
MAY 28, 1975 The Town adopted a Zoning Ordinance which attempted to incorporate all necessary Shoreland
Zoning Provisions required by the State. The Ordinance was not only for the Shoreland but covered the entire
Town.
JULY 11, 1975 The Town received notification that on July 10 LURC and the DEP had reviewed Glenburn’s newly
enacted Zoning Ordinance and found that the Ordinance incorporated most of required provisions. However, the
State Guidelines which were adopted effective DECEMBER 15, 1973 remained imposed on the Kenduskeag Stream
upstream from its crossing with the Bangor and Aroostook Railroad.
JUNE 13, 1979 LURC and the DEP re-adopted the State imposed Ordinance for the Town Of Glenburn. The area
covered stayed the same-the Kenduskeag Stream upstream from it crossing with the Bangor and Aroostook Railroad
in the Resource Protection District. The re-adopted Ordinance incorporated three changes in the regulations.
OCTOBER 19, 1987 A new Shoreland Zoning Ordinance was adopted by a Special Town Meeting. At the same
time, a New Regular Zoning Ordinance was adopted to apply to the portion of the Town not in the Shoreland Zone.
The New Shoreland Ordinance is based on the latest version of the State Model Ordinance. Some minor
modifications were made.
APRIL 21, 1987 A Special Town Meeting amended the following sections: Section 2; 9(A)(7); 11(H); 12(6);
11(N)(3); 12(B)(1); 11(D); 9(A)(1); 11(B); 13(C); 13(H); 8(B); 8(C) deleted and new 8(A) adopted.
JUNE 12, 1991 A completely new Shoreland Zoning Ordinance was adopted by a Regular Town Meeting. This
Ordinance is substantially the same as the New State Model Ordinance. It updates and greatly clarifies many of the
ambiguous points contained in the 1987 Model Ordinance.
FEBRUARY 17, 1994 A Special Town Meeting deleted two small parcels from the Resource Protection District.
The amendments were in Section 13(B)(2)(a) and Section 13(B)(2)(d).
JUNE 8, 2004 A Regular Town Meeting adopted amendments that repeal all of Section 12(C)(1)(a)-(d) and
replaced those provisions with Section 12(C)(1), (1-A), ( 1-B), and ( 1-C).
MARCH 15, 2007 Amendment to Section 13B(2c) Reclassify property located on French’s Point Road from
Shoreland Zoning/Resource Protection to Shoreland Zoning/Limited Residential identified as Glenburn Tax Map
25/Lot 145
JUNE 12, 2012 Amendments to Section 15 A. Minimum Lot Standards, 1a., 6., 6a, 6b. to coincide with the
Zoning/Land Use Ordinance.
JUNE 12, 2013 Amendments to Section 3. Applicability; Section 13. Establishment of Districts, B. Resource
Protection District; and Section 17. Definitions, Freshwater Wetland.
36
JUNE 15, 2016 Amendments to comply with DEP’s minimum guidelines which were mandatory as of May 1,
2006 and amendments to comply with DEP’s minimum guidelines which were mandatory January 26, 2015
(Amendments filed with ordinance of permanent record)
JUNE 11, 2019 Amendment to Section 15, Land Use Standards, A. Minimum Lot Size Standards (1)(a) “a
minimum area of one and three-quarters (1¾) acres” to “a minimum area of one (1) acre”.
1
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE
of the
TOWN OF GLENBURN
100 Purpose and Scope
110 Purpose
The purpose of this mobile home park ordinance is to promote the orderly development of
mobile home parks; to insure the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the
parks; to encourage the most appropriate use of land within the Town; and to maintain and
protect property values within the Town of Glenburn.
120 Scope
This ordinance is composed of Sections 100 through 948 and Appendices A through F. The
Appendices are an integral part of this ordinance.
200 Authority, Administration, and Enforcement
210 Authority
211 This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article 8, Pt. 2, Sec. I of the Maine Constitution, and Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A., Section 3001, and Section 3.04(h) of the Glenburn Charter.
212 This ordinance shall be known and cited as the ‘Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the
Town of Glenburn’.
220 Administration
221 Except where otherwise provided, the provisions of this ordinance shall be administered
by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Glenburn.
222 No person shall construct, develop, establish, or expand a mobile home park without
having first received Final Plat Plan approval from the Planning Board and a Mobile
Home Park Construction permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
223 No person shall operate a mobile home park unless that person holds a valid mobile
home park operating license issued by the Glenburn Code Enforcement Officer in
compliance with the provisions of Appendix F of this ordinance.
224 This ordinance shall apply to all land in the Town of Glenburn. Mobile Home Parks
shall be allowed, however, only in those districts, and subject to the conditions as
specified by the provisions of the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn” and the
“Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Glenburn”, as amended.
230 Enforcement
231 The Municipal Officers or their duly authorized representative, upon a finding that any
provision of this ordinance or the condition(s) of a permit issued under this ordinance is
2
being violated, are authorized to institute legal proceedings to enjoin violations of this
ordinance.
232 A person who violates the provisions of this ordinance or the condition(s) of a permit
shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A., Section
4452.
300 Waiver and Modification of these Regulations
310 Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may result
from strict compliance with this ordinance, or where there are special circumstances of a
particular plan, it may waive any provisions of this ordinance provided that such waiver will
not have the effect of nullifying the purpose of this ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinance of the Town of
Glenburn.
320 In granting any waiver, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as will substantially
secure the objectives of the requirements so waived. Such waiver shall not in any way
jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the community. The Planning Board shall enter
into its records the reasons for granting any waiver and any conditions which it has required.
400 Validity, Effective Date, Conflict of Ordinance, and Filing
410 Should any section, subsection or other provision of this ordinance be held or become
invalid or void, by virtue of any decision of any. court of competent jurisdiction, or by
virtue of any controlling federal, state, or other law, then only such section, subsection or
other provision which is specifically mentioned in such decision of court, or which is
specifically controlled by such federal, state, or other law, shall be affected, and the
remaining portions of this ordinance shall continue to be valid and remain in full force and
effect.
420 This Ordinance shall become effective on the 31st day following its adoption by the
Glenburn Town Council.
430 This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other rule, regulation, by-law, permit, or provision of law except that
mobile home parks need not also undergo review under the Glenburn Subdivision
Ordinance. Where this ordinance conflicts with any municipal, State, or Federal ordinance,
statute, rule regulation, or other provision of law, the more stringent provision shall apply.
440 A copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be accessible to any
member of the public.
500 Amendments
510 This ordinance may be amended by the Glenburn Town Council in compliance with the
procedures established in Section 3.10 of the Glenburn Charter. A copy of all amendments
shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
3
600 Appeals
610 If the Planning Board disapproves an application or grants approval with any provisions that
are objectionable to the applicant or any abutting landowner or any aggrieved party, or when
it is claimed that the provisions of the ordinance do not apply, or that the true intent and
meaning of the ordinance has been misconstrued or wrongfully interpreted, the applicant, an
abutting landowner, or aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the Glenburn Board of
Appeals within thirty (30) days from the Planning Board’s final decision in accordance with
the Town of Glenburn’s Ordinance Establishing Board of Appeals and with Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A. Section 2691. Any appeals from the granting or denying of a license under
Appendix F of this ordinance shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Section 25
of said Appendix F.
700 Non-Conforming Mobile Home Parks
710 Non-Conforming Mobile Home Parks
711 The use of a mobile home park or part thereof existing at the effective date of this
ordinance, or amendments thereto, and not in conformance with the provisions of such
ordinance or amendment is a non-conforming mobile home park.
712 Non-conforming mobile home parks which were lawful at the time of adoption of this
ordinance, or subsequent amendments thereto, may continue to be used provided the
Mobile Home park owner complies with the provisions of Appendix F of this
ordinance.
713 Expansion of a non-conforming mobile home park shall be permitted provided however
that the expanded portion of the non-conforming mobile home park shall be governed
by this ordinance.
800 Definitions
810 Words and terms not defined in Section 820 shall have their customary dictionary meanings.
820 The following words and terms, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall be defined as
follows:
821 Definitions
1. Accessory Structure A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly
incidental and related to that of the principal structure or use of the land, and which is
located on the same lot as that of the principal structure or use.
2. Aquifer A porous formation of ice-contact and glacial outwash sand and gravel or
fractured bedrock that contains significant recoverable quantities of water which is
likely to provide drinking water supplies.
3. Centralized Private Sewer System A subsurface wastewater system not located on any
mobile home lot which disposes of the waste of more than one individual mobile
home and which meets all requirements of the Maine State Plumbing Code and of the
Department of Human Services.
4
4. Code Enforcement Officer The Code Enforcement Officer appointed in compliance
with 38 M.R.S.A., Section 441 and Section 4.04(6) of the Glenburn Charter shall be
the Code Enforcement Officer referenced in this ordinance.
5. Developed Portion The Developed Portion of a park means any part of the parcel to
be developed which:
a. is contained within a mobile home lot;
b. is cleared of any natural vegetation for purposes of development;
c. contains any structure, roadways, septic disposal systems, or wells; or
d. has any use in conjunction with the park other than as a natural buffer zone or
natural parkland for residents.
6. Major Mobile Home Park A mobile home park which is not a minor mobile home
park.
7. Minor Mobile Home Park A mobile home park with fewer than five (5) lots and
which does not involve the construction or reconstruction of a street.
8. Mobile Home
a. A structure transportable in one or more sections which is 12 body feet or more in
width, 32 body feet or more in length, built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, and electrical systems
contained therein, or
b. Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called “newer mobile
homes,’ which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning
structures, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, are
14 body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square feet, and which are built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or without
permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein;
except that the term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of
this paragraph, except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and complies with
the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, Unites States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et.
seq.
9. Mobile Home Lot That area within a mobile home park shown as a lot on the mobile
home park plan that provides facilities for long term occupancy of a mobile home and
is designed for the exclusive use of its occupants.
5
10. Mobile Home Park A parcel or adjoining parcels of land, under unified ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of three or more mobile
homes per parcel for non transient use.
11. Mobile Home Stand/Pad That part of an individual lot that has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home.
12. Person Any individual, group of individuals, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or private or public entity, including a district, county, city, town or other
governmental unit or agent thereof; and, in the case of a corporation, any individual
having active and general supervision of the properties of such corporation.
13. Planning Board The Glenburn Planning Board as established by the Glenburn
Planning Board ordinance.
14. Recharge Area The surface area directly overlying sand and gravel formations that
provide direct replenishment of ground water in sand and gravel and fractured
bedrock acquifers. The term does not include areas overlying formations that have
been identified as unsaturated and are not contiguous with saturated formations.
15. Stream A waterway with clearly defined banks and with a scoured, mineral bottom.
900 Procedures for Mobile Home Park Review
910 Introduction
Whenever the creation or expansion of any mobile home park is proposed in the Town of
Glenburn, the developer or duly authorized agent shall apply for approval of such proposed
mobile home park in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 920 (Sketch Plan
Review Phase), 930 (Preliminary Plan Phase), and 940 (Final Plan Phase). The applicant
shall provide copies of submitted materials for the Applicant, the Planning Board, the
Assessor, the Code Enforcement Officer, and the Town Manager.
920 Sketch Plan Review Phase (Pre application Proposal)
921 The purpose of the Sketch Plan Review Phase is for the Planning Board to understand
what is being proposed and for the Board to inform the developer of the requirements
of the State Mobile Home Laws, the subdivision review criteria as contained in 30-A
M.R.S.A., Sec. 4404, of this Glenburn Mobile Home Park Ordinance, and of any other
known applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations.
922 Submission of Pre application Proposal
The developer shall submit the pre application proposal to the Code Enforcement
Officer at least 14 days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting at
which the proposal will be first heard. The Code Enforcement Officer shall place the
proposal on the Planning Board agenda. The developer or authorized agent shall be
present at the Planning Board meeting to officially file the pre application proposal with
6
the Board and to discuss the proposal with them. The pre application proposal shall
consist of a sketch plan and written supporting data.
1. The sketch plan shall consist of an outline of the proposed mobile home park, drawn
on a map and showing the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions which may be of assistance to the Planning Board in
making its determinations. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil sketch.
2. The supporting data shall be prepared on forms provided by the Town Office and
shall include:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
b. Identification of the parcel by tax map and lot numbers;
c. A description of any known existing covenants or easements;
d. The zoning of the parcel;
e. Outline of the proposed mobile home park drawn on a medium intensity soils map
to be provided by the town;
f. Listing of soil suitability for each intended use for each soil type in the proposed
mobile home park - to be taken from “Soil Suitability Guide for Land Use
Planning in Maine”, latest edition, published by the Cooperative Extension
Service, University of Maine at Orono;
g. Information about available community facilities and utilities on or near the site;
h. Information describing the mobile home park proposal including the number of
mobile home lots and typical lot width and depth;
i. Information regarding proposed sewer and water service and road construction;
and
j. Identification of any proposed non-residential areas.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 7 days of the submission, review the of
any pre application proposal and shall notify the applicant and the Planning Board,
in writing, deficiencies. The applicant may submit the required corrections to the
Code Enforcement Officer prior to the meeting or to the Planning Board during the
meeting.
4. Upon submission, the Code Enforcement Officer shall send notification of such
submission, by mail, to the Superintendent of Schools, to the Glenburn Fire Chief,
and to all owners of property of which any part lies within 1,000 feet of the proposed
mobile home park.
923 Planning Board Meeting with Developer
During this Planning Board meeting, with the developer or agent present, the Planning
Board shall:
1. Informally review with the developer the developer’s ideas for use of the land.
7
2. Review with the applicant the procedures for mobile home park review and approval that
are specified in this ordinance.
3. Discuss any apparent potential problems associated with the mobile home park.
4. Arrange for on-site inspection of the mobile home park site with the developer or agent
and a majority of the Planning Board to be present. Unless a waiver of inspection has
been voted by the Board, the sketch plan phase of the review process shall not be
considered complete until such inspection has been made.
At this meeting no binding commitments shall be made between the developer and the
Planning Board. Review and action upon the pre application proposal under this section
shall not constitute a pending application for the purposes of 1 M.R.S.A., Section 302.
924 Construction Prohibited
Subsequent to the submission of the sketch plan, no utility installations, ditching, grading,
construction or reconstruction of streets, grading of land or lots, and no construction of
buildings shall be done on any part of the mobile home park until the Final Plat Plan of the
mobile home park has been approved and endorsed by the Planning Board and the Final Plat
Plan recorded by the developer in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds. Any violation of
this section shall be enforced in accordance with Section 231 of this ordinance.
925 Planning Board Action on Pre application Proposal
After having made an on site inspection and within 35 days of its first review of the sketch
plan and supplementary data, the Planning Board shall:
1. Classify the mobile home park as a major or a minor mobile home park;
2. Vote on whether or not to waive the requirement for submission of a Preliminary Plan if
the mobile home park is a minor mobile home park; and
3. Within 10 days of taking such action, notify the developer in writing of such action.
930 Preliminary Plan Phase
931 The purpose of the Preliminary Plan Phase is to give the Planning Board an opportunity
to review the developer’s proposal while it is in the planning stage and to make such
recommendations to the developer as seem appropriate based on state and local laws
and regulations. The intent is that most major issues relative to the design of the mobile
home park will be identified and resolved prior to the submission of the final plan.
932 Application
1. Within six months after the classification of the sketch plan by the Planning Board, the
developer may submit an application for the consideration of the Preliminary Plan. The
developer shall submit the Preliminary Nan to the Code Enforcement Officer at least 14
days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the developer wishes the Preliminary
Plan considered. The Preliminary Plan shall substantially conform to the layout shown on
the Sketch Plan plus any recommendations made by the Planning Board. Failure to submit
an application within the required six month period shall require re-submission of the
Sketch Plan to the Planning Board for reclassification.
8
2. The application shall consist of the Preliminary Plat Plan and the supporting data as
defined in Appendix C (Preliminary Plan Submissions) of this ordinance. Each listed item
of supporting data must be included unless the Planning Board has specifically voted to
waive the item upon request of the applicant. Any waiver so voted must conform with
Section 300 of this ordinance.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 7 days of the submission, review the
preliminary plan and shall notify the applicant and the Planning Board, in writing, of any
deficiencies. The applicant may submit the required corrections to the Code Enforcement
Officer prior to the meeting or to the Planning Board during the meeting.
4. The developer shall pay a non-refundable Preliminary Plan fee of $25.00* plus $5.00* per
lot for all lots in the mobile home park. The application for consideration of the
Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a copy of the Glenburn Treasurer’s receipt
issued at the town office when the fee was paid.
5. The developer, or duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board, at which the Preliminary Plan is submitted, to explain and discuss the Preliminary
Plan.
6. At the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board shall issue a dated
receipt to the developer. The time of submission of the Preliminary Plan shall be the date
of the regular meeting of the Planning Board at which the application for Preliminary Plan
consideration, and the required fee, have been filed with the Planning Board by the
developer or duly authorized representative in person.
933 Planning Board Update of Map
Prior to their next regular meeting following the submission of the Preliminary Plan, the
Planning Board shall cause the mobile home park to be temporarily drawn on the Town’s
master subdivision map in accordance with Appendix E of this ordinance.
934 On-Site Inspection
Prior to taking action on the Preliminary Plan and after the developer has placed temporary
markers in conformance with Appendix C, Section 13(5), the Planning Board shall make a
second on-site inspection of the parcel to be developed as a mobile home park.
935 Planning Board Action on Preliminary Plan
1. Within 35 days of the date of the written receipt, the Planning Board shall review the
Preliminary Plan and shall take action to determine either that:
a. The application is a complete application with the exception of the submission of the
Final Plat Plan and the written information required in Column B of Appendix D of
this ordinance; or
b. The application is a complete application with the exception of the submission of the
Final Plat Plan, the written information required in Column B of Appendix D of this
ordinance, and certain other specific materials. The Planning Board shall list all of the
specific additional materials that must be submitted along with the Final Plat Plan to
make the application complete. Submission of the Final Flat Plan without the written
9
information required in Column B of Appendix I) and the specific additional materials
listed by the Planning Board shall be grounds for disapproval of the application for
mobile home park approval.
c. The application is not a complete application because of a number of apparent
deficiencies with the proposal. The Planning Board shall indicate in writing the
specific nature of these deficiencies.
2. Upon determining that the Preliminary Plan application is complete, (a or b above), the
Planning Board shall state in writing:
a. Specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan.
b. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have
been requested and which in its opinion may be waived in compliance with Section
300 of this ordinance.
3. If the Planning Board determines that the application is not complete because of a number
of apparent deficiencies with the proposal, it shall so notify the applicant within 10 days
of the time it makes its determination. Within 70 days of such determination, the
applicant may submit the materials required to correct the deficiencies. The applicant
shall so notify the Town Office at least 10 days prior to the Planning Board meeting so
that the submission of additional materials can be put on the agenda of the meeting.
Failure to submit the materials within the required 70 days shall require resubmission of
the Sketch Plan to the Planning Board for reclassification. Within 35 days of the
submission by the developer of materials required to correct the deficiencies, the
Planning Board shall again review the Preliminary Plan in accordance with Section 935
of this ordinance. This process may be repeated until the Planning Board determines that
the application is a complete application (a or b above).
4. Within 10 days of making its determinations in items I and 2 above, the Planning Board
shall notify the developer in writing of its determinations.
5. The determination that a Preliminary Mobile Home Park Plan is complete shall not
constitute approval of the Final Plan but only that the Planning Board has received the
information that it needs to begin a full evaluation of the proposal. Prior to the approval
of the Final Mobile Home Park Plan, the Planning Board may require additional changes
as a result of further study of the mobile home park in final form or as a result of new
information obtained at a public hearing.
6. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the required time limit shall indicate
acceptance of the completed Preliminary Plan application.
7. An application found to be complete under this section shall not constitute a pending
application for the purposes of I M.R.S.A., Sec. 302.
940 Final Plan Phase
941 The purpose of the Final Plan Phase is to thoroughly review the proposed mobile home
park plan to see that it meets all of the requirements of State mobile home park law, this
ordinance, and any other applicable laws, regulations, or ordinances.
10
942 Application
1. Within 6 months of the date of the Planning Board’s determination that the Preliminary
Plan is a complete plan, or if the Preliminary Plan requirement for a minor mobile home
park has been waived, within 6 months of the Planning Board’s vote to waive the
requirement, the developer may submit the Final Plan. The developer shall submit the
Final Plan to the Code Enforcement Officer at least 14 days prior to the Planning Board
meeting at which the Final Plan will be considered. The Final Plan shall substantially
conform to the Preliminary Plan plus any recommendations made by the Planning Board.
Failure to submit the Final Plan within the designated time period shall require
resubmission of the Preliminary Plan if such was required or of the sketch plan if the
Preliminary Plan was not required.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 7 days of the submission, review the Final
Plan and accompanying written data and shall notify the applicant and die Planning
Board, in writing, of any deficiencies. The applicant may submit the required corrections
to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the meeting or to the Planning Board during the
meeting except that any deficiencies on the Final Plat Plan must have been corrected on
the Plan prior to the meeting.
3. The developer shall pay a non-refundable Final Plan fee in accordance with the schedule
below. The Final Plan shall be accompanied by a copy of the Glenburn Treasurer’s
receipt issued at the town office when the fee was paid.
a. $5.00* per lot for all lots in a major mobile home park; or
b. $5.00* per lot for all lots in a minor mobile home park if submission of a preliminary
plan is required.
c. $25.00* plus $10.00* per lot if the mobile home park is a minor mobile home park and
the submission of the preliminary plan has been waived.
*The Town of Glenburn Fees Ordinance and Fee Schedule supersedes any and all fees in this
ordinance.
4. The developer, or duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board to discuss the Final Plan.
5. The Final Plan shall include all of the items listed in Appendix D (Final Plan
Submissions) of this ordinance. Each item listed shall be included unless specifically
waived by vote of the Planning Board at the request of the developer. The Planning
Board shall not waive the performance guarantee requirement. Any waiver so voted must
conform with Section 300 of this ordinance.
943 Planning Board Determination
During the meeting at which the Final Plan is submitted, the Planning Board shall determine
whether or not the Final Plan is complete in accordance with Section 942(5).
1. If the Planning Board determines that the Final Plan is complete, then the Board shall
issue a dated receipt to the developer. The Board may then begin its full evaluation of the
proposed mobile home park.
11
2. If the Planning Board determines that the Final Plan is not complete in accordance with
Section 942(5), it shall give to the applicant a dated receipt stating that the Final Plan has
been received but that it is not complete. The receipt shall be accompanied by a written
listing of the specific materials that are needed to make the Final Plan complete. Within
70 days of such determination, the applicant may again submit the Final Plan application
in accordance with section 942. Failure to submit the materials within the required 70
days shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Planning Board for
reclassification. This process may be repeated until the Planning Board determines that
the Final Plan is complete.
944 Public Hearing
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposed mobile home park. Such
hearing shall be held within 30 days of the issuance of the dated receipt for the complete
Final Plan. The Planning Board shall advertise the public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in Glenburn at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least 7
days prior to the hearing. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of the
date, time, and place of such hearing. The Planning Board shall also mail a notice of said
hearing to all owners of property of which any part lies within 1,000 feet of the proposed
mobile home park.
The purpose of the public hearing shall be for the Planning Board to receive testimony from
the public relative to any municipal or state ordinance, standard, or regulation which is
applicable to the proposed mobile home park and the relationship of the mobile home park
to the ordinance, standard, or regulation.
945 Planning Board Review and Action on Final Plan
1. Within 30 days of the public hearing held in compliance with Section 944 or within such
other time limit as may be mutually agreed to by the Planning Board and the developer,
the Planning Board shall review the application and:
a. Deny approval of the proposed mobile home park; or
b. Grant approval of the proposed mobile home park; or
c. Grant approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable to satisfy the
criteria contained in this ordinance and to preserve the public’s health, safety and
general welfare.
2. In arriving at its decision, the Planning Board shall make written findings of fact
establishing that:
a. The proposed mobile home park does or does not meet each of the General
Requirements and Design Standards contained in Appendix A of this ordinance;
b. The proposed mobile home park does or does not meet each of the requirements set
forth in 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4404. When reviewing the requirements set down in
Section 4404, the Planning Board shall substitute the words ‘mobile home park’ for the
word subdivision’ and the word ‘developer’ for the word ‘subdivider’, wherever those
words appear.
12
c. If applicable, the performance guarantee submitted to insure completion of required
mobile home park improvements does or does not meet the requirements of Appendix
B of this ordinance; and
The Planning Board shall maintain a permanent record of their action on the Final Plan.
Such record shall include: the action itself; any terms or conditions imposed and the
reasons for such imposition; and, if approval is denied, the reasons for such denial.
In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the developer. The Planning Board, with
the consent of the developer, may engage the services of outside consultants to aid them in
the review or evaluation of the proposed mobile home park. The cost of such consultant
services shall be borne by the developer. Refusal of the developer to consent shall be
grounds for denial of the mobile home park approval. In no instance shall the Planning
Board or its members, the municipality, or any of its officers or officials be held liable for
expenses or other costs which may be incurred by a developer in meeting the requirements
of this ordinance.
3. Upon approval of the plan, a majority of the Board members shall sign and date both
transparencies and shall write any conditions of approval on both transparencies. One
signed transparency shall be returned to the developer for filing with the Registry of
Deeds and one signed transparency shall be retained by the Planning Board.
4. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any mobile home park
plan after approval has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed, in writing on the
plan, unless the plan is first re-submitted to the Planning Board and the Board approves
the modifications. In the event that any such mobile home park plan is recorded without
complying with this requirement, the Planning Board shall file an amended plan at the
Registry of Deeds stating that the original plan is null and void and the reasons therefore.
946 Planning Board Update of Map
Upon recording of the Final Plat Plan in the Registry of Deeds, the Planning Board shalt
cause the mobile home park to be recorded on the master subdivision map in accordance
with Appendix E.
947 Developer’s Post Approval Responsibilities
1. The developer shall file the signed mobile home park plan at the Penobscot County
Registry of Deeds within 60 days of the date of approval. Any plan not filed within 60
days will be considered null and void. If the mobile home park plan is recorded after the
deadline, the Planning Board shall file an amended mobile home park plan stating that
the original is null and void.
948 Construction Permit
Upon receipt of evidence from the developer that the Final Plat Plan has been recorded at
the Registry of Deeds, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Mobile Home Park
Construction Permit. If substantial construction is not initiated within 2 years, the permit
expires and the applicant must reapply to the Code Enforcement Officer for another permit.
If construction is not completed within 5 years from the issuance of the permit under which
construction is started, no further construction may take place until the Planning Board has
13
again reviewed the project and granted approval for continuation. This continuation review
shall be based on the criteria in effect at the time of the review.
The requirements of this section may be waived, if appropriate, under the conditions
specified in sections 310 and 320.
APPENDIX A
General Requirements and Design Standards
Appendix A contains the general requirements and design standards referred to in Section 945
(1)(a) of this ordinance.
Before granting final approval of a mobile home park plan, the Planning Board shall determine
that the proposed mobile home park is in conformance with each of the following items.
10 Conformity with Other Laws and Regulations
The proposed mobile home park shall be in conformity with each of the following:
1. The Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Glenburn, as amended.
2. The latest amendments of all Zoning Ordinances and Building Codes of the Town of
Glenburn.
3. The latest revision of the Rules of the Department of Professional and Financial
Regulation, Rules and Regulations Relating to Mobile Home Parks.
4. The Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act of the State of Maine, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 435 et
seq., if applicable, and the Glenburn Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
5. The Natural Resources Protection Act of the State of Maine, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 480-A et
seq., if applicable.
6. The Site Location of Development Act of the State of Maine, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 481 et
seq., if applicable.
7. The Flood Hazard Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn, if applicable.
8. The Glenburn Road Ordinance, if applicable.
9. The Farmland Adjacency Act of the State of Maine, 7 M.R.S.A. Section 52 et seq., if
applicable.
10. Any other Federal, State and local codes, ordinances, laws and regulations known to be in
effect at the time of the mobile home park review.
11. The applicant shall have obtained or applied for all applicable permits from other
governmental offices including the Army Corps of Engineers, the Department of
Environmental Protection, and the Maine Manufactured Housing Board.
If the proposed mobile home park or certain aspects of it require the approval of other
Governmental agencies, then each review may be conducted simultaneously. However, each
review will be conducted independently, and the Planning Board may deny approval of the
14
mobile home park even though the other agency has granted an approval. An example of this
would be a large mobile home park requiring approval of the Board of Environmental
Protection under the Site Location Act, 38 M.R.S.A., Sec 482.
20 Lot Size, Layout, and Stand/Pad Construction
21. Lot layout should be planned so as to meet the following requirements.
1. Each individual mobile home lot shall be designed so that a mobile home located
thereon will be connected to a municipal sewer or a centralized private sewer system
and shall contain a minimum of (12,000) square feet, exclusive of roads.
2. Each individual mobile home lot in a mobile home park not connected to a municipal
sewer or a centralized private sewer system shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square
feet.
3. Each mobile home lot shall be at least 75 feet in width in its narrowest place and shall
be at least 100 feet in depth in its shortest depth.
4. The lot arrangement shall be such that in locating a mobile home in compliance with
the laws and ordinances of the Town of Glenburn and the State of Maine there will be
no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions.
5. Corner lots should be designed so as to provide a desirable mobile home site and to
allow for adequate structure setback from each street even if this requires that the
corner lots be larger than the interior lots.
6. The lot arrangement shall be such that there is adequate maneuvering room for placing
manufactured home on stands, considering the home sizes likely to be located on the
lots in the foreseeable future.
22. Setback Requirements
1. Park Boundaries
a. Any Mobile Home Park whose total generated wastewater is less than 2,000 gallons
per day shall have the outermost boundary of the developed portion of said park no
closer than 300 feet from the outermost boundary of the Shoreland Zone of the
Town of Glenburn and 300 feet from the actual boundary of any aquifer or recharge
area.
b. Any Mobile Home Park whose total generated wastewater is equal to or greater than
2,000 gallons per day shall have the outermost boundary of the developed portion
of said park no closer than 500 feet from the outermost boundary of the Shoreland
Zone of Glenburn and 500 feet from the actual boundary of any aquifer or recharge
area.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to establish that the proposed park is
the requisite distance from the outermost boundary of the Shoreland Zone or the
actual boundary of any aquifer or recharge area through the use of a qualified
professional geologist or soil scientist.
15
d. The location of any expansion of an existing mobile home park within the Town of
Glenburn shall require compliance with this section.
2. Mobile Homes
a. No mobile home shall be located less than 10 feet from the side and rear lot lines of
any individual mobile home lot and there shall be a minimum side and end
clearance of 22 feet between adjacent mobile homes.
b. No mobile home shall be located closer than 10 feet to the right-of-way line of a
public way or a privately owned road.
23. Mobile Home Stand/Pad
Each mobile home lot in a mobile home park shall be provided with a stand/pad of
suitable construction as to prevent heaving, shifting or settling due to frost action such as
standards contained in the State of Maine Manufactured Home Installation Standards.
30 Character of the Land
31 General Character
Land to be used for mobile home lots shall be of such character that it can be used safely
for location of a mobile home without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other
menace. Mobile home lots shall not contain land within the 100 year floodplain, land
containing floodplain soils, or land created by diverting a watercourse.
32 Open Space Provisions
The Planning Board may require that a proposed mobile home park design include a
landscape plan that will show the preservation of existing trees, the replacement of trees
and vegetation, graded contours, streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic, or
environmentally desirable areas.
33 Buffer Strip
The Planning Board may require a buffer strip, such as natural vegetation providing a
dense visual barrier at all times, when the proposed subdivision will be located adjacent to
a use where separation is desirable.
40 Drainage Improvements
41 Removal of spring and surface water
The developer may be required by the Planning Board to carry away by piping systems,
catch basins, or open ditches any spring, surface, or storm water that may exist either
previous to, or as a result of the development of the mobile home park. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual
unobstructed easements of appropriate width.
42 Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream
Culverts and other drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff
from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the mobile home park.
43 Responsibility for Down Stream Drainage
16
If requested by the Planning Board, the developer’s engineer shall study the effect of the
proposed mobile home park on the existing down-stream drainage facilities outside the area
of the mobile home park. Where it is anticipated that the additional run-off incident to the
development of the mobile home park will overload an existing down-stream drainage
facility during a storm with recurrence interval of twenty five years, the Planning Board
shall notify the Town Council of such potential condition. In such case the Planning Board
shall not approve the mobile home park until provision has been made by the developer for
the improvement of said condition.
44 Drainage Easements
The Planning Board may require that easements for drainage be turned over to the Town.
45 Basement Drainage
Basement Drainage- If any lots are being created to accommodate structures with
basements, the developer shall show that the basement can be drained by gravity to the
ground surface, or storm sewers, if they are required to be installed, or that the seasonal
high water table is below the lowest level of the basement.
50 Street Standards
51 Layout of streets
All streets in a mobile home park, whether intended to be dedicated to the town as town
ways or to be maintained as privately owned roads, shall be planned so as to meet the
following standards:
1. The proposed streets shall conform, as far as practical, to the adopted Comprehensive
Plan of the Town of Glenburn.
2. All streets in the mobile home park shall be designed so as to provide safe vehicular
travel and to discourage movement of through traffic.
3, Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to ninety degrees as possible. In no case
shall two streets intersect at an angle of less than sixty degrees.
4. A distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of offset
intersecting streets.
5. The Planning Board shall require that the layout of lots and roads in a mobile home park
be designed so as to minimize dangerous access points from the mobile home park onto
heavily traveled roads.
52 Design and Construction Standards
Any streets in a mobile home park planned with a right of way of 50 feet or more s
designed and constructed in accordance with the street standards in Section 52 of the
Glenburn Subdivision Ordinance. All other streets in a mobile home park shall be built
according to acceptable engineering standards and with a professional engineer’s seal. At
a minimum, they shall be designed and constructed to meet the following standards.
1. Streets
a. Minimum thickness of material after compaction*
17
Street Materials Minimum Requirements
Aggregate sub-base coarse 12” (1)
(Max sized stone 4”)
Crushed aggregate base course 3” (1)
*The 12” aggregate sub-base is in most instances not acceptable for municipal
streets. If your long range plan is to have your park streets accepted as public
ways, you should check with your municipality. Most municipalities require at
least 18” aggregate sub-base.
b. Before clearing has started on a park street, the center and side lines of the new street
shall be staked or flagged at fifty foot intervals.
c. Before grading is started, the entire park Street shall be cleared of all stumps, roots,
brush, and other objectionable material. All ledge, large boulders and tree stumps
shall be removed from the park street.
d. All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade of
the street. Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a depth of two feet below the
subgrade of the roadway. On soils which have been identified as not suitable for
roadways, the subsoil shall be removed from the street site to a depth of two feet
below the subgrade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel
aggregate sub-base below.
e. Except in a ledge cut, side slope shall be no steeper than a slope of three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, and shall be graded, loamed, limed, fertilized, and
seeded according to the specifications of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
When a cut results in exposed ledge, a side slope no steeper than four feet vertical to
one foot horizontal is permitted.
f. The aggregate sub-base course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free
from vegetation matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The
gradation of the part that passes a 3 inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following
grading requirements.
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
1/4 inch 25%-70%
No. 40 0%-30%
No. 200 0%-7%
g. Aggregate for the sub-base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding four inches in
any dimension.
h. The aggregate base course shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The
gradation of the part that passes a 3 inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following
grading requirements:
18
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
1/2 inch 45%-70%
1/4 inch 30%-55%
No. 40 0%-20%
No. 200 0%-5%
i. Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding two inches in any
dimension.
j. Pavement joints. Where pavement is used and joins an existing pavement, the
existing pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical
joint.
k. Pavements. If pavement is used, minimal standards for the base layer or pavement
shall be the MDOT specifications for plant mix grade B with an aggregate size no
more than 1 inch maximum. Minimal standards for the surface layer of pavement
shall meet the MDOT specifications for plant mix grade C with an aggregate size no
more than 314 inch maximum.
2. Intersections
a. Grades of all streets shall conform to the terrain so that cut and fill are minimized.
b. Where park streets intersect with public roads, sight distances, as measured along the
public way which traffic will be entering shall be based upon the posted speed limit and
conform to the following:
Posted Speed Limit (MPH) 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
Sight Distance (Feet) 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
c. Sight distances shall be measured from the driver’s seat of a vehicle standing on that
portion of the exit with the front of the vehicle at the stop line of park street, with the
height of the eye 3 1/2 feet, to the top of an object 4 112 feet above the pavement.
d. When necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions,
including ground excavation to achieve the required visibility.
3. General
a. Mobile home park streets shall be posted for 15 MPH speed limits.
b. All streets shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to provide for the removal
of storm water to prevent flooding on the pavement and erosion of adjacent surfaces.
The subgrade shall be shaped to prevent erosion, and any ditches shall extend below the
level of the gravel. There shall be at least a I % longitudinal grade to all streets and
ditches.
c. The maximum grade of any Street shall be 8% and shall not exceed 2% within 75 feet
of any intersection.
19
d. There shall be adequate provision for access by fire trucks and other safety vehicles
including turn-arounds for fire trucks if deemed necessary by the Glenburn Fire Chief.
All mobile home rights of way street plans shall be submitted for comment to the
Glenburn Fire Chief prior to approval by the Planning Board.
e. All mobile home park streets shall be at least 23 feet in width.
53 Utilities in Streets
Whenever possible, underground utilities shall be placed behind the homes if paving of
streets is contemplated. If paving is contemplated, and if underground utilities are planned in
any right of way, they shall be installed in the right of way outside of the area of proposed
paving (except for driveway paving) or shall be installed prior to paving, along with
underground service connections to the property line of each lot within the mobile home
park, to avoid cuts in the pavement.
54 Illumination of Park Streets
Mobile home park streets and sidewalks shall be illuminated to provide for safe vehicular and
pedestrian movement during dark hours.
55 Off Street Parking
1. Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall be furnished with space for off-street
parking for two (2) automobiles configured in such a way that when vehicles are parked,
no portion of the vehicle shall extend into the street.
2. If off-street parking is not provided on each lot it shall be provided at a distance of not
more than two hundred (200) feet from the mobile home it intends to serve.
3. Two hundred square feet shall be considered the minimum area of one off-street parking
space.
56 Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be provided and maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated and is not separated from automobile traffic.
60 Off-site Improvements
Private roads, public easements, and discontinued Town and County ways which will serve as
a major access to the proposed mobile home park shall be widened and improved by the
developer to the standards required by the Glenburn Subdivision Ordinance from the parcel to
be developed to an existing Town way or other public highway. This requirement does not
include private roads created by the mobile home park developer as an access road to the
mobile home park to the extent they fall within the parcel to be developed. Such
improvements, including right of way acquisitions, shall be completed at the developer’s
expense and shall be subject to the same performance guarantees as are other improvements.
70 Utilities
71 Water Supply
1. An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water shall be provided in each
mobile home park.
20
2. Where a public supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality, and pressure is
available, connection shall be made thereto and its supply used exclusively.
3. When a public water supply is not available, a private water supply shall be developed
and used subject to approval by the local plumbing inspector and the Department of
Human Services.
4. The water supply shall be capable of delivering a minimum of 200 gallons per day to
each mobile home with a minimum of 30 pounds per square inch pressure at all times.
5. All elements of the water system shall be designed and constructed in a manner that
underground or surface contamination shall not reach the water supply.
6. All elements of the water system shall be designed and constructed to prevent freezing
and heaving.
72 Sewage Disposal
1. All water carried sewage shall be disposed of by means of one of the following or a
combination thereof:
a. Any mobile home park located within 500 feet of an existing public sewer shall
connect to that existing public sewer if the municipal system has the capacity to accept
the volume of sewage to be produced by the mobile home park.
b. Each mobile home lot in a mobile home park shall be served by a centralized private
sewer system approved by the Department of Human Services. If this option is used,
final approval of the Mobile Home Park Final Plan shall not be given until an alternate
system has been sited and designed.
c. Each mobile home lot in a mobile home park shall be served by an individual
subsurface sewage system meeting the requirements of the State Plumbing Code. If
this option is used, then on any lot which contains less than 1 acre or has road frontage
of less than 150 feet, the size of the disposal bed shall be increased by at least 10%
over the minimum size required by the State Plumbing Code.
d. All parts of all subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall be set back at least 20’
from any exterior boundary line of the park.
2. All subsurface waste water disposal systems shall be constructed in the locations shown
on the Mobile Home Park Final Plan.
73 Electrical Distribution System
Every mobile home park and each lot within a mobile home park shall be served by an
electrical wiring system which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with all
applicable State of Maine laws and local codes and regulations governing such systems. The
electrical supply to each mobile home shall have a power shut off. The shut off shall be
marked with the lot number. Both the shut off and the lot number shall be clearly visible
from the road. The shut off and access to it from the road shall at all times be kept free from
obstructions so as to allow easy access by emergency services personnel.
74 Supply and Storage
21
1. Natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas systems shall comply with all applicable codes
and regulations. Installation of systems shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Glenburn.
2. All fuel oil supply systems shall be constructed and installed in accordance with all
applicable codes and regulations. Installation of the system shall be subject to inspection
and approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
3. All above ground fuel storage containers shall be screened in such a way that they are not
visible from outside the lot on which they are installed.
80 Outside Services
81 Refuse Disposal
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
accident or fire hazards, or air pollution.
82 Fire Protection and Safety
1. The mobile home park shall be subject to any and all existing and future state and local
fire prevention regulations.
2. Each lot shall be legibly marked for identification in accordance with the Town of
Glenburn’s road numbering system, and shall be easily accessible to emergency
vehicles (permitting fire apparatus to approach within 100 feet).
3. An easily accessible supply of water for use by the Fire Department shall be provided
in all mobile home parks planned or developed for 5 lots or more. It shall be provided
at the developer’s expense and shall be subject to the same performance guarantees as
are other improvements. The park operator shall not allow any mobile homes to be
brought into the park and the Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue an occupancy
certificate under the Glenburn Building Code until such time as the fire protection
water supply is in place and certified as operational by the Glenburn Fire Department.
The water supply requirement may be met by one of the following:
a. Providing storage for a minimum of 1,000 gallons of water at each of as many
locations as are required to insure that no mobile home lot is more than 750 feet,
road distance, from at least one such water supply. This requirement may be met by
a holding tank, a low boy tank, or other suitable storage container modified to meet
Fire Department specifications. Each container shall be installed in such a manner
that it will not freeze under the most severe weather conditions.
b. Installing a dry hydrant at a pond, stream, or other reliable water source located
within the park or located outside the park not more than 1,000 feet from an
entrance or exit to the park. If the source of water is outside of the park, any
necessary easements will be acquired by the developer. The dry hydrant must be
installed in accordance with Fire Department specifications. It will have a minimum
8 inch main laid from the water source to the hydrant. The hydrant must be certified
by a Professional Engineer as meeting ISO requirements.
22
c. Providing another type of water supply system approved by the Glenburn Fire
Chief.
90 Relationship of Mobile Home Park to Community Services
The proposed mobile home park shall be reviewed by the Board with respect to its effect upon
existing services and facilities. This review shall include but not be limited to:
1. Schools, including transportation.
2. Road maintenance and snow removal.
3. Vehicle traffic flow patterns.
4. Police and fire protection.
5. Solid Waste disposal.
6. Septic sludge disposal.
7. Recreational facilities.
Upon final approval of the Mobile Home Park application, the Planning Board shall notify the
Town Council, in writing, of the projected impact of the mobile home park upon existing
services and facilities. The Planning Board shall also notify the School Committee, in writing,
of the proposed impact of the mobile home park on the schools, including transportation.
APPENDIX B
Improvement Guarantees
10 Improvement Guarantees Required
At the time of submission of a Final Plan, the developer shall provide the Town with
improvement guarantees if roads are to be constructed to Town road standards, if fire safety or
drainage improvements are planned, or if other similar improvements are planned which the
Planning Board, by vote, determines require an improvement guarantee. Such improvement
guarantees shall be in the form of one or more of the guarantee options listed in Section 80 of
this appendix in amounts and for durations defined in Section 40 of this appendix.
20 Procedure
The developer shall file an improvement guarantee with the Planning Board as part of the
Final Plan submission. The Planning Board, with the advice of the Town Council, shall
determine whether the form, amount and duration of the improvement guarantee are
sufficient. The Planning Board shall not grant final approval of the mobile home park until it
has determined that a sufficient improvement guarantee has been filed. The burden of
providing improvement guarantees in compliance with this ordinance shall at all times remain
with the developer.
30 Time Limits
31 Completion Deadline
23
All required improvements within a mobile home park shall be completed within 2 years
of the date of final mobile home park approval,
32 Extension
The Town Council may extend the completion deadline for two additional years at one
year increments only where the developer presents substantial reason for doing so. No
request for extension shall be considered until at least 6 months prior to the original or
extended completion deadline. Before extending the initial deadline or the initial
extension, the Council shall require that the improvement guarantee be extended in
duration to cover the extended period of time plus an additional 8 month period. Before
extending the initial deadline, or the initial extension, the Council shall review the form
and amount of the improvement guarantee to make certain it remains adequate and shall
require any necessary adjustments.
33 Dead ends
The developer may delay the construction of the dead end portion of any road for up to 5
years from the date of approval of the Mobile Home Final Plan provided that the
developer files a separate improvement guarantee in the amount of 150% of the cost of
construction of the dead end, such cost being certified by a registered engineer. In the
interim time, the developer shall provide and maintain a temporary turnaround suitable
for turning emergency vehicles.
40 Amount and Duration of Improvement Guarantee
41 Amount
The developer shall submit a report prepared by a registered Professional Engineer stating
the estimated cost of completion of all improvements for which performance guarantees
are required. These improvements shall include the construction of new streets, upgrading
existing streets, construction of storm drainage systems and other planned improvements.
The amount of the improvement guarantee shall be 125% of the estimated cost of
completion or upgrading.
42 Duration
The duration of the performance guarantee shall be for a period of at least 2 years and 8
months. In the event an extension is granted, the Council shall require the duration of the
performance guarantee to be extended for at least 8 months beyond the termination of the
new time limit.
43 Reduction of Guarantee
No improvement guarantee shall be reduced in value until all required improvements are
satisfactorily completed.
50 Inspection and Certification
51 During construction of the required improvements, the Road Commissioner shall cause
regular inspections to be conducted to insure that the construction complies with
specifications. The developer shall cooperate with the Road Commissioner as these
inspections are carried out.
24
52 Upon completion of the improvements, the developer shall file the following with the road
commissioner.
1. A sworn certification from the developer’s registered professional engineer that all
required improvements are completed in strict compliance with all applicable
construction standards and the approved mobile home park plan, and that the engineer
knows of no defects from any cause, in the improvements.
2. A sworn statement from the developer that the improvements are free and clear of any
encumbrance or lien; and that the developer knows of no defects from any cause, in the
improvements.
53 Upon completion of the improvements and upon receipt of the materials listed in Section
52 above, the Road Commissioner shall report on same to the Town Council within 15
days of receipt of such materials.
54 If the Town Council determines that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed,
they shall so certify and shall notify the developer and the Planning Board in writing. If
the Town Council determines that the improvements have not been satisfactorily
completed, they shall list the defects and shall so notify the developer and the Planning
Board. If the deadline for completion has not passed, the developer may make the required
improvements and resubmit the documentation required in Section 52.
60 Incomplete or Unsatisfactory Work
If the Town Council determines that the required improvements have not been satisfactorily
completed according to the accepted mobile home park plan within the agreed upon time, they
shall inform the developer in writing of the Town’s intent to exercise its rights against the
improvement guarantee unless the developer meets all requirements within 30 days. At the
expiration of the 30 days, the Council shall exercise any and all such rights. If the
Performance Bond, Letter of Credit, or Cash Escrow options were chosen, the Council shall
then cause the incomplete or unsatisfactory work to be completed and to be paid for from the
improvement guarantee assets. Any guarantee assets unused in the completion of the
unsatisfactory or incomplete work shall be returned to the developer. If the Conditional
Agreement option was chosen, the Council shall then cause the Planning Board to prepare,
sign, and record in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds an amended mobile home park
plan stating that the original plan is null and void.
70 Release of Guarantee
As soon as the Town Council has certified that the improvements are satisfactorily completed
the Council shall release the previously required improvement guarantee.
80 Improvement Guarantee Options
The improvement guarantee options referenced in Section 10 of this appendix are:
81 Performance Bond
A performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State
of Maine. The bond shall be payable to the Town of Glenburn.
82 Letter of Credit
25
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution satisfactory to the
Planning Board and in a form satisfactory to the Board. The letter of credit shall be
deposited with the Town Council and shall certify the following:
1. That the creditor does guarantee funds in the amount and for the duration of time set
forth in Section 40 of this appendix; and
2. That, in case of failure on the part of the developer to satisfactorily complete the
specified improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the
Town of Glenburn immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary
to finance the proper completion of the required improvements, up to the credit limit
stated in the letter.
83 Cash Escrow
A cash escrow account. The developer shall submit to the Planning Board:
1. Evidence that cash has been deposited in an escrow account at a bank or other reputable
institution acceptable to the Planning Board.
2. An escrow agreement acceptable to the Planning Board. The agreement shall provide
that in case of failure on the part of the developer to satisfactorily complete the
specified improvements within the required time period, the escrow agent shall pay to
the Town of Glenburn immediately, and without further action, such funds as are
necessary to finance the proper completion of the required improvements, up to the
amount of the escrow account.
84 Conditional Agreement
Under this improvement guarantee option, the developer shall enter into a conditional
agreement with the municipality, endorsed in writing on the Final Plat Plan. The
conditional agreement shall provide that the Planning Board may approve the Final Plan on
the condition that no lot in the mobile home park may be rented and no permit shall be
issued for construction or placement of any structure on any lot on any street in the mobile
home park until it shall have been certified, in the manner set forth in Section 50 of this
appendix, that all improvements have been satisfactorily completed within the agreed upon
time.
APPENDIX C
Preliminary Plan Submissions
Appendix C contains a complete listing of the materials required by Section 932(2) of this
ordinance.
10 Submissions
Five copies of the Preliminary mobile home park Plat Plan and supporting data shall be
submitted. They may be either printed or reproduced on paper. The Preliminary Plat Plan shall
not be less than 17” x 11” and not more than 48” x 36” and shall be drawn to a scale not
26
greater than one inch equals 100 feet and not less than one inch equals 400 feet. The
Preliminary Nat Plan and supporting data shall include the following information:
Col. (A). An “X” in Column (A) indicates that the information must eventually be shown on
the Final Plat Plan.
Col. (B). An “X” in column (B) indicates that the information must be shown on the
Preliminary Plat Plan.
Col (C) An “X” in column (C) indicates written supporting data which must be submitted with
the Preliminary Plat Plan.
11 Information about the Applicant
(A) (B) (C)
Final Prelim Written
Plan Plan Plan
X X X 1. Name of owner of record of the parcel to be developed as a mobile home park.
X X X 2. Maine of applicant (If other than owner).
X 3.Statement that corporation is licensed to do business in Maine and a copy of the
Secretary of State’s Registration if the applicant is a corporation.
X 4. Name of applicant’s authorized representative, if any.
X X X 5. Name, address, and number of registered professional engineer or land
surveyor who prepared the plan.
X 6. Address to which all correspondence from the Planning Board should be sent.
X 7. Statement of the interest the applicant has in the parcel to be developed as a
mobile home park (option, land purchase contract, record ownership, etc).
X 8. Statement of any interest which the applicant has in any parcel abutting the
parcel to be subdivided.
X 9. Statement of whether or not the preliminary plan covers the entire contiguous
holdings of the applicant
12. Information on Parcel to be developed
(A) (B) (C)
Final Prelim Written
Plan Plan Plan
1. Property description.
X (a) Deed description.
X X X (b) Volume and Page from Registry of Deeds.
X X (c) Tax map and lot numbers from Glenburn Assessor
27
X (d) All known existing easements and covenants.
X 2. Map survey of the entire tract to be developed, certified by a Registered Land
Surveyor, tied to established reference points, and stating the number of acres in
the parcel.
X X 3. Map survey of the portion of the tract to be developed, certified by a
registered land surveyor, tied to established reference points, and stating the
number of acres occupied by lots, roads, and other areas.
X X 4. A soils report prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator, identifying soil
types and location of soil test areas. Evidence of soil suitability according to the
Maine Plumbing Code shall be presented if subsurface sewage disposal is
proposed. There shall be at least one suitable soil test per sewage disposal unit if
subsurface sewage disposal is proposed. The location of the suitable soil tests
shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat Plan.
X X 5. Names of all property owners abutting the parcel to be developed and on the
opposite side of the road from the parcel to be developed.
X X 6. Current zoning of the parcel and any zoning district boundaries affecting the
mobile home park.
13. Information on mobile home park
(A) (B) (C)
Final Prelim Written
Plan Plan Data
X X X 1. Proposed name of mobile home park and name of municipality.
X X X 2. Number of lots and lot sizes.
X X 3. Date, north point, graphic map scale.
X X 4. The location, bearing, and length of every lot line. All lots shall be numbered
sequentially beginning with 1. Even numbered lots shall be on one side of any
street, odd numbers on the other side.
X 5. Location of temporary markers adequate to enable the Board to locate
readily and appraise the basic layout in the field.
X X X 6. Location of all parcels to be dedicated to public use, the conditions of such
dedication, and the location of all natural features or site elements to be
preserved.
X X 7. Plans or lighting, utility placement, buffer strips, and natural features to be
retained.
28
X X 8. A site location map, showing the relation of the proposed mobile home
park appropriate for the area shown.
X 9. Location and size of any existing culverts and drains on the property.
X X 10. Location, suggested names, and widths of existing and proposed
streets, highways, easements, parks, and other open spaces.
X 11. Contour lines at intervals of not more than 10 feet unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board Board. If the Planning Board requests contour
lines at intervals of less than 10 feet on all or part of the parcel to be
subdivided, such request shall state the specific purposes for which such detail
is needed.
X 12. Storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size of
proposed ditches, culverts, storm sewers and means of water disposal.
X X X 13 .Location of and details concerning fire protection water supply facilities.
X 14. If the application covers only a part of the developer’s entire holding, a map
of the entire tract, drawn at a scale of one inch equals not more than 500 feet,
showing an outline of area to be developed with its proposed streets and an
indication of the probable future street system in the remaining portion of the
tract. The part of the developer’s holding submitted shall be considered in light
of the entire holding.
X X X 15. If this application is a revision or an amendment to an existing mobile home
park plan, a statement to that effect including the name of the prior mobile
home park and its recording numbers at the Registry of Deeds.
APPENDIX D
Final Plan Submissions
Appendix D is a complete listing of the materials required by Section 942(5) of this ordinance.
10 Final Plan Submissions
The Final Plan shall Consist of the Final Plat Plan and five copies of all other items
(including maps, drawings, and written information) necessary to complete the submission.
The Final Plat Plan shall consist of two original transparencies of one or more maps or
drawings in a size not less than 17” x 11” and not greater than 48” x 36” drawn to a scale not
greater than 1 inch equals 100 feet and not less than 1 inch equals 400 feet, and oriented so
the north direction is the same on all sheets. Shown on the Final Nat Plan shall be all
29
applicable items marked “X” in Column A of Appendix C and in Column A of Appendix D
of this ordinance.
The other items necessary to complete the submission shall include all items shown in
Column C of Appendix C and all items in Column B of Appendix D of this ordinance.
11. Information to be Submitted
Col. (A). An “X” in Column A indicates information which must be shown on the Final
Plat Plan.
Col. (B). An “X in Column B indicates written information which must accompany the
plan.
(A) (B)
Final Written
Plan Data
X a. Registered Land Surveyor or Engineer The name, registration number,
seal, and signature of the land surveyor and/or engineer who prepared the
plan.
X X b. Street Plan View The names and lines, lengths of all straight lines, the
deflection of angles, radii, length of curves, and central angles of all
curves, and tangent distances and bearings. The name, registration
number, seal and signature of the land surveyor and/or engineer who
prepared the road plans shall be on all sheets of the Street Plan View, the
Street Profiles, and the Street Cross Sections.
X c. Street Profiles Profiles of centerlines of proposed new streets. The profile
shall show the grade of the existing ground and the final grade of
completed pavement. The horizontal scale shall be one inch equals 50 feet
and the vertical scale shall be one inch equals 5 feet unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board.
X d. Street Cross Sections Cross sections at 50 foot horizontal intervals of
proposed new streets plotted at a scale of one inch equals 5 feet vertical
and one inch equals 10 feet horizontal.
X e. A completed form HHE-200 prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator
shall be submitted for each proposed subsurface wastewater disposal
sytem. The location of each system shall be shown on the Final Plan.
X f. Permanent Reference Monuments The location of permanent monuments
and/or pins set at all lot corners.
X g. Improvement Guarantee Where applicable, an improvement guarantee to
30
secure completion of all public improvements required by the Planning
Board, and written evidence that the Town Council is satisfied with the
legal sufficiency of such guarantee.
X h. Conditional Agreement If the conditional agreement performance
guarantee option was chosen, the statement, “No lot in the mobile home
park may be rented and no permit may be issued for construction of any
structure on any lot on any street in the mobile home park until it has been
certified by the Town Council that all required improvements, including
road construction, have been satisfactorily completed.”
X i. Hydrological Study For all major mobile home parks in which any lot
contains less than one acre or has road frontage of less than fifty feet,
certification by a Registered Civil Engineer or a Registered Geologist that
the proposed mobile home park, alone or in conjunction with other existing
activities, will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of ground water.
X j. Recording Deadline The statement “this mobile home park plan will
become null and void if not recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of
Deeds within 60 days of final approval.”
X k. Approval Space Suitable space to record on the approved plan the date and
conditions of approval, if any. This space shall be similar to the following
example:
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT AFTER REVIEWING THE MOBILE HOME PARK SHOWN
BY THIS PLAN AND CONSIDERING EACH OF THE CRITERIA SET FORTH IN THE
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF GLENBURN, THE
UNDERSIGNED HAVING MADE FINDINGS OF FACT ESTABLISHING THAT THE
PROPOSED MOBILE HOME PARK MEETS ALL OF THE CRITERIA SET FORTH
THEREIN, AND THEREFORE THE MOBILE HOME PARK IS APPROVED.
GLENBURN PLANNING BOARD:
Date: __________________________________________
Conditions:____________________
APPENDIX E
Master Subdivision Map
Upon submission of a preliminary plan, the Planning Board will cause the proposed mobile
home park to be temporarily marked on the master subdivision map. Included in this temporary
drawing will be an outline of the proposed mobile home park together with its street system and
31
an indication of the probable street system of the remaining portion of the developer’s entire
holding.
Upon recording a final mobile home park plan in the Registry of Deeds, the Planning Board will
cause that mobile home park to be permanently drawn on the master subdivision map.
APPENDIX F
Qperation and Licensing of Mobile Home Parks
This appendix contains the regulations pertaining to the Mobile Home Park Operating License
referenced in Section 223 of this ordinance.
10 Operation
11. All mobile home parks and mobile home park expansions constructed, developed, or
established after the effective date of this ordinance and approved under the terms of this
ordinance shall be operated thereafter in accordance with the criteria in Appendices A
and F of this ordinance.
12. All mobile home parks and mobile home park expansions constructed, developed, or
established before the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with applicable
Glenburn ordinances and with State law, including the Rules and Regulations Relating
to Mobile Home parks published by the Department of Professional and Financial
Regulation. However, such pre-existing parks and expansions need not comply with any
portion of this Mobile Home Park Ordinance except for those provisions contained in
Appendix F.
13. Mobile home park owners shall be responsible for notifying the Code Enforcement
Officer of any connections or disconnections of utilities to each mobile home. The
sewage hookup shall not be made until the Local Plumbing Inspector has issued a
hookup permit.
14. Accessory structures for which a building permit is required by the Glenburn Building
Code Ordinance shall not be established upon a mobile home lot without a building
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
15. Prior to placing a mobile home in any mobile home park in the Town of Glenburn, the
prospective tenant shall obtain a Building Permit from the Code Enforcement Officer
and a Plumbing Permit from the Local Plumbing Inspector. A mobile home shall not be
occupied for more than 96 hours without the mobile home owner obtaining a Certificate
of Occupancy from the Code Enforcement Officer.
16. Mobile home park owners shall maintain a register containing the names and lot
numbers of mobile home park occupants. The register shall be available for inspection
by state and local authorities upon request during normal business hours or by
appointment.
17. Mobile home park owners shall notify the Glenburn Code Enforcement Officer and/or
Local Plumbing Inspector prior to allowing any mobile home to be brought into their
mobile home park. A minimum fine of $100.00 per day or the combined costs of the
32
Building Permit and the Plumbing Permit, whichever is greater, shall be imposed on all
mobile home park owners who allow the installment of a mobile home within their park
without the tenant’s copies of the paid Building Permit and the paid Plumbing Permit
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Local Plumbing Inspector.
18. Mobile home park owners shall require all individual mobile homes located in the park
to be equipped with skirting or other type of enclosure.
19. Mobile home park owners shall require all mobile homes located in the park to be
anchored in accordance with the manufacturer’s anchoring standards or State of Maine
standards.
20 Licensing
21. It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile home park, including a nonconforming mobile
home park, within the boundaries of the Town of Glenburn without first obtaining a
license from the Glenburn Code Enforcement Officer. Parks existing as of the date of
enactment of this ordinance shall be licensed for the number of existing mobile home
sites within the park which are available for lease.
22. Mobile home park licenses shall be issued as of July 1 each year and shall remain in
effect until June 30 the following year. Licenses issued following July 1 of any year
shall remain in effect to June 30 the following year. The license fee for each year or part
of a year is $50.00*.
23. Mobile home park operating licenses shall be issued to mobile home parks constructed
or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance only upon a showing that the park
as constructed or as expanded, and as operated, complies with all provisions of this
ordinance. Licenses shall be issued to mobile home parks constructed or expanded
before the effective date of this ordinance upon a showing that the park as operated
complies with all of the relevant criteria in Appendix F of this ordinance and can be
operated without detriment to the health and safety of park residents and the general
public.
24. Applications for a mobile home park operator’s license shall be submitted in writing to
the Code Enforcement Officer by May I of each year. Upon receipt of the application
and the license fee, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises,
shall notify abutting property owners and park residents, shall notify the Town Council,
and shall consult with the Fire Chief, the Health Officer, the Plumbing Inspector, and the
Assessor before granting or denying a permit.
25. Appeals from the granting or denying of any license may be made to the Glenburn
Board of Appeals within 30 days of the date of decision by any interested party
including the park owners or operator, abutters, residents of the park, or any other
person who claims a particular injury from the construction or operation of the park.
26. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
Appendix F of this ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that a license
cannot be issued according to the criteria in Section 23 above, the nature of the problem
and the action necessary to correct it shall be put in writing and forwarded to the
applicant. Conditional licenses may be issued for reasonable time periods sufficient to
33
correct the problems noted. Licenses may be revoked, or the other enforcement actions
in this Section may be taken, if violations of Appendix F, and Appendix A where
applicable, occur during the term of a license.
27. When the action(s) in Section 26 do not result in the correction of the problems noted,
and the license lapses, the municipal officers or their duly authorized representative,
upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are authorized to institute legal
proceedings seeking injunctions and/or the imposition of fines in accordance with Title
30-A M.R.S.A. Sec. 4506. The municipal officers or their duly authorized representative
are hereby authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of Appendix F, or Appendix A where applicable, and recovering
tines without court action.
28. In any and all enforcement action under this Appendix F, municipal officials shall take
the residency rights of park residents into account and shall close all or any portion of a
mobile home park to residents only as a last resort.
*The Town of Glenburn Fees Ordinance and Fee Schedule supersedes any and all fees quoted
in this ordinance.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
Adopted: 12/08/94; Effective Date: 01/08/95
01/06/11: Section 932-Application and Section 942-Application-Asterisk added to reflect that
the Town of Glenburn Fees Ordinance supersedes any and all fees quoted in this
ordinance.
02/26/15 Section 20-Licensing (22)-Asterisk added to reflect that the Town of Glenburn Fees
Ordinance and Fee Schedule supersedes any and all fees quoted in this ordinance.
11/17/16, effective 12/17/16 Appendix F #15, #17, and #22.
1
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that the following ordinance be enacted:
Glenburn Road Ordinance
1. Statement of Purpose
Whereas, one of the responsibilities of the Town of Glenburn is the maintenance of
satisfactory roadways for travel and commerce; and the Town is growing, and that growth
over the last several years has included new roads built by private developers and then
dedicated to and accepted by the Town as town ways; and it is expected that this activity will
continue in the future; the Town shall utilize this ordinance as guidance for the design and
construction of new private or public roadways and where appropriate for the upgrade of
existing roadways.
2. Enacting Clause
Therefore, to promote and maintain the quality of roads in the Town of Glenburn, the Town of
Glenburn hereby ordains the following, to be known as the "Glenburn Road Ordinance", to
set specifications for the construction of all roads accepted as town ways or public easements and
to ensure their use in said construction.
3. Purpose
A. The purpose of this Ordinance is to ensure that public right -of-way improvements
implemented in the town provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, including handicap access; provide for minimum long-term maintenance costs of
public improvements; protect the environment, the public, and abutting landowners by
providing the necessary controls for stormwater runoff, soil erosion and siltation, and
groundwater; and protect the public health and safety.
B. These standards provide for flexibility, with the intent of having the design fit into the
surroundings, and to not waste the town's valuable natural resources.
C. Any proposed road shall provide for safe access to and from public and private roads.
Safe access shall be assured by providing an adequate number and location of access
points with respect to sight distances, intersections, schools and other traffic generators.
D. Curb cuts shall be limited to the absolute minimum number and widths necessary for
safe entering and exiting. The proposed road shall not have an unreasonable adverse
impact on the town road system and shall assure safe interior circulation within any
development served by the road by separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
providing adequate parking and loading areas.
E. Provisions shall be made for providing and maintaining convenient and safe emergency
vehicle access to all buildings and structures at all times.
F. The Board shall not approve any road unless it is designed in accordance with the
2
specifications contained in this Ordinance.
G. The intent of this Ordinance is to implement Comprehensive Plan Policies —Transportation,
Policy #5: "Ensure that new roads are built to Town Standards."
4. Town Roads
A. There shall be three types of roads: Town Ways, Private Roads and Public Easements, as
defined by Title 23 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Section 3021 and the
components of which are defined herein.
B. Town Ways
1. All roads offered or dedicated to the Town of Glenburn as Town Ways shall be
designed and constructed according to the specifications set forth in this Ordinance.
2. If, due to local conditions, it is found necessary, advantageous and prudent to vary from
these specifications, prior approval must be obtained from the Road Commissioner,
Planning Board, and Town Council.
C. Public Easements
1. The following roads, as laid out and described by the Penobscot County Roads and
Mapping Department in 1979, 1980, and 1983 and, Warren Cookson Subdivision Plan
7/23/75 revised 8/23/78 and 12/15/78 (French's Point Road) are declared to be Public
Easements in the Town of Glenburn due to a history of town continuous maintenance
and repair for over 20 years, under a claim of rights, openly and visibly, with the
acquiescence of all individuals owning land along the roads or having any claim of
rights in the roads. Roads ordered, adjudged, & decreed to be Public easements by
Penobscot County Superior Court on 03 April 1984 in Civil Action Docket No. 83-520.
ROAD MILEAGE WIDTH AND LIMITS
French’s Point .37 3 rod to turn around
Lucky’s Landing .79 2 rod includes loop
Sandy Beach .78 2 rod includes loop
Lakeside Landing .58 2 rod to Lake Road
Cedar Breeze South .73 2 rod to Lake Road
Cedar Breeze Center .80 2 rod to Lake Road
Cedar Breeze North .93 2 rod to Lake Road
Beechwood Avenue .92 2 rod between Hudson /Old Town line
Lakeside Lane _.21 2 rod between Old Town/Beechwood Ave.
Total Miles 6.11
2. The Town of Glenburn shall provide for the maintenance and repair of the above
named roads including restorative and preventive maintenance, grading, laying of
gravel, crowning of road surfaces, ditching and culverting, winter plowing, and
3
rebuilding in emergency situations or when road surfaces deteriorate. The nature and
scope of the maintenance and repair shall be determined by the Town Council in
consultation with the road commissioner. Since the above named roads are public
easements, not town ways, the Town is not obligated to maintain the same to the level
required for town ways under 23 M.R.S.A.§ 3651, and the Town is not liable for any
damages arising from the use of any road that is a public easement. The public
easements will be maintained as gravel roads except that all or a portion of said public
easements may be paved by the Town upon a determination by the road commissioner
and the Town Council that there is a sufficient base to support paving and upon a
determination that funds for such purpose have been properly appropriated. No areas in
addition to those described above shall be maintained under this section of the
ordinance.
D. Definition of terms:
1. ARTERIAL STREET — A major thoroughfare which serves as a major traffic way
for travel between and through the municipality.
2. BASE — that portion of the roadway constructed of special material on the subbase and
supporting the surface or pavement.
3. BACKFILL — the refilling with suitable material of all spaces excavated
and not occupied by drainage structures, drainage systems and other
permanent structures up to the elevation of the surrounding ground.
4. BOARD — The Glenburn Planning Board
5. BORROW — approved materials obtained from beyond the cut slopes for completing
embankments and for other purposes necessary to complete the grading, when
sufficient quantities of suitable materials are not available from roadway or structural
excavation.
6. BRIDGES — structures having a clear span of ten (10) feet or more.
7. COLLECTOR STREET — A street with average daily traffic of 400 vehicles per day
or greater, or streets which serve as feeders to arterial streets, and collectors of traffic
from minor streets.
8. CULVERTS — all structures not defined as bridges which provide an opening under
the roadway.
9. DRAINAGE — the system of pipes, drainage ways, ditches and structures by which
surface or sub-surface waters are collected and conducted from the roadway area.
10. EMBANKMENT — that part of the roadway outside the limits of travel surface and
shoulders.
4
11. INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL STREET — A street servicing industrial or commercial
uses.
12. MATERIALS — any substance specified for use in the construction of the project,
13. MINOR STREET — All public roads and streets not classified as arterials or collectors
will have a minor classification, Minor roads and streets are characterized by many points
of direct access to adjacent properties and have a relatively minor role in
accommodating mobility. Speeds and traffic volumes are usually low.
14. PRIVATE ROAD — A road with two or more dwellings that is constructed and maintained
without public funds, and as such does not provide for public access.
15. PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A duly qualified professional engineer licensed in the
State of Maine.
16. PUBLIC EASEMENT — Those privately constructed roads that have been. are, and/or will
be maintained by the Town as listed in the Ordinance, and as such provide public access.
17. PUBLIC WAY — Any town way, state highway, or state aid highway under Maine
law.
18. REFERENCE STAKES or GRADE STAKES — wooden stakes, generally set beyond
the lines of improvement on which the reference marks are placed, from which lines
and grades may be obtained.
19. RIGHT OF WAY — all lands or other property interest provided or acquired for
the development and operation of a public roadway.
20. ROAD — a route consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil. gravel, asphalt, or
other surfacing material constructed for or created by the passage of motorized
vehicles that may be lawfully operated on public ways. The term "road" shall include
the term "street."
21. ROADBED — that portion of the roadway between the outside edges of the finished
shoulders.
22. ROADSIDE — a general term denoting that area adjoining the outer edge of the
finished shoulders.
23. ROADWAY — that portion of the right of way within the limit of construction.
24. ROD — 16.5 feet (e.g. 2 rods =33')
25. SHOULDERS — that parts of the roadway lying immediately outside the traveled way.
26. SUBBASE — that portion of the roadway between the subgrade and base.
5
27. SUBGRADE — that portion of the roadway upon which the subbase and shoulders are
constructed.
28. SURFACING — that portion of the roadway constructed on the base course to
facilitate fine grading and produce good rideability.
29. SURFACE TREATMENT — any bituminous treatment applied or placed on the
surfacing course prior to paving.
30. TOWN WAY — An area or strip of land designated and held by the Town of Glenburn
for the passage and use of the general public by motor vehicle.
5. Submittal Requirements
A. Applicants shall submit to the Board, as part of the engineered plan, detailed construction
drawings showing a plan view, profile, and typical cross-section of the proposed streets and
the location of existing streets within 300 feet of a proposed intersection. The plan view
shall be a scale of one inch equals fifty feet. Plan view sheet shall be labeled with
stations at 50' intervals. The vertical scale of the profile shall be one inch equals five
feet. The plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, and shall be submitted as
required by any applicable ordinance of the Town. In the event that the proposed road is
not part of a development otherwise requiring approval from the Board, the Plan shall be
submitted to the Road Commissioner. In addition, a Site Plan at the scale of 1"---200' shall
be submitted to the Tax Assessor to be used in keeping the Tax Maps up to date.
B. The plans shall include the following information:
1. Date, scale, and indicate north using either magnetic or true north plus at least two
reference points of the Maine State Plane Coordinate System.
2. Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
3. Roadway and right of way limits including edge of pavement, edge of shoulder,
sidewalks, and curbs.
4. Kind, size, location, material, profile and cross-section of all existing and proposed drainage
structures and their location with respect to the existing natural waterways and proposed
drainage ways.
5. Complete curve data shall be indicated for all horizontal and vertical curves.
6. Turning radii at all intersections.
7. Centerline gradients.
8. Size, type, and locations of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities, to
include but not be limited to water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting, and cable television.
6
6. Design Standards
A. These minimum design guidelines shall control the roadway, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage systems, culverts and other appurtenances associated with the road, and shall be met
by all proposed roads.
B. Reserve strips controlling access to roads shall be prohibited except where their ownership
and control is placed with the municipality.
C. Where a proposed road borders an existing narrow street {not meeting the width
requirements of the standards for streets in this Ordinance), or when the comprehensive plan
indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that would require use of some of the
land, the plan shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road marked
"Reserved for Road Realignment {Widening) Purposes." Land reserved for such purposes
may not be included in computing lot area or setback requirements of the zoning
ordinance. The reserve area shall not be included in any lot, but shall be reserved to be
deeded to the municipality or State, and said reservation shall be shown on the final
subdivision plan recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds.
D. Those portions of existing town ways, public easements, and discontinued town and county
ways which are adjacent to any portion of the road being constructed and which will serve as
major accesses to the proposed road shall be widened and improved to the standards required
by this ordinance. Such improvements, including right of way acquisitions, shall be completed
at the developer's expense and shall be subject to the same performance guarantees as are
other improvements.
E. Any road expected to generate average daily traffic of 400 trips per day or more shall have
at least two street connections with existing town roads, streets shown on an Official Map,
or streets on an approved subdivision plan for which performance guarantees have been
filed and accepted.
F. The design standards below shall be used for construction of all roads, unless the applicant
can provide clear and convincing evidence that an alternate design will meet good
engineering practice and will meet the intended performance standards and is approved by
the Board and Town Council.
G. The Board may eliminate portions of a particular road cross section amenity (sidewalk, bike
lane, etc.) as it deems appropriate for individual projects.
Roadway Design Guidelines
Description
Type of Street
Arterial Collector Minor
Industrial
Commercial
Minimum Right of Way Width 90' 66' 50' 66'
Minimum Traveled Way Width 24' 24' 20' 24'
Minimum Width of Shoulders (each side) 3' 3' 3' 3'
7
Maximum Width of Shoulder 10'5 10'5 5' 10'5
Paved Pedestrian/Bike lane6
8' 8' 8' 8'
Minimum Grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Maximum Grade 1
8.0% 8.0% 8.0% 8.0%
Minimum Centerline
Radius
without superelevation
with suprelevation
500'
350'
280'
175'
280'
175'
400'
300'
Roadway Crown² 1/4"/foot
1/4"/foot
1/4"/foot 1/4"/foot
Minimum Angle of Street Intersections³ 90°
90°
75°
90°
Max. Grade within 75 ft. of intersection 3% 3% 3%
3%
Minimum Curb radii at intersection 30' 25' 25' 30'4
Minimum r/o/w radii at intersection 20' 10' 10' 20'
' Maximum grade may be exceeded for a length of 100 feet or less
² Roadway crown is per foot of land width including at the subgrade level
³ Street intersection angles shall be as close to 90° as feasible but not less than the
listed angle.
4 Should be based on turning radii of expected commercial vehicles, but no less than
30 feet.
5 These shoulders could be used for on-street parking or emergency stops.
6 Includes width of shoulders.
H. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right of way.
I. Dead End Streets. In addition to the roadway design standards, dead-end streets shall be
constructed and provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following requirements for
radii:
Property line: 60'
Outer edge of pavement: 50'
Inner edge of pavement: 25'
Where the cul-de sac is in a wooded area prior to construction, a stand of trees shall be
maintained within the center of the cul-de-sac. The Board may require the reservation of
8
a twenty foot easement in line with the street to provide continuation of pedestrian traffic
or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require the reservation of an easement
in line with the street to provide continuation of the road where future extension is
possible. The width of said easement shall match the proposed road.
EXCEPTION: Where an approved subdivision plan contains provisions for
phased development, the dead end street may terminate in a T-style turnaround at least
sixty (60) feet wide in all parts, the dead end extensions being at least one hundred
(100) feet in length. Provision shall be made for the reservation of an easement in
line with the street to provide continuation of the road. The direction of the T shall
be to the right. If continuation is not completed within five years, the cul-de-sac
must be constructed, and as such the recorded initial phase subdivision plan shall
show the cul-de-sac right-of-way. As a condition of approval, the Town must receive
adequate documentation to provide it with the legal rights to complete and accept the
cul-de-sac in the event that the developer fails to do so, as well as an adequate
performance bond to cover the costs of constructing the cul-de-sac.
J. Grades, Intersections, and Sight Distances
1. Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain, so that cut and fill are minimized
while maintaining the grade standards above.
2. All changes in grade in excess of one percent shall be connected by vertical curves in
order to provide smooth grade change transitions.
3. Where new street intersections or driveway curb-cuts are proposed, sight distances, as
measured along the road into which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the posted
speed limit multiplied by ten.
4. Sight distances shall be measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that
portion of the exit with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the
curbline or edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye 3½ feet, to the top of an object 4¼
feet above the pavement.
5. Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions,
including ground excavation, to achieve the required visibility.
6. Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible, except as
shown on the comprehensive plan or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum
distance of 125 feet shall be maintained between centerlines of minor streets and 200 feet
between collectors or a collector and minor street.
K. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in areas where the Board determines that they are
necessary for neighborhood connection or public safety.
1. Location. Sidewalks may be located adjacent to the curb or shoulder.
9
2. Bituminous Sidewalks
a. The aggregate base shall be no less than twelve inches thick after compaction.
b. The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be constructed in two lifts, each no
less than one inch after compaction.
3. Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks
a. The aggregate base be no less than twelve inches thick after compaction.
b. The Portland cement concrete shall he reinforced with six inch square, number 10 wire
mesh and shall be no less than four inches thick, with a broom finish and two inch
(2") smooth finish edge.
L. When utilized, concrete curbing shall be installed on a thoroughly compacted gravel base
of six inches minimum thickness. When utilized, bituminous curbing shall be installed on
the base course of the pavement. The specified traveled way width above shall be
measured between the curbs.
7. Construction Standards
A. Clearing shall consist of cutting and disposing of all trees, down timber, stubs, brush, and
bushes that interfere with excavation, embankment, clear vision, or otherwise considered
objectionable within the right of way.
1. In fill areas of five (5) feet or more in depth, measured from the subgrade to old
ground, STUMPS will be allowed to remain but shall be cut as close to the ground as
practical: in no case will stumps exceed a height of six (6) inches above the surrounding
ground or eight (8) inches in diameter.
2. In fill areas of five (5) feet or less in depth, measured from the subgrade to old ground,
all stumps, bushes and objectionable materials shall be removed and disposed of in
waste areas (stump dumps) prior to the placing of the fill.
3. Suitable waste material with all stumps removed may be used in the toe of slopes in fill
areas. The toe of the slope area shall be defined as that area below the subgrade and
outside of a 3 to I slope from the shoulder break. Suitable waste material is not meant to
include trees, brush or parts thereof cleared from the right of way.
NOTE: Because of the disease carrying characteristics of elm trees, especially after being
cut, they shall be disposed of within two (2) days after cutting. This may be
accomplished by burying under soil in waste areas or by burning if lawfully permitted.
B. The minimum thickness of materials after compaction shall meet the specifications
below:
10
Minimum Materials Thickness
Street Materials Arterial Collector Minor Industrial-
Commercial
Aggregate Subbase
Course (Max. sized
stone 6")
18" 18" 18" 18"
Crushed
Aggregate Base
6" 6" 6" 6"
Hot Bituminous Pavement
Total Thickness 4" 4" 3½" 4"
Surface Course 1¼" 1¼" 1½" 1¼"
Binder Course 2¾" 2¾" 2" 2¾"
1. Gravel subbase and base shall be placed in a maximum 12" loose lifts.
2. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center line and side lines of the
new road shall be staked or flagged at fifty foot intervals,
3. Before grading is started, the entire area within the right-of-way necessary for traveled
way, shoulders, sidewalks, drainage-ways, and utilities shall be cleared of all stumps,
roots, brush, and other objectionable material. All shallow ledge, large boulders and
tree stumps shall be removed from the cleared area.
4. All organic materials or other deleterious material shall be removed to a depth of two
feet below the subgrade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a
depth of two feet below the subgrade of the roadway. On soils which have been
identified by the municipal engineer as not suitable for roadways, either the subsoil
shall be removed from the street site to a depth of two feet below the subgrade and
replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate subbase below,
or a Maine Department of Transportation approved stabilization geotextile may be
used. Subject to approval of the Municipal Engineer.
5. Except in a ledge cut, side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of three feet
horizontal to one foot vertical and back slopes shall not be steeper than 2 feet
horizontal and 1 foot vertical, and shall be graded, foamed, limed, fertilized, and seeded
according to the specifications of the MDOT erosion and sedimentation control plan.
Where a cut results in exposed ledge a side slope no steeper than one foot horizontal to
four feet vertical is permitted. If the side slope extends outside the required right -ofway,
the Developer shall convey to the Town additional right -of-way, satisfactory to
the Road Commissioner, sufficient to allow the Town to access, maintain, repair or
replace the side slope and back slope area to the elevation of the proposed road.
6. All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the pavement.
11
Anticipated building sewers and water service connections shall be installed to the edge
of the right-of-way prior to paving.
C. Bases and Pavement
1. Bases/Subbase.
a. The aggregate subbase course shall be sand or gravel or hard durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls or clay and other deleterious substances. The
gradation of the part that passes a three inch square mesh sieve shall meet the
grading requirements.
Aggregate Subbase Grading Requirements
Square Mesh Sieves
Percentage by Weight Passing Sieve
Designation
¼ inch 25-70%
No. 40 0-30%
No. 200
0-7%
J
Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of rock exceeding six inches in any
dimension.
b. The aggregate base course shall be screened or crushed gravel of hard durable particles
free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances.
The gradation of the part that passes a three inch square mesh sieve shall meet the
following grading requirements.
Aggregate Base Course Grading Requirements
Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves Percentage by Weight Passing
SieveDesignation
½ i n c h 45-70%
¼ inch 30-55%
No. 40 0-20%
No. 200 0-5%
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding two inches in any
dimension.
12
2. Pavement Joints. Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall
be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.
3. Pavements. The developer shall provide both the base layer and the surface layer of
pavement.
a. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the Maine Department of
Transportation specifications for 19 mm plant mix. The pavement may be placed
between April 15 and November 15, provided the air temperature in the shade at the
paving location is 35° F or higher and the surface to be paved is not frozen or
unreasonably wet.
b. Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall be the Maine
Department of Transportation specifications for 9 mm plant mix. The pavement may
be placed between April 15 and October 15, provided the air temperature in the shade
at the paving location is 50° F or higher.
4. Surface and Shoulder Gravel
Surface gravel may be used on shoulders and temporary turn-arounds. It shall be placed
on top of the aggregate subbase, shall have no stones larger than two inches in size
and meet the following grading requirements.
Surface Gravel Grading Requirements
Square Mesh Sieves
Percentage by Weight Passing Sieve
Designation
2 inch 95-100%
½ inch
30-65%
No. 200
7-12%
8. Road Drainage Standards
A. Design of best management practices shall be substantially equivalent to those described in the
Storm Water Management for Maine: Best Management Practices, published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, 1995.
B. Drainage easements for existing or proposed water courses shall be provided at least 30
feet wide, conforming substantially with the lines of existing natural drainage. All
streets shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to provide for the removal of
stormwater to prevent flooding and erosion of adjacent properties.
13
C. All road construction shall provide for collection and transport of stormwater and
groundwater away from the roadway. Catch basin, pipe, and underdrain systems will be
utilized in areas where ditching is not practical.
D. Ditching shall have a minimum depth to reach the bottom of the roadway subbase to ensure
free draining roadway material. Ditch inslopes shall have a minimum of three feet horizontal to
one foot vertical slope, but outslopes can be two feet horizontal to one foot vertical provided
native soils are stable or stabilized.
E. Ditches shall be vegetated, by appropriate, site specific means. All ditch profiles shall
match, to the extent possible, the corresponding roadway slope. Any ditch slopes in excess of
5% shall be rip rap surfaced with angular stone, preferably blast rock.
F. All storm drainage structures and pipe shall meet the material requirements of the Maine
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
G. Any street that the water runoff may influence a river, stream, brook or
Pushaw Lake shall have a storm water plan prepared by a Professional Engineer. The
plan shall be reviewed by the town's Engineer, at the Developer's expense.
H. Culvert locations and sizes shall be approved by the Road Commissioner, or Planning Board
as appropriate, and shall not be smaller than 15" in diameter and 30' in length and must be
either Aluminized coated corrugated metal pipe, type 2 (ALCCMP), reinforced concrete or
HDPE "Polyethylene smooth bore interior, double wall culvert". All culverts shall be
below the level of the roadway gravel, if elevation permits, and if not they shall be
insulated as approved by the Road Commissioner. Bedding and backfill shall be of native
material from the pipe excavation up to the elevation of the roadway or driveway gravel.
All entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the Town's Road Entrance Ordinance.
I. Catch basins or drain manholes shall be pre-cast concrete in accordance with MDOT standards
and when installed within the roadway shall be located at the curb line.
J. Catch basins or drain manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal
alignment unless specifically approved by the Road Commissioner, or Planning Board as
appropriate.
K. Catch basins or drain manholes shall be provided at least every 300 feet on straight runs of
closed conduit drainage.
L. All basins and pipes shall be flushed and sumps cleaned prior to activating a new drainage
system.
9. Inspection and Certification Required
A. In order to be considered for acceptance as a town way or public easement, the following
requirements must be met:
14
1. At least five days prior to commencement of construction, the owner or contractor shall:
a. Notify the Road Commissioner in writing of the time proposed for the commencement of
construction of the road improvements, so that the Town can arrange for independent
inspections during the course of construction to ensure that said improvements are
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and with proper
materials and construction techniques.
b. Deposit with the Town Treasurer a sum of money equal to 2% of the estimated costs of
the road improvements to pay for the costs of inspection. If the inspection account is
drawn down by 90%, an additional 1% of the estimated costs of the improvements
shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer. Upon satisfactory completion of the
work and the cleanup of the area, any funds remaining in the inspection account
shall be refunded.
B. If the inspecting official determines that any of the road improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with this Ordinance and the approved plans, or with proper
materials and construction techniques. the official shall notify the owner and/or contractor
of the deficiencies in writing, with a copy to the Road Commissioner. If the deficiencies
are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Road Commissioner, the road shall not be
considered for acceptance by the Town. In the event that the proposed road is part of an
approved subdivision, the Town may exercise any remedy available to it under the
Subdivision Ordinance or any other law.
C. Upon completion of the construction of the road improvements and prior to consideration
of the acceptance of the same as a town way or public easement, the Road Commissioner
shall be provided with a written certification from a professional engineer, at the expense
of the owner or contractor, certifying that the road improvements meet or exceed the
design and construction requirements of this Ordinance. If there are any underground
utilities, the servicing utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a
manner acceptable to the utility. In addition, "as built" plans prepared by a professional
engineer shall be submitted to the Road Commissioner. If the road improvements are to
be dedicated to the Town, the owner thereof shall provide the Town with a Warranty Deed
in form and content acceptable to the Town Attorney, along with a title opinion from an
attorney admitted to practice in the State of Maine certifying that the conveyed
premises and related easements are being conveyed free and clear of all encumbrances,
including but not limited to any liens for labor, materials or services.
10. Guaranty of Road Improvements
All road improvements shall be guaranteed by the owner and/or contractor against defects in
materials or workmanship for a period of two years from the date of acceptance of the same.
Prior to consideration of acceptance, the owner or contractor shall submit a sum of money
equal to 2% of the estimated costs of construction to the Town Treasurer . If the funds have not
been used to repair any defects within 2 years and eight months from the date of
acceptance, any remaining funds shall be refunded.
15
11. Street Opening and Entrance Permits
A. No person, utility or company may excavate in a town road without first obtaining a
street opening permit from the Road Commissioner or designee, who shall be authorized
to issue said permits and to impose reasonable conditions concerning traffic control and
safety considerations. Any person excavating in a town road shall repair the same to the
satisfaction of the Road Commissioner, or designee.
B. No person shall install a culvert or driveway connecting to a town road without first
obtaining an entrance permit from the Road Commissioner , or designee. The driveway
and/or culvert shall be designed and installed so that it does not cause drainage problems
to, or interfere with, the operation of the roadway drainage system.
12. Acceptance of Town Roads.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to abdicate the legislative authority of the Town
Council to accept town ways or public easements pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 3021 et. seq.
13. Applicability.
All roads to be constructed after the enactment date of this Ordinance shall meet the
requirements of this Ordinance. Any road that has received Final Subdivision approval from the
Planning Board prior to November 18, 2004 may be constructed to the standards of this
Ordinance or constructed in accordance with the approval and requirements in effect at the time
of the subdivision's approval.
14. Separability.
Should any provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other provision of this Ordinance.
15. Repeal of Prior Ordinance.
Except for applicability to approved subdivisions under Section 13, the Glenburn Road
Ordinance adopted on March 10, 1980, as amended, is repealed as of the date of enactment of
this Ordinance.
16. Conflict With Other Ordinances.
Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other
lawful rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive shall govern.
17. Damage to Town Ways / Public Easements
Any person who causes damage to any town way or public easement located in the Town of
Glenburn shall be responsible for the costs to repair the same. The amount of damages shall
be paid to the Town Treasurer within 30 days of the receipt of an invoice for the damages.
16
The person who causes the damage shall also be liable to the Town for any costs of
collection, including reasonable attorney's fees.
Adopted 05/26/05
Amended 07/30/11 #4. Town Roads, C. Public Easements, #2.
1
ROAD NUMBERING ORDINANCE
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this Road Numbering Ordinance be enacted.
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties for the
delivery of public safety and emergency services, postal delivery, and business delivery.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Maine; Section
3001 of Title 30-A M.R.S.A.; and Section 3.04(j) of the Charter of the Town of Glenburn,
Maine.
SECTION 3. ADMINISTRATION
Except that the Town Council shall have final authority to assign road names, and the Glenburn
Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for determining any new road numbers assigned
after enactment of this ordinance, this ordinance shall be administered by the Glenburn
Addressing Officer who shall be responsible for maintaining the following official records of
this ordinance:
a. A set of maps for official use showing road names and numbers within the Town of
Glenburn.
b. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current assessment records, by
last name, showing the assigned numbers.
c. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of their assigned
numbers.
SECTION 4. NAMING SYSTEM
All roads (town ways, public easements, or private roads) in the Town of Glenburn that serve
two or more structures shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is public or private.
A road name assigned by the Town shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a
town way or public way.
a. Existing Roads
As of the effective date of this ordinance, the following shall be the assigned names of
roads within the Town of Glenburn:
AA LANDING ROAD From Orono Road to Orono Town Line
ALBERT LANE From McCarty Road to end
ASPEN RIDGE ROAD From Ledgewood Drive to end
2
BEECH GROVE AVENUE From Pine Hill Drive to end
BEECHWOOD AVENUE From end near Old Town line to Hudson Line
BRASLEY AVENUE From Lakeview Road to end
BRASSLETT DRIVE From Cressy Avenue to end
BROADWAY From Bangor line to Kenduskeag line
CEDAR BREEZE CENTER From Pushaw Road to 90° bend then turn left to end
CEDAR BREEZE NORTH F r o m Pushaw Road to 900° bend then turn left to Hudson line
CEDAR BREEZE SOUTH F r o m Pushaw Road to 90° bend then turn right to end
CLARK ROAD F r o m I ntersection with Glenburn/Levant line to Hermon line
CRESSY AVENUE F r om Lakeview Road to end
CUSHING DRIVE F r o m C r e s s y A v e n u e to end
DEER RUN ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road to end
FRENCH’S POINT ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road to end
GRACE SNOW DRIVE F r o m Union Street to end
GRAND VIEW ACRES F r o m Union Street to end
HUDSON ROAD From Bangor Line To Hudson Line
KELLEY ROAD F r o m Union Street to Ohio Street
LAKESIDE LANDING ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road around loop to intersection with self
LAKEVIEW ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road to Hudson Road
LANCASTER BROOK ROAD F r o m Hudson Road to Kenduskeag line
LANCASTER LANE F r o m Lancaster Brook Road to end
LARGAY LANE F r o m McClellan Drive to end
LEAVITT LANE F r o m P h i l l i p s R o a d t o e n d
LEDGEWOOD DRIVE F r o m Roundstone Drive to end
LUCKEY’S LANDING ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road around loop to intersection with self
MARSTON MEADOW ROAD H u d s on Road to end
McCARTY ROAD B r o adway to Ohio Street
McCLELLAN DRIVE P u s h a w R o a d t o e n d
MERRYMAN ROAD Union Street to Phillips Road
MISTY WAY AA Landing Road to end
NORWAY ROAD Hudson Road to end
3
OHIO STREET From Hermon Line to Kenduskeag Stream
ORONO ROAD From Orono line to Pushaw Road
OXBOW DRIVE F r o m L a n c a s t e r B r o o k R o a d to end
PHILLIPS ROAD F r o m Ohio Street to Levant line
PINE GROVE AVENUE F r o m Pine Hill Drive to end
PINE ACRES WAY F r o m Hudson Road to Sparkle Pond Road
PINEHILL DRIVE F r o m Pushaw Road to end
PINEVIEW AVENUE F r o m Broadway to end
PINKHAM ROAD F r o m Broadway to end
PLEASANT ROAD F r o m McClellan Road to end
POPLAR ROAD F r o m Hudson Road to end
PUSHAW ROAD F r o m Bangor line to Hudson Road
RICHARD’S ROAD F r o m Largay Lane to end
ROUNDSTONE DRIVE F r o m Hudson Road to end
SANDY BEACH ROAD F r o m Pushaw Road around loop to intersection with self
SANDY BEACH SHORE ROAD F r o m Sandy Beach Road to end
SPARKLE POND ROAD F r o m Hudson Road to end
SUNSET AVENUE F r o m Lakeview Road to end
TWIN ISLAND I s l a nd in Pushaw Lake
UNION STREET F r o m Hermon line to Levant line
VISTA LANE F r o m Vista Way to end
VISTA RIDGE F r o m Vista Lane to end
VISTA WAY F r o m Pushaw Road to end
b. The following criteria shall govern the naming of new roads:
i. No new road shall be given the same name as an existing road in the zip code area.
ii. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
SECTION 5. NUMBERING
Numbers shall be assigned every 50 (fifty) feet along both sides of the road, with even numbers
appearing on the left side of the road and odd numbers appearing on the right side of the road,
determined by the number origin. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
4
a. The Glenburn Addressing Officer shall determine the number origins. Among the factors
to be considered in determining such origins shall be: numbers assigned by other
municipalities on roads leading into Glenburn; usual direction of travel of emergency and
delivery vehicles; and volume of traffic on the adjacent roads. For dead end roads,
numbering shall originate at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead
end. On roads with names duplicating names of different roads in the zip code area, the
number origins shall be larger than the largest number assigned to the already numbered
road.
b. On all roads (town ways, public easements, or private roads) the number assigned to each
structure shall be that of the numbered interval falling closest to the front door or driveway
of said structure.
c. Every structure with more than one principal use or occupancy shall have a separate
number for each use or occupancy. (i.e. duplexes will have two separate numbers;
apartments will have one road number with an apartment number, such as 235 Maple
Street, Apt. 2.
SECTION 6. COMPLIANCE
All owners/occupants of structures shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance,
display and maintain in a conspicuous place on or near said structure, the assigned numbers in
the following manner:
a. Number at the Street Line
The assigned number shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mailbox, or on some
structure at the property line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence or
structure except that the number may be displayed on a mail box on the opposite side of
the road if such location for the mail box is required by postal regulations.
b. Number on the Structure or Residence
Subsection (a) above may be waived at the owner’s option where the residence or
structure is within 50 (fifty) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way and where there is a
clear view of the structure’s front door or entry from the right-of-way. In such case, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the residence or structure in the vicinity of the
front door or entry.
c. Size and Color of Number
Numbers shall be displayed in such color and size as to be clearly visible to travelers on
the road as they approach the property from either direction. Numbers shall be reflective
and have a minimum height of 3 inches.
d. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned number shall remove any different
number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned in
conformance with this ordinance.
e. Interior Location
5
All residents and other occupants are requested to post the assigned number and road
name adjacent to their telephone for emergency reference.
f. On new structures, numbering will be installed no later than when the structure is first
used or occupied.
7. NEW DEVELOPMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS
All new developments and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and as follows:
a. New Developments
Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed, moved onto a lot, or developed,
it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number from the Code
Enforcement Officer. This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building
permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine the proper number on the basis of the site
plan that the applicant submits as a part of a building permit application. Prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Code Enforcement Officer shall physically
verify that the assigned number is proper. In the event that the dwelling unit is not located
in the position shown on the site plan, the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine the
proper number and so notify the applicant of the change.
When the Glenburn Addressing Officer determines that it is necessary to create a new
road name(s) in order to maintain numbering consistency, the Glenburn Addressing
Officer shall so notify the Town Council. If the Council determines that the Glenburn
Addressing Officer’s determination is correct, it shall take the Charter mandated steps to
amend this ordinance by adding the new road name(s) to this Section 7(a) of this
Ordinance.
Alley Way (Private) 3145 Broadway to DE
Ambrose Lane (Private) 3015 Ohio Street to DE
Ashley Avenue 106 Jillian Way to DE
Beaver Cove Drive (Private) 566 Hudson Road to DE
Birch Avenue (Private) 134 Lakeview Road to DE
Botting Lane (Private) 16 Quinn Avenue to DE
Bouchard Lane (Private) 105 Lakeside Landing Road to DE
Charles Street 26 Kelliher Street to DE
Clewley Road (Private) 253 Phillips Road to DE
Crystal Lane (Private) 373 Phillips Road to DE
Daigle Drive 664 Hudson Road to DE
Daisy Lane (Private) 14 Neal Lane to 15 Quinn Avenue
6
Danforth Drive (Private) From Ohio Street to end
Dunston Drive 32 Riverbend Drive to DE
Ellingwood Drive (Private) 1956 Pushaw Road to DE
Elliott Circle 40 Libbey Lane to DE
Fellows Drive (Private) 3053 Broadway to DE
Fitz Lane (Private) 77 Merryman Road to DE
Gabby Laine (Private) 83 Cedar Breeze South to DE
Grandpa’s Lane (Private) 257 Phillips Road to DE
Grouse Lane (Private) 249 Lancaster Brook Road to DE
Happy Corner Road (Private) 1420 Hudson Road to DE
Hastey Lane (Private) 1006 Pushaw Road to DE
Island Getaway Road 16 Sandy Beach Shore Road to DE (16 to 25)
Jamie’s Way (Private) 661 Hudson Road to DE
Jewell Lane (Private) 9 Danforth Drive to DE
Jillian Way 41 Lyndsay Lane to DE
Johnna’s Way 50 Kelleher Street to DE
Kelliher Street 981 Pushaw Road to DE
Kennedy Drive (Private) 253 Cedar Breeze North to DE
Kimberley Lane (Private) 109 Merryman Road to DE
King’s Court (Private) 243 Lakeview Road to DE
Koz Way (Private) 597 Hudson Road to DE
Lakeside Lane 31 Beechwood Avenue to Old Town Line
Libbey Lane 3127 Broadway to DE
Lorna Lane (Private) 1025 Hudson Road to DE (Hingham Heights MHP)
Lower Cross Road (Private) 513 Hudson Road to 1076 Pushaw Road
Lyndsay Lane 367 Hudson Road to DE
M & M Lane (Private) 2881 Ohio Street to loop and DE on itself
Malcolm Lane (Private) 120 Cedar Breeze Center to Cedar Breeze South
Martins Lane (Private) 290 Cedar Breeze North to End
Manansis View 30 Dunston Drive to DE
Marsh View Lane 86 Sandy Beach Road to DE (9 to 23)
Midway Lane (Private) 200 Lakeview Road to DE
Mongoose Road (Private) 243 Lancaster Brook Road to DE
7
Naida Drive (Private) 971 Hudson Road to DE
Nannie's Laine 795 Hudson Road to DE
Neal Lane (Private) 3026 Ohio Street to DE
Northland Road (Private) 1072 Hudson Road to DE.
Page Road (Private) 1546 Hudson Road to DE
Parkhurst Lane (Private) 125 Luckey’s Landing to DE
Pebble Drive (Private) 1188 Hudson Road to DE
Penny Lane (Private) 2691 Ohio Street to DE
Phil’s Way (Private) 645 Hudson Road to DE
Porcupine Lane (Private) 951 Pushaw Road to DE
Quinn Avenue (Private) 3012 Ohio Street to DE
Redneck Alley (Private) 3245 Broadway to End
Rita’s Way (Private) 39 Phil’s Way to DE
Riverbend Drive 69 Libbey Lane to DE
Rocky Road (Private) 1198 Hudson Road to DE
Rosewood Drive (Private) 2851 Ohio Street to DE
Sandy Beach Shore Road (Private) 9 Marsh View Lane to DE (2 to 43)
Schwabe’s Way (Private) 1770 Pushaw Road to DE
Simpson Lane (Private) 1016 Orono Road to DE
Skidgel Road (Private) 1747 Pushaw Road to DE
South Shore Road (Private) 124 Sandy Beach Road to DE
Spruce Lane (Private) 1449 Hudson Road to DE
Stone Hedge Drive (Private ROW) 80 Victory Lane to DE (correction 07/12/18)
1479 Pushaw Road to lot before lake
Timber Lane (Private) Off of Poplar Road right-of-way
(includes cul de sac)
Turner Road (Private) 58 Pinkham Road to DE
Victory Lane (Private) 3021 Broadway to DE
Watson Lane (Private) 208 Kelley Road to DE
Winters Way (Private) 2720 Ohio Street to DE
Yellow Brick Road (Private) 766 Hudson Road to DE
b. New Subdivisions
8
Any prospective subdivider shall show a proposed road name on the pre-application
submission to the Planning Board. At the same time, the subdivider shall submit to the
Planning Board a statement that the proposed name does not duplicate any other road
name within the zip code delivery area. The statement shall be signed by the Postmaster,
or designee, in control of such zip code area.
The Planning Board shall forward the proposed road name and a copy of the signed
statement to the Town Council. The Council shall either approve or deny the use of the
proposed name and shall so notify the Planning Board. If the decision is to deny, the
Council shall so notify the Planning Board along with written reasons therefor. The
Planning Board will then notify the subdivider who will submit a new name and a new
postmaster statement. This process shall continue until the Town Council approves a
name. However, if the Town Council has not approved a name prior to the statutory
deadline for the Planning Board to grant final Planning Board approval, the latest name
submitted by the developer shall be affixed to the final subdivision plan. Approval of the
final subdivision plan by the Planning Board shall constitute the assignment of the road
name in the subdivision.
SECTION 8. VIOLATIONS
A. Unlawful to deface assigned numbers or road signs
1. No person may alter, deface, or remove any number placed on any property in
accordance with this ordinance, except for repair or replacement within twenty-four
(24) hours of such number.
2. No person may alter, deface, or remove any road sign erected in accordance with this
ordinance, except for repair or replacement within twenty-four (24) hour of such sign.
B. Any violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100.00, payable to the Town of Glenburn, Maine, for each violation, together with
attorneys’ fees and other legal fees and costs incurred by the Town in enforcement of
this ordinance.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED: 03/30/95
AMENDED: 10/12/95
AMENDED: 02/25/16
AMENDED: 05/05/16, eff. 06/04/16
AMENDED: 08/25/16, eff. 09/24/16
AMENDED: 02/08/18, eff. 03/09/18 (added Mongoose Road, Happy Corner Road, and Timber Lane)
AMENDED: 07/12/18, eff. 08/12/08 (correction on location of Stone Hedge Drive)
TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
Pursuant to M.R.S.A. Title 30-A, Section 3009(l)(B), the Town of Glenburn hereby ordains as
follows:
1. ESTABLISHMENT OF ONE WAY TRAFFIC ON A PORTION OF LUCKY LANDING
ROAD.
Vehicular traffic shall be allowed to travel in one direction only, specifically in a generally
northerly and easterly direction, on the following described portion of the public easement
known as Lucky Landing:
Beginning on the public easement and at a distance of 120 feet northerly of the centerline of the
intersection of the two portions of the public easement located nearest to Curve 5 and extending
to the intersection of the public easement and a drive located northerly of the public easement
and nearest to Curve 11, said public easement and both numbered curves being as shown on
Sheet 2 of 2 of the proposed Right of Way Plan of Lucky Landing, dated Jan. 15, 1980 and
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds in Map File D28-84.
2. ENFORCEMENT.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, plus reasonable attorney’s fees and costs,
recoverable in a civil action in Maine District Court. The Municipal Officers or their duly
authorized representative may institute proceedings to enjoin violations of this ordinance. Any
fines imposed under this ordinance shall inure to the Town of Glenburn.
ORDINANCE HISTORY:
ADOPTED 03/18/93
NAMING OF PUBLIC FACILITIES POLICY
The authority for naming all public facilities under the jurisdiction of the Town of Glenburn shall
rest with the Glenburn Town Council, however nothing in this policy is meant to restrict the
ability of the Inhabitants of Glenburn to name public facilities at a duly called Town Meeting
that is held in accordance with the Charter of the Town of Glenburn and the laws of the State of
Maine.
A. Current Public Facilities
The following public facilities shall be named as indicated:
1. The town office shall be known as the Glenburn Municipal Building.
2. The fire station shall be known as the Glenburn Public Safety Building.
3. The superintendent’s office shall be known as the Glenburn Superintendent’s Office.
4. The elementary school shall be known as the Glenburn Elementary School.
5. The library shall be known as the Glenburn Public Library.
B. New Public Facilities
New public facilities will be named in accordance with Section C. of this ordinance. For
facilities which are newly constructed or which receive major renovation, a plaque shall be
created bearing the name of the public facility, Town of Glenburn Council member names,
architect, contractor, date of erection, and other pertinent information. The plaque shall be placed
prominently in the facility.
C. Public Facility Names
1. In naming new public facilities, changing the names of the public facilities listed in Section
A above, or naming components of these public facilities, names shall be selected using the
following criteria:
a. If a new name is to be that of an individual, that individual must have:
1. Been a prominent Glenburn resident with a history of distinguished service to the
Glenburn community.
2. Been deceased for a period of at least ten years to allow a comparative historical
perspective to develop.
b. If the new name is to be that of a geographic locale, the proposed name must be placed
before the town council by vote of a committee comprised of the town manager, one
town councilor, and one resident of Glenburn.
Adopted by the Glenburn Town Council November 2, 2006
Michael Crooker, Secretary to the Town Council
Ordinance Prohibiting Retail Marijuana Establishments and
Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
in the Municipality of Glenburn, ME
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that this Ordinance Prohibiting Retail Marijuana
Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs in the Municipality of Glenburn, ME be enacted.
Section 1. Authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417; and Municipal
Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. §3001.
Section 2. Definitions
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail
marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and retail marijuana
testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs are defined as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. §2442.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation facilities,
retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities, and retail
marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in this municipality.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that engages in retail or wholesale sales of
a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. §2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession, or conduct pursuant to the
Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative body unless
otherwise provided* and shall remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties
This ordinance shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee. Violations of this ordinance
shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452.
*Adopted 04/05/18, effective 05/05/18 Town Charter Sec. 3-10 Ordinances in General, (c) Effective Date: Except as otherwise
provided in this charter, every adopted ordinance shall become effective at the expiration of 30 days after adoption or at any later
date specified therein.
1
SUPPLEMENTAL PLUMBING CODE ORDINANCE
This ordinance is intended to serve as a local supplement to the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules. It provides for the inspection of existing systems prior to a property
sale with a private sewage disposal system within 250 feet of a classified body of water, for the
inspection of all such system, and for the maintenance of comprehensive records regarding all
such systems.
Therefore, THE TOWN OF GLENBURN HEREBY ORDAINS:
Section I. Purpose
A. This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the powers granted to municipalities in Title 30-
A MRSA § 4211. The purpose of the Ordinance is to provide for the avoidance
and elimination of nuisances in the Glenburn Shoreland Zone created by
malfunctioning sewage disposal units including septic tanks, cesspools,
cisterns, dry wells, drainage beds, and other types of private sewage disposal
systems as delineated in the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules. It is also the purpose of this ordinance to provide for the collection and
maintenance of records at the Town Office in order to assist property owners in
preventing and correcting malfunctioning systems and also to be of assistance in
carrying out the purpose of the Ordinance.
Section II. Requirements
A. With regard to property located within 250 feet of a classified body of water, no
person may (1) convert a seasonal dwelling to a year-round or principal residence
(2) sell or have title transferred for the purpose of habitation by spew owner; or
(3) expand a structure used for, or to be used for, human habitation unless and until
the Local Plumbing Inspector issues a written certification that one of the following
conditions is met:
1. A subsurface waste water disposal application, completed after July 1, 1974,
exists indicating that the dwelling's waste water disposal system
substantially complies with the State of Maine Department of Human
Services rules and applicable municipal ordinances, provided that the
disposal system was installed with the required permit and certificate of
approval and is not malfunctioning; or
2. A replacement for an existing wastewater disposal system has been
constructed so that it substantially complies with departmental rules and
applicable municipal ordinances.
A holding tank may not be used as a means of waste water disposal or storage for a new yearround
or principal residence. For any use that is authorized to utilize a holding tank under the
Ordinance or applicable state laws or regulations, the holding tank shall have a water tight
pump-out port terminating above the 100-year flood elevation. For the purposes of the
Ordinance, the terms "seasonal dwelling," "year-round or principal residence," and "subsurface
wastewater disposal system" shall have the meanings as set forth in 30-A MRSA§ 4201, as may be
amended..
2
B. Occupancy by an individual(s) of any dwelling covered under the terms of this
Ordinance prior to the receipt of the proper certifications, permits and/or
validations as required by the Ordinance shall be a violation of the Ordinance.
C. A fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town of Glenburn by the seller or the seller's agent
for the services of the Local Plumbing Inspector to conduct investigations for the
purpose of ascertaining adequacy of existing systems and/or compliance with the
provision of this Ordinance.
Section HI. Administration, Enforcement, and Fines
A. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Officers or other appointed officials to organize
and maintain a filing system in the Town Office based on tax map and lot number or
some other system capable of receiving such information that is generated by
compliance with the requirements of the Ordinance.
B. Starting on December 1, 1993, the Local Plumbing Inspector or agent shall develop
and implement a schedule for the inspection and testing of all private sewage disposal
systems serving properties within the Shoreland Zone surrounding Pushaw Lake by
December 31, 1998. Testing shall be by dye test (or by other means at the discretion of
the Local Plumbing Inspected
C. It shall be the duty of the Local Plumbing Inspector to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance and to notify in writing any person responsible for a violation of any
provision of this Ordinance or of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to
correct it, including discontinuance of illegal dwellings and abatement of nuisance
conditions. Commencement of corrective work shall begin within ten (10) days, 30-
AMRSA § 4452 (as amended) of notification of violation.
D. When the above action of the Local Plumbing Inspector, Section HI C of this
Ordinance, does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance
condition, the municipal officers, upon notice from the Local Plumbing Inspector are
hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable; including seeking injunction of violations and the imposition of
fines not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Such actions may
include having the necessary work done and the cost attached to the individuals' property
tax assessment bill.
E. Right of Entry - The Local Plumbing Inspector, or an authorized employee of the
Town, shall have authority for the right of entry, with permission of the property
owner or tenant, to investigate alleged conditions, which do not comply with the
Ordinance and to conduct the inspection and testing program described in Section HI B
of this Ordinance. If requested, the LPI, or authorized employee of the Town, shall
present proper credentials prior to entering the premises. If entry is denied, an
Administrative Warrant may be sought from the District Court.
F. The installation of a subsurface waste water disposal; system shall be subject to the
following three (3) inspections by the Local Plumbing Inspector:
3
1. After the site of the subsurface wastewater disposal system has been
cleared, scarified and excavated to the depth of the bottom of the proposed
system, but before any material or system components have been place in the
bed for the system;
2. After installation of the system components, including stones, pipes or
proprietary devices, and tanks, but before hay, filter fabric or fill covers the
system components. This inspection shall include any curtain drains, diversion
ditches, berms or other measures outlined in the design to improve the
function of the system; and
3. After the system has been graded and seeding has been established or the system
has been otherwise stabilized.
Any additional inspections shall require payment of twenty-dollars ($20.00) to the
Town of Glenburn for each inspection.
Section IV. Separability and Conflict
A. If any provision of this Ordinance is held to be unconstitutional or invalid, this will
not affect the remaining provision of the Ordinance.
B. In the case of conflict with other Ordinances, the more stringent shall apply. Section
V. Appeals to Board of Appeals
A The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon written application of an aggrieved party
and after public notice, hear requests for variances, from specific provisions of the
Ordinance. Such hearings shall be held in accordance with State laws. Variances may
be granted where it is necessary to avoid undue hardship provided it will not result in an
unsafe or unhealthful condition or water pollution.
Ordinance History:
Adopted 06/08/78 with effective date 07/08/78
Adopted 12/09/82 with effective date 01/08/83
Adopted 10/14/93 with effective date 11/13/93
Adopted 10/30/03 with effective date 12/01/03
Adopted 12/01/04 with effective date 01/04/05
Glenburn Supp Plumb Ordinance-05.doc
1
The Town of Glenburn hereby ordains that the following ordinance be enacted.
GLENBURN RECYCLING COMMITTEE ORDINANCE
1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Maine Constitution VIII Part Second Municipal Home Rule and Title 30-A
M.R.S. §3001, the Town of Glenburn hereby establishes the Glenburn Recycling Committee.
2. Type of Committee.
The Committee shall be an Advisory Committee.
3. Appointments
A. Applicants to the Recycling Committee must submit an application and may be
interviewed by the Municipal Officers in accordance with the Town Council’s
Appointment Procedure Policy.
B. Committee members appointed by the Municipal Officers shall be sworn in by the Clerk
or another person authorized to administer oaths.
C. The Committee shall consist of 5 regular members.
D. The term of each member shall be for 3 years or until the member’s successor is appointed
and qualified, except that the initial appointments made under this ordinance shall be as
follows: two regular members, 3 years; two regular members 2 years; one regular
member, one year. Each term shall commence at the beginning of the Town’s fiscal year,
(July 1st).
4. Vacancies
A vacancy shall exist whenever:
A. A member dies.
B. A member resigns from the committee.
C. A member ceases to be a voting resident of the Town.
D. A member is removed from the committee by the Municipal Officers.
When there is a vacancy, the Municipal Officers shall within 60 days of its occurrence
attempt to appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
5. Removals
The Municipal Officers may remove any member of the Recycling Committee for any one
of the following reasons:
2
a. Failure by any member of the Committee to attend three (3) consecutive regular
meetings.
b. Failure of any member to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding twelve
(12) month period.
c. If a committee member is in bad standing with the committee, the committee may vote
by simple majority to recommend to the Town Council the removal for cause of such
member.
d. For cause.
Removal based on either a. or b. above shall not require notice and hearing and shall
only require a majority vote of the Municipal Officers. The Recycling Committee may
recommend to the Municipal Officers in writing against removal pursuant to a. or b.
above whenever it finds that the absences of the member subject to removal are
excusable.
Removal based on either c. or d. above shall require notice and hearing to the member
affected and shall be by a majority vote of the Municipal Officers.
6. Mission
The mission of the Glenburn Recycling Committee is to advise the Council and educate the
public on matters related to recycling.
7. Objectives
A. Monitor curbside recycling program.
B. Assist in coordinating recycling events.
C. Help plan and staff exhibits at appropriate events to promote recycling.
D. Help investigate and make recommendations for implementation of other recycling
opportunities in the community.
E. Actively work with area schools and organizations to help develop environmentally sound
programs for students and adults.
F. Help develop educational programs and flyers and assist in the creation of educational
articles to be published in local newspapers, community fliers and other public service
announcements.
8. Organization and Rules.
A. At their first meeting of each fiscal year, the committee shall elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary from among its members and create and fill such other offices
as it may determine. The term of all offices shall be one year with eligibility for re-election.
B. When the Chairperson is unable to act because of interest, physical incapacity, absence or
any other reason satisfactory to the committee, the Vice Chairperson shall perform the
duties of the Chairperson in his/her absence.
3
C. The committee shall establish its own regular meeting schedule. The committee shall
attempt to meet at least six times annually. The Chairperson may call special meetings
when necessary.
D. Agendas for the meetings will be developed by an employee of the town in consultation
with the Chairperson, if necessary.
E. No meeting of the committee shall be held without a quorum consisting of three members
authorized to vote.
F. The Secretary shall keep a record of its resolutions, votes, transactions, correspondence,
findings and determinations. All records shall be deemed public and may be inspected at
reasonable times.
9. Effective Date
The effective date of this ordinance shall be at the expiration of 30 days after adoption.
Adopted December 13, 2012, effective January 12, 2013

TOWN OF GLENBURN
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ADOPTED: NOVEMBER 18, 2004
TOWN OF GLENBURN
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS·
ARTICLE 1-Purposes ............................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE 2-Miscellaneous PI'ovisions ................................................................ '.2
2.1 Authority .......................................................................................... 2
2.2 Amendments ................................... ; ................................................. 2
2.3 Severability ....................................................................... : .............. 2
2.4 Effective Date .................................................................................. 2
2.5 Repeal of Prior Ordinance ....... ~ ....................................................... 2
2.6 Conflicts ........................................................................................... 2
2.7 Filing ................................................................................................ .3
2.8 Applicability .......................................................................... .-......... 3
2.9 Pending Application Status .............................................................. 3
2.10 Burden of Proof ......................................................................... : ...... 3
.. 2.J I Maximum Number of Lot's or Dwelling Units ................................ 3 . ' . ~ .
.. , ,2_.12 . Technical Review ............................................................................. 3
:.:
· 2.13 Blasting.Activities ............................................ . ............................ • .... 4
ARTICLE 3 - Admlnistration And Procedure ........................................... , ............. 5
• t
3.1 Administration ................................................................................. 5
3 .2 Procedure ......................................................................................... 5
J.3 Bylaws~ ................................. : ............................................................ .
5 .
• • I!"
ARTICLE 4 - Preapplication Meeting, Sketch Plan and On-Site Inspection .......... 6
1
-----------------------------·······················································································
4.1 Purpose ............................................................................................. 6
4.2 Procedure ......................................................................................... 6
"'-- .
4.3 Submission ....................................................................................... 6-
4.4 Contour Intervals and On-Site Inspection ........................................ 7
4.5 Establishment of File ...................... , ................................................. 7
ARTICLE 5 -PLAN FOR MINOR SUBDMSION ............................................... 8
5.1 General ............................................. -................................................ 8
52 Procedure ......................................................................................... 8
5.3 Submissions For Minor Subdivisions .............................................. 9
A. Application Form. ................................................................. 9
B. Location Map ....................................................................... 9
C. Final Plan ........................................................................... 10
D. Application Requirements ................................................. 10
ARTICLE 6 - PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDMSION ................ 15
6.1 Procedure .....................•......... ~ ....................................................... 15
62 Submissions For Preliminary Plan of Major Subdivisions ............ 17
A. Application Form. ............................................................... 17
B. Location Map ..................................................................... 1 7
C. Preliminary Plan. ............................................... ~ ................ 17
D. Application Requirements ................................................. 17
ARTICLE 7 - FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDNISION .............................. .23
7.1 Procedure ................................................................................. ; ..... 23
7.2 Submissions For Final Plan of Major Subdivisions ....................... 24
• 7.3 Final Approval and Filing .. : .......... ; ................................................ 27
ARTICLE 8 - REVIEW CRITERIA, PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
AND DESIGN GUIDELINES .............................................................................. 30
8.1 Pollution ......................................................................................... 30
· A. Statutory Criteria ............................................... ~ ................ 30
I
B. Performance Standards - Pollution ................................... .30
8.2 Sufficient Water ............................................................................. 31
11
. A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 31
B. Design Guidelines - Sufficient Water ............................... 31
C. Performance Standards- Sufficient Water ....................... .31
8.3 Municipal Water Supply ........................... '.:;·, ................................. 32
A; Statutory Criteria ...................................................... ~ ......... 32 ·
B. Performance Standards-Municipal ·Water Supply ........... 33
8.4 Erosion ...................................... ~ .......................................... : ......... 33
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................. 33
B Performance Standards-Erosion~ ..................................... 33
8.5 Traffic Conditions .................................... ~ ............................... ~ ..... 33
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 33
B. Performance Standards- Traffic Conditions .................... .33
8.6 Sewage Disposal ...................................................... : ..................... 35 .
A. Statutory Criteria: ............................................................... 35
B. Performance Standards - Sewage Disposal ....................... 35
8.7 Municipal Solid Waste Disposal ................................................... .36
A Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 36
B. Performance Standards
-Municipal Solid Waste Disposal .. ~ ................................. .36
8.8 Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values ........................................ .36
A. Statutory Criteria ....................... '. .................................. : ..... 36
< ' .
B. Design Guidelines
· ..
:.: -Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values ......................... .37
C!" Performance Standards
-Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values ..... ! ................... 39
8.9 Conformity With Local Ordinances and Pla.nS ............................. .41
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................. 41
B. Design Guidelines
•
- Conformity With Local Ordinances and Plans .............. .41
C. Performance Standards
111
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
- Conformity With Local Ordinances and Plans .............. .42
8.10 Financial and Technical Capacity ................................................. .42
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 42
B. Performance Standards
-Financial and Technical Capacity ............ .-..................... .42
8.11 Surface Waters; Outstanding River Segments .............................. .42
A. Statutory Criteria .......•........................................................ 42
B. Design Guidelines
- Surface Waters; Outstanding River Segments ............... .4 3
C. Performance Standards
-Surface Waters; Outst3.nding River Segments ............... .43
8.12 Ground Water ................................................................................. 44
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 44
B. Performance Standards- Ground Water ........................... 44
8.13 Flood Areas .................................................................................... 45
A.- Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 4 5
B. Performance Standards - Floodplain Management .......... .45
8.14 Freshwater Wetlands ......................................... _ ........................... 46
A. Statutory Criteria ........•....................................................... 46
B. Performance Standards - Freshwater Wetlands ............... .46
8.15 River, Stream. or Brook .................................................................. 46
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 46
B. Performance Standards - River Stream or Brook ............. .46
8.16
I.
Storm Water Management ............................................................. 46
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 46
B. Design Guidelines - Storm Water Management .............. .46
C. Performance Standards-Storm Water Management ........ 47
8.17 Spaghetti-Lots Prohibited ............................ : .................. : .............. 48
I
A. Stafutory Criteria ................................................................ 48-
B. Performance Standards - Spaghetti Lots Prohibited ........ .48
IV ·
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
8.18 Lake Phosphorus Concentration ................................................... .48
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 48
B. Design Guidelines-Lake Phosphorus Concentration ...... .48
C. Performance Standards - Lake Phosphorus Concentration48
8.19 Impact on Adjoining Municipality .............................................. ::.52
A. Statutory Criteria ................................................................ 52
B. · Design Guidelines - Impact on Adjoining Municipality ~ .. 52
C. Performance Standards
- Impact on Adjoining Municipality .................................. 52
ARTICLE 9 - CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT ....................................................... 53
9 .1 Design Guidelines
- Cluster Developments (Open Space Developments) ................... 53
A. Purpose ............................................ ; ................................ ;.s3
B. Application Procedure ....................................................... 53
C. Basic Requirements for Cluster Developments
(Open Space Developments) .............................................. 54
9 .2 Performance Standards - Reservation or Dedication and
Maintenance of Open Space and Common Land,
Facilities and Services of Cluster Developments ........................... .56
ARTICLE 10 - DWELLING UNIT SUBDIVISION CRITERIA ......................... 58
10.1 Utilization of Site ........................................................................... 58
10.2 . Traffic Access and Park:ing ............................................................ 58
10.3 Internal Vehicular Circulation ....................................................... 58
10.4 Park'ing Layout and Design ..................................................... :.: .... 58
10.5 • Pedestrian Circulation ................................................... ! ................ 59
10.6 Utilities ........................................................................................... 59
10. 7 Exterior Lighting ..................................•......................................... 59
10.8 Buffering of Adjacent Uses ....... ; ........... · ........................................ 59
I
10.9 Noise ............................................................. : ................................ 59
10.10 Storage ofMaterials ....................................................................... 59
v
10.11 Landscaping ................................................................................... 60
10.12 Building Scale .................................................... : ........................... 60
ARTICLE 11 ·PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES ............................................. 61
11.1 Types of Guarantees ·········································~····························61
11.2 Contents of Guarantee .................................................................... 61
11.3 Escrow Account ............................................................................. 62
11.4 Performance Bond .... ; .................................................................... 62
11.5 Letter of Credit ............................................................................... 62
11.6 C-onditional Agreement .................................................................. 62
11.7- Phasing ofDevelopment ................................................................ 62
11.8 Release of Guarantee ..................................................................... 63
11.9 Default. ........................................................................................... 63
11.10 Improvements Guaranteed ............................................................. 63
ARTICLE 12 - WAIVERS ................................................................................... 64
12.1 Waivers From Submission Requirements ........ '. ............................. 64
12.2 Waivers From Required Improvements ......................................... 64
12.3 Conditions ...................................................................................... 64
12.4 Waivers to be shown on final plan ................................................. 64
ARTICLE 13 ·REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS ... ~ ................................... 65
·13.1 Procedure ....................................................................................... 65
132 Submissions ................................................................................... 65
13.3 Scope of Review ............................................................................ 65
ARTICLE 14-APPEALS .................................................................................... 66
• 14.1 Procedure ............................... ~ ....................................................... 66
ARTICLE 15-INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT ........ ~ .......................... 67
15.1 Inspection of Required Improvements ........................................... 67
15.2 Violations and Enforcement .......................................................... 68
AR TIC LE 16 - DEFINITIONS ............................................................................. 70
•
VI
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ARTICLE 1- PURPOSES
The purposes of this ordinance are:
1.1 To assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the people;
1.2 To protect the environment and to promote the development of an economically
sound and stable community;
1.3 To provide for an expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed
subdivisions;
1.4 To clarify the approval criteria of the state Subdivision Law, found in Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404;
1.5 To assure new development in the Town of Glenburn meets the goals and
conforms to the policies of the Glenburn Comprehensive Plan;
1.6 To assure that a minimal level of services and facilities are available to the
residents of new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions are capable of
supporting the proposed uses and structures;
1.7 To minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring
properties and on the municipality; and
1.8 To maintain and protect property values a.rid promote fiscally responsible
development within the Tovm of Glenburn.
1
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
ARTICLE 2 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
2.1 Authority.
A. This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4403.
B. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance
of the Town of Glenburn, Maine."
2.2 Amendments.
This ordinance may be amended by the Tovm Council of the Town of Glenburn
in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter.
2.3 Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such action shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this
ordinance, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to
be severable.
2.4 Effective Date.
The effective date ofthis ordinance shall be 30 days after the date of its adoption
by the Town Council.
2.5 Repeal of Prior Ordinances.
The Glenburn Subdivision Ordinance adopted December 13, 1986, as amended,
shall be repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance. Provided, however,
that said ordinance shall remain in full force and effect with respect to any
violation thereof in existence at the time of the effective date of this ordinance,
and provided further that any such violation shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance and subject to its terms and provisions. The Glenburn Subdivision
Moratorium Ordinance adopted June 12, 2003, as extended, shall be repealed as
of the date of adoption of this Ordinance.
2.6 Conflicts.
This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, by-law, permit, ordinance
or provision of law of the ToVvn of Glenburn. ·where this ordinance imposes a
higher standard for the protection and promotion of comfort, health, safety and
general welfare, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
2
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
..
2.7 Filing.
A copy of this ordinance shall be filed at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds
and with the Town 91erk and shall be accessible to any member of the public:;.
2.8 Applicability.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all applications for subdivision
approval filed on or after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, and to
applications that are not pending applications within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A.
§ 302, or the provisions of the prior Subdivision Ordinance, as of the date of
adoption of this Ordinance.
2.9 Pending Application Status.
No application for subdivision approval under this ordinance shall be deemed to
be a pending application within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 until such time
as the Planning Board has made a determination that the Final Plan application is
complete and the Planning Board has conducted at least one substantive review of
the completed Final Plan application for the purpose of determining whether it
complies with the review criteria and other applicable requirements of this
ordinance or state laws relating to subdivisions.
2.10 Burden of Proof.
In all instances, the burden of proof is upon the person proposing the subdivision
to demonstrate satisfaction of the requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.
and of this ordinance.
2.11 Maximum Number of Lots or Dwelling Units.
The maximum number of lots for a proposed subdivision shall be determined by
'dividing the net residential acreage of the land area proposed for inclusion in the
subdivision by the applicable minimum lot size required by the Town's Zoning
Ordinance. The maximum number of dwelling units for a proposed subdivision
consisting of dwelling units shall be determined by dividing the net residential
acreage of the land area proposed for inclusion in the dwelling unit subdivision by
the applicable minimum lot size per dwelling unit required by the Town's Zoning
Ordinance.
2.12 Technical Review.
. .
The Planning Board is authorized to retain the services of engineers or other
professionals to undertake a technical review of any subdivision application for
the purpose of assisting the Plaiming Board in detem1ining whether the
. application ai1d the proposed subdivision complies \yith the requirements of this
,,
.)
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ordinance or applicable State Laws or Regulations. Any technical review fee paid
by the applicant shall be deposited in a special account designated for that
subdivision application. If the balance in this special account is drawn down by
75% the Board shall notify the applicant, and the applicant shall deposit with the
Town sufficient funds to restore the special account to at least 50 % of its original
amount. The Board shall continue to notify the applicant whenever the balance in
the account is drawn down by 75% of the original deposit, and the applicant shall
deposit sufficient funds to restore the special account to at least 50% of its
original amount. If the applicant fails to fund the special account as required,
review of the application by the Planning Board shall be suspended until such
time as the funds are paid. Any balance in the account remaining after a decision
on the final plan application by the Board shall be returned to the applicant.
2.13 Blasting Activities
No blasting shall be undertaken in a subdivision unless: (1) a blasting plan has
been approved by the Planning Board as part of the preliminary plan application
or (2) a site map and blasting plan is submitted to and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The map must show the proposed blast area(s) and the
location of all structures and wells within 500 feet of the blast area(s). In
addition, no blasting shall be undertaken in a subdivision unless the Code
Enforcement Officer is provided with ·written notice of the location and date of
the proposed blasting, which notice must be received at least 7 days prior to the
blasting activity.
4
ARTICLE 3 - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE
3.1 Administration.
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Glenburn, hereinafter called the Board,
shall administer this ordinance.
B. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions, as defined
by this ordinance or the laws of the State of Maine, that are located wholly
or partially within the boundaries of the Town of Glenburn.
3.2 Procedure.
In order to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious procedure for reviewing
subdivisions and to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for
subdivision review, the Board Chairperson, in consultation with the Code
Enforcement Officer, shall prepare a written agenda for each regularly scheduled
meeting. The agenda shall be prepared no less than seven (7) calendar days in
advance of the meeting, distributed to the Board members and any applicants
appearing on the agenda, and posted at the municipal office. Applicants shall
request to be placed on the Board's agenda at least fourteen (14) calendar days in
advance of a regularly scheduled meeting by contacting the Code Enforcement
Officer.
Applicants who are not on the Board's agenda may be heard, only as a CEO item.
However, the Board shall take no action on any application not appearing on the
Board's written agenda.
3.3 Bylaws.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws for the transaction of its
business under this ordinance.
5
ARTICLE 4 - PREAPPLICATION MEETING, SKETCH
PLAN AND ON-SITE INSPECTION
4.1 Purpose.
The purpose of the pre-application meeting and on-site inspection is for the
applicant to present general information regarding the proposed subdivision to the
Board and receive the Board's comments prior to the expenditure of substantial
sums of money on surveying, soils identification, and engineering by the
applicant.
4.2 Procedure.
A. The applicant or duly authorized agent shall present the Pre-application
Sketch Plan and make a verbal presentation regarding the site and the
proposed subdivision.
B. Following the applicant's presentation, the Board may ask questions and
make suggestions to be incorporated by the applicant into the application.
C. The on-site inspection shall be scheduled.
4.3 Submission.
The Pre-application Sketch Plan shall show in simple sketch form the proposed
layout of streets, lots, buildings and other features in relation to existing
conditions. The Sketch Plan, which does not have to be engineered and may be a
free-hand penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development. It will be most helpful to both the applicant and the Board for site
conditions such as steep slopes, wet areas and vegetative cover to be identified in
a general manner. It is recommended that the sketch plan be superimposed on or
accompanied by a copy of the assessor's map(s) on which the land is located. The
Sketch Plan shall be accompanied by:
A. A copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. topographic map of the area showing
the outline of the proposed subdivision.
B. A copy of that portion of the county soil survey covering the proposed
subdivision, showing the outline of the proposed subdivision. Along with
soils suitability for intended use taken from "Soil Suitability Guide for Land
Use Planning in Maine", latest edition.
C. Ten copies of all materials.
6
4.4 Contour Intervals and On-Site Inspection.
Within thi1iy days of the pre-application meeting, or as soon as weather
conditions permit, the Board shall hold an on-site inspection of the property and
inform the applicant in writing of the :required contour interval on the Preliminary
Plan, or Final Plan in the case of a Minor Subdivision. The applicant shall place
"flagging" at the approximate centerline of any proposed streets, and at the
approximate intersections of the street centerlines and lot corners, prior to the onsite
inspection.
4.5 Establishment of File.
Following the pre-application/sketch plan meeting the Board shall establish a file
for the proposed subdivision. All correspondence and submissions regarding the
pre-application/sketch plan meeting and application shall be maintained in the
file.
7
ARTICLE 5 -PLAN FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION
Any subdivision containing four lots or dwelling units or less, and in which no street is
proposed to be constructed, is a Minor Subdivision subject to this article. (A Minor
Subdivision requires a Sketch Plan and a Final Plan, while a Major Subdivision requires a
Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and Final Plan.)
5.1 General.
The Board may require, where it deems necessary to make a determination
regarding the criteria for approval from Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404, or the
standards from Article 8 of this ordinance, that a Minor Subdivision comply with
some or all of the submission requirements for a Major Subdivision.
5.2 Procedure.
A. After Sketch plan review and within six months after the on-site inspection
by the Board, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a
final plan at least fourteen (14) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the
Board. Applications shall be submitted by registered mail to the Board in
care of the municipal office or delivered by hand to the municipal office.
The municipal office shall issue a dated receipt. Failure to submit the
application within six months shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan
to the Board. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the
Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board.
B. All applications for final plan approval for a Minor Subdivision shall be
accompanied by payment of any application, technical review, advertising,
mailings or other fees as established by the Fee Schedule Ordinance of the
Town of Glenburn. If the applicant fails to pay the required fees, review of
the application shall be suspended until such time as the fees are paid.
C. The applicant, or the applicant's representative, shall attend the meeting of
the Board to present the final plan application. Failure to attend the meeting
to present the final plan application shall result in a delay of any action by
the Board until such time as the applicant follows the appropriate process to
appear on the Board's agenda.
D. Upon receipt of an application for final plan approval of a Minor
Subdivision the municipal office representative shall:
1. Notify in writing all owners of abutting property that an application for
subdivi_sion approval has been submitted, specifying the locati9n of the
proposed subdivision and including a general description of the project.
2. Notify the clerk and the revie,:ving authority of the neighboring
municipalities if any portion of the subdivision or crosses the municipal
boundary.
8
3. Make the appropriate posting of notices.
E. Within thirty calendar days ~f the receipt of the final plan application, the
Board shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant in writing of its determination: If the application is not complete,
the Code Enforcement Officer, at the direction of the Plam1ing Board, shall
notify the applicant in ·writing of the specific additional material needed to
complete the application.
F. Upon a determination that a complete application has been submitted for
review, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, at the direction of the Planning
Board, notify the applicant in "'Titing of that determination. In addition, the
Board shall schedule a public hearing on the final plan application.
G. The Board shall hold the public hearing within thirty calendar days of
determining that it has received a complete application, and shall publish a
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the first
publication to be at least seven days prior to the hearing. A copy of the
notice shall be mailed to the applicant and abutters. All costs incurred in
advertising and notifying abutters of a public hearing shall be borne by the
applicant.
H. Within thirty days from the public hearing, or within another time limit as
may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the applicant, the
Board shall make findings of fact, and conclusions relative to the criteria
contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the standards of Article 8. If
the Board finds that all the criteria of the statute and the standards of Article
8 have been met, it shall approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any
of the criteria of the statute or the standards of Article 8 has not been met,
the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with
conditions to ensure all of the criteria and standards will be met by the
subdivision. The Board shall issue a written notice of its decision to the
applicant, including the Board's findings, conclusions and any reasons for
its decision.
5.3 Submissions For Minor Subdivisions.
The final plan application shall consist of the following items.
A. Application Form.
B. Location Map. The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties, and
to allow the Board to locate the subdivision \Vithin the municipality. The
location map shall show: ·
1. Existing subdivisions in close proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
9
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
3. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
4. J'\n outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
owner's property if the final plan submitted covers only a portion of the
owner's entire tract or parcel of land.
C. Final Plan. The subdivision plan for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of
two reproducible, stable-based transparencies, one to be recorded at the
Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal office, and three
copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than
one hundred feet to the inch.
The reproducible transparencies shall be embossed with the seal of the
individual responsible for preparation of the plan. Plans for subdivisions
containing more than one hundred acres may be drawn at a scale of not
more than t\vo hundred feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can
easily be read.
Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin
of 1.5 inches outside of the borderlines on the left side for binding and a
one-half inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. The Plan
shall provide space for endorsement. Ten (10) copies of all information
accompanying the plan shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
One copy of the subdivision plan at a scale of 1 "=200' to be submitted to
the Tax Assessor.
D. Application Requirements.
The application for approval of a Minor Subdivision shall include the
following information. The Board may require additional infom1ation to be
submitted, where it finds such information necessary in order to determine
whether the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S .A. § 4404 and this ordinance are
met.
I. Proposed name of the subdivision, or identifying title, and the name of
the municipality in which it is located, plus the assessor's map and lot
numbers.
2. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
3. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive
data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a land surveyor
registered in Maine. The comers of the parcel shall be located on the
ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of
monument found or to be set at each lot comer.
4. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all
deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances
currently affecting the property.
10
--------------------------------------------························································································
5. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or paii of the lots
or dwellings in the subdivision.
6. An indication of the type sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the
public sewer, a written statement from the appropriate sewer district,
stating that the district has the capacity to collect and treat the
wastewater, shall be provided.
b. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface
wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses (logs), prepared by a
Licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. A map showing the
location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
7. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by a publicly owned public water
system, a written statement from the appropriate public official shall
be submitted indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure
for the subdivision and that the public entity approves the plans for
extensions where necessary. Where the public entity's supply line is
to be extended, a written statement from the fire chief, stating
approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written
statement from the public official approving the design of the
extension shall be submitted. Any public main extensions and fire
hydrants shall be installed at the developers expense within the
public right-of-way.
b. ·when water is to be supplied by a privately owned public water
system, evidence that the proposed system complies with the State
of Maine Rules Relating To Drinking Water and will provide
adequate water supply and pressure for the subdivision shall be
submitted.
c. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate
ground water supply shall be submitted by a well driller or hydro
geologist familiar with the area.
8. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
9. The names ai1d addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual
or company who prepared the plan, and adjoining property ovmers.
10. A soil survey map by a Certified Soil Scientist! Wetland ai·eas shall be
identified on the survey, regardless of size.· The intensity of the soil
survey map shall be as follows:
a. Class A (High Intensity) Soil Survey
11.
.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................._ ____________________________________________________________________ _
1. Specific land area within any development proposed to be used
for disposal of effluent, wastewater or other wastes.
2. Subdivisions with any lot less than 2 acres and on-site subsurface
wastewater disposal.
b. Class B (High Intensity) Soil Survey
1. Subdivisions with any lot less than 2 acres.
2. The land area of a condominium development that is to be
disturbed during construction. Condominium developments
include single or multi-family attached dwellings.
c. Class C (Medium High-Intensity) Soil Survey
1. Subdivisions with all lots greater than 2 acres and on-site
subsurface wastewater disposal.
d. For the purposes hereof, Class A, B, and C soil mapping intensity
levels shall be those as established by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection.
11. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, vegetative cover type, and other
essential existing physical features. The location of any trees larger
than 24 inches in diameter at breast height shall be shuwn on the plan.
On wooded sites, any area to be cleared prior to the sale of lots shall be
depicted.
12. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is
located in the direct watershed of Pushaw Lake the application shall so
indicate.
13. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Board, showing elevations
in relation to mean sea level.
14. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located, if
districts are defined, and the location of any zoning boundaries affecting
the subdivision.
15. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains,
culverts, and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be
subdivided.
16. The location, names, and present widths of ex1stmg streets and
highways, and existing -and proposed easements, building lines, parks
and other open spaces on or adjacent to the subdivision. The plan shall
contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing and length of every
street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily dete1111ined and be
12
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to reference
points previously established.
1 7. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of
proposed improvements and its management.
18. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication. Written offers to convey title to the
municipality of all public open spaces shov.'11 on the plan, and copies of
agreements or other documents showing the maru1er in which open
spaces to be retained by the applicant or lot ov.711ers are to be maintained
shall be submitted. If open space or other land is to be offered to the
municipality, written evidence that the municipal officers are satisfied
with the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey title shall be
included.
19. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries
of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted
on the municipality's Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be delineated on
the plan.
20. A storm water management plan, prepared by a registered professional
engineer in accordance with the Stormwater Management for Maine:
Best Management Practices, published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection (1995). The Board may waive submission of
the storm water management plan unless the subdivision is in the
watershed of Pushaw Lake, the proposed subdivision will not involve
grading which changes drainage patterns, and the addition of
impervious surfaces such as roofs and driveways is less than 5% of the
area of the subdivision.
21. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with
the }.Jaine Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook for
Construction: Best Management Practices, published by the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991. The
Board may waive submission of the erosion and sedimentation control
plan unless the subdivision is in the watershed of Pushaw Lake, the
proposed subdivision will not involve grading which changes drainage
patterns, and the addition of impervious surfaces such as roofs and
driveways is less than 5% of the area of the subdivision.
22. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been
identified as high or moderate value wildlife habitat by the Maine
Depaiiment of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife· or within the
comprehensive plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within
an area designated as a critical natural area by the comprehensive plan
or the Maine Natural Areas Program the plan shall indicate appropriate
13
··········································································································································----------------------------------------
measures for the preservation of the values, which qualify the site for
such designation.
23. If the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of Pushaw Lake a
phosphorus control plan:
a. For subdivisions, which qualify for the simplified review, procedure
the plan shall indicate the location and dimensions of vegetative
buffer strips or infiltration systems. (See Section 8.18)
b. For subdivisions, which do not qualify for the simplified review,
procedure the following shall be submitted. (See Section 8 .18)
1. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan conducted using
the procedures set forth in Phosphorus Control in Lake
Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New
Development, published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, September, 1992 revision.
2. A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control
measures.
3. The contour lines shown on the plan shall be at an interval of not
more than five feet unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board.
4. Areas with sustained slopes greater than 25% covering more
than one acre shall be delineated.
24. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either
listed on or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, or have been identified in the comprehensive plan as sensitive or
likely to contain such sites.
25. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction
debris and any other permits relating to the same that may be necessary.
.' 14
----------------------------------------························································································
ARTICLE 6 - PRELIMINARY PLAN FOR MAJOR
SUBDIVISION
Any subdivision containing more than four lots or dwelling units, or any subdivision
containing a proposed street is a Major Subdivision subject to this article. (A Major
Subdivision requires a Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and Final Plan.)
6.1 Procedure.
A. After Sketch Plan review and Vvithin six months after the on-site inspection
by the Board, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a
preliminary plan at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to a scheduled
meeting of the Board. (The final plan submittal procedures are found in
Article 7.) Applications shall be submitted by registered mail to the Board
in care of the municipal office or delivered by hand to the municipal office.
The municipal office shall issue a dated receipt. Failure to submit an
application within six months shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan
to the Board. The preliminary plan shall approximate the layout shown on
the Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations made by the Board.
B. All applications for preliminary plan approval for a Major Subdivision shall
be accompanied by payment of any application, technical review,
advertising, mailing or other fees as established by the Fee Schedule
Ordinance of the Town of Glenburn. If the applicant fails to pay the
required fees, review of the application shall be suspended until such time
as the fees are paid.
C. The applicant, or the applicant's representative, shall attend the meeting of
the Board to present the preliminary plan application. Failure to attend the
meeting to present the preliminary plan application shall result in a delay of
any action by the Board until such time as the applicant follows the
appropriate process to appear on the Board's agenda.
D. At least 7 calendar days prior to the meeting of the Board, at which an
application for preliminary plan approval of a major subdivision is to be
initially presented, the municipal office shall:
1. Notify in writing all owners of abutting property that an application for
subdivision approval has been submitted, specifying the location of the
proposed subdivision and including a general description of the project.
2. Notify. the clerk and the reviewing authority of the ne~ghboring
municipalities if any po11ion of the subdivision crosses the municipal
boundary.
3. Make the appropriate posting of notices.
15
4. Notify the road con11mss10ner, school superintendent, Local Law
Enforcement and fire chief of the proposed subdivision, the number of
dwelling units proposed, ·the length of roadways, and the size and
construction characteristics of anY. multi-family, commercial or
industrial buildings. The notice ·shall request that these officials
comment in writing upon the adequacy of their department's existing
capital facilities to service the proposed subdivision, and any health or
safety reconm1endati.m1s th.e~ feel 1i1ertin.enL Th.eit wtitt.en. te):'art sh.all
be submitted to the CEO 7 days prior to the public hearing.
E. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of the preliminary plan
application, the Board shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is
not complete, the Code Enforcement Officer, as directed by the Planning
Board, shall notify the applicant in wTiting of the specific additional
material needed to complete the application.
F. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for
review, the Code Enforcement Officer, as directed by the Planning Board,
shall notify the applicant in -vvriting of its determination. The Board shall
schedule a public hearing on the preliminary plan application.
G. The Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) calendar days of
determining that it has received a complete application, and shall publish a
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the first
publication to be at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing. A
copy of the notice shall be mailed to the applicant. All costs incurred in
advertising and notifying abutters of a public hearing shall be borne by the
applicant.
H. Within thirty (30) calendar days from the public hearing, or within another
time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board and the
applicant, the Board shall make findings of fact on the application, and
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan application.
The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any
decision.
I. When granting approval to a preliminary plan, the Board shall state the
conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it ,~·ill require in the final plan;
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which
waivers may have been requested an~ which the Board finds may be
waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general
welfare; and
16
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
3. The construction items for which cost estimates and perfom1ance
guarantees will be required as prerequisite to the approval of the final
plan.
J. Approval of a pi:eliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final
plan or intent to approve the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the design of the preliminary plan as a guide to
the preparation of the final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for
consideration by the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements of this
ordinance and the conditions of preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the
approval of the final plan, the Board may require that additional infonnation
be submitted and changes in the plan be made as a result of further study of
the proposed subdivision or as a result of new information received.
6.2 Submissions For Preliminary Plan of Major Subdivisions.
The preliminary plan application shall consist of the following items.
A. Application Form.
B. Location Map. The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties, and
to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The
location map shall show:
1. Existing subdivisions in close proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
3. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts, if a zoning land use
ordinance is adopted.
4. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
owner's property if the preliminary plan submitted covers only a portion
of the owner's entire tract or parcel ofland.
C. Preliminary Plan. The preliminary plan shall be submitted, to the Code
Enforcement Officer, in ten (10) copies of one or more maps or drawings
which may be printed or reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in
feet or decimals of a foot, along with all accompanying information no less
than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the meeting. The preliminary plan
shall be dravm to a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch.
Plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred acres may be
dravm at a scale of not more than two hundred feet to the inch provided all
necessary detail can easily be read.
D. Application Requir~1i1ents. The application for preliminary plan approval
shall include the following infonnation. The Board may require additional
information to be submitted, where it finds such information necessary in
order to determine \Vhether the criteria of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and
this ordinance are met.
17
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality, in
which it is located, plus the assessor's map and lot numbers.
2. Verification ofright, title or interest in the property.
3. A standard boundary survey of the parcel, giving complete descriptive
data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a registered land
surveyor. The comers of the parcel shall be located on the ground and
marked by monuments.
4. A copy of the most recently recorded deed for the parcel. A copy of all
deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances
currently affecting the property.
5. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots
or dwellings in the subdivision.
6. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the
public sewer, a written statement from the appropriate sewer district,
stating that the district has the capacity to collect and treat the
wastewater, shall be provided.
b. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface
wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses (logs), prepared by a
Licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. A map showing the
location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
7. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by a publicly owned public water
system, a ·written statement from the appropriate public official shall
be submitted indicating that there is adequate supply and pressure
for the subdivision and that the public entity approves the plans for
extensions where necessary. Where the public entity's supply line is
to be extended, a written statement from the fire chief, stating
approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a ·written
statement from the public official approving the design of the
extension shall be submitted. Any public main extensions and fire
hydrants shall be installed at the developers expense within the
public right-of-way.
b. ·when water is to be supplied by a privatel,y ovmed public water
system, evidence that the proposed system complies with the State
of Maine Rules Relating To Drinking Water and will provide
adequate water supply and pressure for the subdivision shall be
submitted.
18 '
'
.·
c. \Vhen water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate
ground water supply shall be submitted by a well driller or hydro
geologist familiar with the area.
8. The date the plan was prepared, north point, and graphic map scale.
9. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual
or company who prepared the plan, and adjoining property owners.
10. A soil survey map by a Certified Soil Scientist. Wetland areas shall be
identified on the survey, regardless of size. The intensity of the soil
survey map shall be as follows:
a. Class A (High Intensity) Soil Survey
1. Specific land area within any development proposed to be used
for disposal of effluent, wastewater or other wastes.
2. Subdivisions with any lot less than 2 acres and on-site subsurface
wastewater disposal.
b. Class B (High Intensity) Soil Survey
1. Subdivisions with any lot less than 2 acres.
2. The land area of a condominium development that is to be
disturbed during construction. Condominium developments
include single or multi-family attached dwellings.
c. Class C (Medium High-Intensity) Soil Survey
1. Subdivisions with all lots greater than 2 acres and on-site
subsurface wastewater disposal.
d. For the purposes hereof, Class A, B, and C soil mapping intensity
levels shall be those as established by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection.
11. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of
property lines, existing buildings, vegetative cover type, and other
essential existing physical features. On wooded lots, any area to be
cleared prior to the sale of lots shall be depicted.
12. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is
located in the direct watershed of Pushaw Lake, the application shall so
indicate.
13. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Board, showing elevations
in relation to Mean Sea Level.
19
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
14. The zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located, if
districts are defined, and the location of any zoning boundaries affecting
the subdivision.
15. ·Xhe location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains,
culverts, and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be
subdivided.
16. The location, names, and present widths of existing streets, highways,
easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to
the subdivision.
17. The proposed lot lines with dimensions and lot areas.
18. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
19. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of
proposed ownership, improvement and management.
20. The area on each lot where existing forest cover will be permitted to be
removed and converted to lawn, structures or other cover and any
proposed restrictions to be placed on clearing existing vegetation, as is
applicable to the proposed subdivision.
21. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries
of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation, as depicted
on the municipality's Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be delineated on
the plan.
22. A hydro geologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist or
Registered Professional Engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when
the subdivision is not served by public sewer and any part of the
subdivision is located over a sand and gravel aquifer, as shown on a map
entitled "Hydro geologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel
Aquifers," by the Maine Geological Survey.
The Board may require a hydro geologic assessment in other cases
where site considerations or development design indicate greater
potential of adverse impacts on ground water quality. These cases
include extensive areas of shallow to bedrock soils; or cluster
developments (open space developments) in which the average density
is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet but the density of
the developed portion is in excess of one dwelling unit per 80,000 square
feet; or the proposed use of shared or common subsurface waste water
disposal systems.
An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated
on a daily basis and at peak hours. Trip generation rates used shall be
taken from Trip Generation }..1anual, 1991 edition, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engifieers. Trip generation rates from other
20
sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates, to the Board's
satisfaction, that these sources better reflect local conditions.
-
24. For subdivisions involving 40 or more parking spaces or projected to
generate more than 400 vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis,
prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer with experience in
traffic engineering, shall be submitted. The analysis shall indicate the
expected average daily vehicular trips, peak-hour volumes, access
conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected,
effect upon the level of service of the street giving access to the site and
neighboring streets which may be affected, and recommended
improvements to maintain the desired level of service on the affected
streets and any proposed traffic signage.
25. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been
identified as high or moderate value wildlife habitat by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the
comprehensive plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within
an area designated as a unique natural area by the comprehensive plan
or the Maine Natural Areas Program, the plan shall indicate appropriate
measures for the preservation of the values, which qualify the site for
such designation.
26. If the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of Pushaw Lake
and qualifies for the simplified review procedure (See: Section 8.18)
for phosphorus control, the plan shall indicate the location and
dimensions of vegetative buffer strips or infiltration systems and the
application shall include a long-term maintenance plan for all
phosphorus control measures.
27. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either
listed on or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, or have been identified in the comprehensive plan as sensitive or
likely to contain such sites.
28. All plans, submissions, and supporting documentation for streets, roads
or sidewalks as required under the Town of Glenburn Road Ordinance.
29. If it is anticipated that blasting will be required for the subdivision, the
area(s) of contemplated blasting shall be shown on the preliminary plan,
and a blasting plan shall be submitted.
30. A stonn water management plan, prepared by a registered professional
engineer in accordance v.ith the Stormwater lvfanagement for lvfaine:
Best ,\fanagement Practices, publjshed by the Maine Department of
Enviromnental Protection (1995). The Board may waive submission of
the stonn water management plan unless the subdivision is in the
watershed of Pushaw Lake, the proposed subdivision will not involve
grading v,;hich changes drainage patterns, and the addition of imp~rvious . .
21
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
surfaces such as roofs and driveways is less than 5% of the area of the
subdivision.
31. An erosion and sedimentation control plan prepared in accordance with
the Mu~ne Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbo.ok for
Construction: Best .Management Practices, published by the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District and the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, March 1991 is mandatory.
32. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is in the direct watershed of
Pushaw Lake and does not qualify for the simplified review procedure
for phosphorus control, the following shall be submitted or indicated on
the plan.
1. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan conducted using the
procedures set forth in Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: a
Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development, published by the
Maine Department of Envirom11ental Protection, revised September,
1992. The analysis and control plan shall include all worksheets,
engineering calculations, and construction specifications and
diagrams for control measures, as required by the Technical Guide.
2. A long-term maintenance plan for all phosphorus control measures.
3. The contour lines shovm on the phosphorus plan shall be at an
interval of no less than two (2) feet.
4. Areas with sustained slopes greater than 20% covering more than
one acre shall be delineated.
33. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction
debris.
22
ARTICLE 7 - FINAL PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION
.
Ahy subdivision containing more than four lots or dwelling units, or any subdivision
containing a proposed street is a Major Subdivision subject to this article. (A Major
Subdivision requires a Sketch Plan, Preliminary Plan and Final Plan.)
7.1 Procedure.
A. Within six months after the approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant
shall submit an application for approval of the final plan at least fourteen
(14) calendar days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. Applications
shall be submitted by registered mail to the Board in care of the municipal
office or delivered by hand to the municipal office. The municipal office
shall issue a dated receipt. If the application for the final plan is not
submitted within six months after preliminary plan approval, the Board
shall require resubmission of the preliminary plan, except as stipulated
below. The final plan shall approximate the layout shown on the
preliminary plan, plus any changes required by the Board.
If an applicant cannot submit the final plan within six months, due to delays
caused by other regulatory bodies, or other reasons, the applicant may
request an extension. Such a request for an extension to the filing deadline
shall be filed, in writing, with the Board prior to the expiration of the filing
period. In considering the request for an extension the Board shall make
findings that the applicant has made due progress in preparation of the final
plan and in pursuing approval of the plans before other agencies, and that
municipal ordinances or regulations which may impact on the proposed
development have not been amended.
B. All applications for final plan approval for a major subdivision shall be
accompanied by payment of any application, technical review, advertising,
mailing or other fees as established by the Fee Schedule Ordinance of the
Tovvn of Glenburn. If the Board does not decide to hold a public hearing
under Section 7.1.H, the advertising fee shall be refunded to the Applicant.
D. If the preliminary plan identified any areas listed on or eligible to be listed
on the National Register of Historic Places, in accordance with Section
5.3.D.24, the applicant shall submit a copy of the plan and a copy of any
proposed mitigation measures to the Maine Historic Preservation
commission prior to submitting the final plan application.
E. The applicant, or the applicant's duly authorized representative, shall attend
the meeting of the Board to discuss the final plan. Failure to attend the
meeting to present the final plan application shall result in a delay of any
action by the Board until such time as the applicant follows the appropriate
process to appear on the Board's agenda.
23
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
F. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of the final plan application,
the Board shall detennine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant in writing of its determination. If the application is not complete,
the Code Enforcement Officer, as directed by the Board, shall notify th~
applicant in writing of the specific additional material needed to complete '
the application.
G. Upon detennination that a complete application has been submitted for
review, the Code Enforcement Officer, as directed by the Board, shall
notify the applicant in writing of its detem1ination. The Board shall
determine whether to hold a public hearing on the final plan application.
H. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within
thirty (30) calendar days of determining it has received a complete
application, and shall publish a notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing in a newspaper of local circulation at least two times, the date of the
first publication to be at least seven days before the hearing. In addition,
the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least three prominent places
within the municipality at least seven days prior to the hearing. The
municipal office will notify the applicant and abutting property owners of
the hearing date.
I. Before the Board grants approval of the final plan, the applicant shall meet
the performance guarantee requirements contained in Article 11.
J. Within thirty (30) calendar days from the public hearing, or within sixty
( 60) calendar days of receiving a complete application if no hearing is held,
or within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the
Board and the applicant, the Board shall make findings of fact and
conclusions relative to the criteria for approval contained in Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404 and the standards of this ordinance. If the Board finds that
all the criteria of the statute and the standards of this ordinance have been
met, it shall approve the final plan. If the Board finds that any of the
criteria of the statute or the standards of this ordinance have not been met,
the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application with
conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the subdivision. The
Board shall specify in v.lfiting its findings of fact and reasons for any
decision.
7.2 Submissions For Final Plan of Major Subdivisions.
The final plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of
not more than one hundred feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing
more than one hundred acres may be dra\vn at a scale of not more than two
hundred feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read. Plans
shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin of 1.5
inches outside of the borderline on the left side for binding and a one-half inch
margin outside the border along the remaining sides. The Plan shall reserve space
011 the plan for endorsement. Two reproducible, stable-based transparencies, one
24
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
- -
to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the municipal
office, and ten copies of the plan shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Office, along with all accompanying information no less than fourteen (14)
calendar days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. The applicant may
instead submit one reproducible stable-based transparent ·original of the final plan
and one recording plan with ten copies of the final plan within the stated
timeframe.
The final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following infonnation.
A. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality m
which it is located, plus the assessor's map and lot numbers.
B. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property
lines, existing buildings, watercourses, and other essential existing physical
features.
C. An indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public
sewer, a written statement from the sewer district indicating the district has
reviewed and approved the sewerage design shall be submitted.
D. An indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
1. When water is to be supplied by an existing public water supply, a
written statement from the servicing water district shall be submitted
indicating the district has reviewed and approved the water system
design. A written statement shall be submitted from the fire chief
approving all hydrant locations or other fire protection measures
deemed necessary.
2. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate
ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a
hydro geologist familiar with the area.
E. The date the plan was prepared, north point, graphic map scale.
F. The names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, and individual or
company who prepared the plan.
G. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
H. If different than those submitted with the preliminary plan, a copy of any
proposed deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots or
dwellings in the subdivision.
I. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains,
culverts, and drainage \Vays on or adjacent to the prope1iy to be subdivided.
J. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed streets,
highways, easements, buildings, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent
25
to the subdivision. The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the
location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and boundary line
to be readily detem1ined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines
shall be tied to reference points previously established. The location,
bearing and length of street lines, lot lines and parcel boundary lines shall
be certified by a land surveyor registered in Maine. The original
reproducible plan shall be embossed with the seal of the registered land
surveyor and be signed by that individual.
K. Street plans, meeting the requirements of Section 8.5 and the Glenburn
Road Ordinance.
L. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions
of such dedication. Written offers to convey title to the municipality of all
public ways and open spaces shoV\711 on the Plan, and copies of agreements
or other documents showing the manner in which open spaces to be retained
by the developer or lot owners are to be maintained shall be submitted. If
proposed streets and/or spaces or other land is to be offered to the
municipality, written evidence that the Municipal Officers are satisfied with
the legal sufficiency of the written offer to convey title shall be included.
M. The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation
as depicted on the municipality's Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall be
delineated on the plan with a notation made on the final plan.
N. A list of construction items, with cost estimates, that will be completed by
the applicant prior to the sale of lots, and evidence that the applicant has
financial commitments or resources to cover these costs.
0. The Board shall verify that the following minimum conditions are placed on
the final plan:
a) All of the property pins have been set, or to be set, on all lots within the
subdivision before any lots are sold, or building permits are issued;
b) The statement "this subdivision plan will become null and void if not
recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds within 60 days of final
approval.
P. Approval Space: Suitable space to record on the approved plan the date and
conditions of approval, if any. This space shall be similar to the following
example:
THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT AFTER REVIEWING THE SUBDIVISION
SHOWN BY THIS PLAN AND CONSIDERING EACH OF THE
CRITERIA SET FORTH IN 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404, AS AMENDED, AND
CONSIDERING EACH OF THE CRITERIA SET FORTH IN THE
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF GLENBURN, THE
UNDERSIGNED HAVING MADE FINDINGS OF FACT
ESTA.B -LISHING THAT THE PROPOSED SUBDIVISION.MEETS ALL '
26
OF THE CRITERIA SET FORTH THEREIN, AND THEREFORE THE
SUBDIVISION IS APPROVED.
GLENBURN PLANNING BOARD:
Date:
Conditions of Approval: -----
7.3 Final Approval and Filing.
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the applicant is in
violation of the provisions of a previously approved Plan within the
municipality.
B. Prior to approval of the final plan application by the Planning Board, the
following approvals, as applicable, shall be obtained in ·writing, unless
waived by the Planning Board:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location
of Development Act.
2. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Natural
Resources Protection Act or if a storm water management permit or a
wastewater discharge license is needed.
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to
provide a public water system.
4. Maine Department of Human Services, if an engineered subsurface
wastewater disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
5. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a pennit under Section 404 of the
Clea.J:?. Water Act is required.
6. Maine Department of Transportation, if a permit under 23 M.R.S.A.
§ 704 or§ 704-A is required.
27
C. Upon findings of fact and detennination that all standards in Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4404, and this ordinance have been met, and upon voting to
approve the subdivision1 a majority of the Board members shall sign and
date both transparencies and shall write any conditions of approval on both
transparencies of the signed plan as ·paii· of its permanent record. One paper
copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the tax assessor. One paper
copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement
Officer. It is the responsibility of the developer to have the subdivision
recorded in the Penobscot Registry of Deeds within sixty (60) days of the
date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Board. Failure to
do so shall result in the subdivision becoming null and void.
D. At the time the Board grants final plan approval, it may permit the Plan to
be divided into two or more phases subject to any conditions the Board
deems necessary in order to ensure the orderly development of the Plan. If
any municipal or quasi-municipal department head notified of the proposed
subdivision informs the Board that their department or district does not have
adequate capital facilities to service the subdivision, the Board may require
the plan to be divided into two or more phases subject to any conditions the
Board deems necessary in order to allow the orderly planning, financing
and provision of public services to the subdivision. If the expansion,
addition or purchase of the needed facilities is included in the
municipality's capital improvements program, the time period of the
phasing shall be no longer than the time period contained in the capital
improvements program for the expansion, addition or purchase.
E. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final
plan after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on
the plan, unless the revised final plan is first submitted and the Board
approves any modifications, except in accordance with Article 11. The
Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets the criteria of Title
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404, and the standards of this ordinance. In the event
that a Plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be
considered null and void, and the Board shall file a notice of noncompliance
with the Registry of Deeds, which would put prospective purchasers on
notice that the plan was not properly approved.
F. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to
constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any
street, easement, or other open space shown on such plan. Vlhen a park,
playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on the plan to be
dedicated to the municipality, approval of the plan shall not constitute an
acceptance by the municipality of suc!1 areas. The Board shall require the
plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require
the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the municipal
officers covering future deed and title dedication, and provision for the cost
of grading, development. equipment, and maintenance of any such
dedicated area. , ~
28
G. Except in the case of a phased development plan, failure to complete
substantial construction of the subdivision within five years of the date of
approval and signing of the plan shall render the plan r:mll and void. The
Board shall require the plans to contain appropriate notes to thi~ effect.
Upon determining that a subdivision's approval has expired under this
paragraph, the Board shall have a notice recorded in the Registry of Deeds
to that effect.
29
ARTICLE 8 - REVIEW CRITERIA, PERFORM:ANCE
STANDARDS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES
The performance standards in this article are intended to clarify and expand upon the
criteria for approval found within the subdivision statute (Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404).
In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Board shall review the application for
conformance with the following perfonnance standards and make findings that each has
been met prior to the approval of a final plan. Compliance with the design guidelines in
this article shall be considered to be evidence of meeting the appropriate perfonnance
standards. Proposed subdivisions not in compliance with the design guidelines of this
article may be considered, but the applicant shall provide clear and convincing evidence
that the proposed design will meet the performance standard(s) and the statutory criteria.
In all instances the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that all
performance standards and statutory criteria for approval have been met or will be met.
8.1 Pollution.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or
air pollution. In making this determination, the Planning Board shall at least
consider the following:
1. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood
plains;
2. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support
waste disposal;
3. The slope of the land and its effects on effluents;
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and
5. The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and
regulations.
B. Performance Standards - Pollution -
1. The proposed subdivision shall not discharge wastewater to a water body
without a license from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
2. Discharges of storm water shall be treated to remove oil, grease, and
sediment prior to discharge into surface water bodies. When the
subdivision is within the watershed of Pushaw Lake, the stom1 water shall
be treated in order to remove excess nutrients.
. 30
----------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
8.2 Sufficient Water.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available
for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision. '
-
B. Design Guidelines - Sufficiei1t Water -
1. Well Constructions.
a. Due to the increased chance of contamination from surface water, dug
wells shall be prohibited.
b. Wells shall not be constructed within 100 feet of the center line of the
traveled way of any street, if located downhill from the street, or
within 50 feet of the center line of the traveled way of any street, if
located uphill of the street. This restriction shall be included as a note
on the plan and as a deed restriction in any deed of conveyance for the
effected lots.
2. Fire Protection. (In the event that such municipal infrastructure, facilities
and organizations are established and as applicable)
a. Fire hydrants connected to a public water supply system shall be
located as approved by the Glenburn Fire Chief and the Glenburn
Road Commissioner.
b. Minimum storage capacity: There shall be 2,000 gallons per lot or
principal building, but in no case shall there be less than 10,000
gallons per subdivision. The Board may require additional storage
capacity upon a recommendation from the fire chief. Where ponds are
proposed for water storage, the capacity of the pond shall be calculated
based on the lowest water level less an equivalent of three feet of ice.
c. Hydrants or other provisions for drafting water shall be provided to the
specifications of the fire department. Minimum pipe size connecting
dry hydrants to ponds or storage vaults shall be six inches.
d. Where the dry hydrant or other water source is not within the right-ofway
of a proposed or existing street, an easement in perpetuity to the
municipality shall be provided to allow access. The applicant shall
construct a suitable access way to the hydrant or other water source.
C. Performance Standards - Sufficient \Vater-
1. Water Supply. (In the event that such municipal infrastructure,
facilities and organizations are established and available)
a. When a subdivision is to be served by a publicly o\;v1Jed public
water system, the complete supply system v,,ithin the subdivision
including fire hydrants shall be installed at the expense of the
applicant. The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants,
31
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
and service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing
by the servicing water company or district and the fire chief.
b. When a proposed subdivision is' not within the area designated for
public water supply service in the comprehensiv.e plan, the water
supply shall be from individual wells or a private community water
system.
(i) Proposed well locations shall be sited. In the alternative,
the applicant may propose other mechanisms to ensure that
the placement of wells and/or subsurface wastewater
disposal systems on a lot do not interfere with the ability to
place such facilities on adjoining lots.
(ii) Lot design shall permit placement of wells, subsurface
waste water disposal areas, and reserve sites for subsurface
waste water disposal areas in compliance with the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the
(iii) If a central water supply system is provided by the
applicant, the location and protection of the source, the
design, construction and operation of the system shall
conform to the standards of the Maine Rules Relating to
Drinking Water (10-144A C.M.R. 231).
(iv) In areas where the comprehensive plan has identified the
need for additional water storage capacity for fire fighting
2. Water Quality.
-purposes, the applicant shall provide adequate water
storage facilities. Facilities may be ponds with dry
hydrants, underground storage reservoirs or other methods
acceptable to the fire chief. An easement shall be granted
to the municipality granting access to and maintenance of
dry hydrants or reservoirs where necessary. The Board
may waive the requirement for water storage only upon
submittal of evidence that the soil types in the subdivision
will not permit their construction or installation and that the
fire chief has indicated in writing that acceptable alternate
methods of fire protection are available.
If existing water quality contains known contaminants in excess of the
secondary drinking \:Vater standards in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking
Water, that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the plan to be recorded in the
Regi~try of Deeds.
8.3 Municipal \Vater Supply.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable
burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be used.
32
B. Performance Standards - Municipal Water Supply: (In the event that such
municipal infrastructure, facilities and organizations are established and
available):
A proposed subdivision shall not generate a demand on the source, treatment
facilities or distribution system of the servicing water company or district
beyond the capacity of those system components, considering improvements
that are planned to be in place prior to occupancy of the subdivision. The
applicant shall be responsible for paying the costs of system improvements to
the district or company's system as necessary to alleviate existing deficiencies.
8.4 Erosion.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable
soil erosion or a reduction in the land's capacity to hold water so that a
dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
B Performance Standards - Erosion:
1. The proposed subdivision shall prevent soil erosion from entering
waterbodies, wetlands, and adjacent properties.
2. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control
plan, if applicable and required, shall be implemented during the
site preparation, construction and clean-up stages.
3. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be
removed from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads,
parking areas, and building excavations.
8.5 Traffic Conditions.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable
highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the
use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed and, if the
proposed subdivision requires driveways or entrances onto a state aid
highway located outside the urban compact area of an urban compact
municipality as defined by Title 23, section 754, the Department of
Transportation has provided documentation indicating that the driveways or
entrances conforms to Title 23, section 704 and any rules adopted under that
section.
The following criteria and specifications are contained in the Town of
Glenburn Road Ordinance.
1. Access Control
2. Street Design
3. Construction Standards
B. Performance Standards - Traffic Conditions:
,.,,..,
.) .)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
1. In general, provision shall be made for vehicular access to the subdivision
and circulation within the subdivision in such a manner as to:
a. Safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in existing streets
and within the subdivision;
b. A void traffic congestion on any street; and
c. Provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the
subdivision.
2. More specifically, access and circulation shall also confonn to the following
standards:
a. The street giving access to the subdivision and neighboring streets and
intersections which can be expected to carry traffic generated by the
subdivision shall have the capacity, or be suitably improved at
developers expense, to accommodate that traffic and avoid unreasonable
congestion. In addition, those portions of existing tovm ways, public
easements, and discontinued town and county ways which are adjacent
to any portion of the parcel being subdivided and which will serve as
major accesses to the proposed subdivision shall be widened and
approved to the standards required by the Glenburn Road Ordinance.
Such improvements, including rights-of-way acquisitions, shall be
completed at the Subdivider's expense and shall be subject to the same
performance guarantees as are other improvements.
b. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be made for turning
lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage roads, sidewalks, bicycle ways
and traffic controls within existing public streets.
c. Access ways to non-residential subdivisions or to multifamily
developments shall be designed to avoid queuing of entering vehicles on
any street. Left lane storage capacity shall be provided to meet
anticipated demand. A Licensed Civil Engineer shall do a study or
analysis to determine the need for a left-tum storage lane.
d. Where topographic and other site conditions allow, provision shall be
made for street connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or
potential use within areas of the municipality designated as growth areas
in the comprehensive plan; or in non-residential subdivisions when such
access shall be provided if it will:
L Facilitate fire protection services as approved by the fire chief; or .
IL Enable the public to travel between two existing or potential uses,
generally open to the public, without need to travel upon a
public street.
e. Street Names, Signs and Lighting .•
34
Streets, which join and are in aligmnent with streets of abutting or
neighboring properties, shall bear the same name. Names of new streets
shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of
existing streets within the municipality, and shall be subject to the
approval of the Board. Prior to approval of the proposed names of
streets, the names shall be submitted to the U.S. Postal Service for
review and comment. The developer shall either install street name,
traffic safety and control signs meeting municipal specifications or
reimburse the municipality for the costs of their installation.
f. Clean-up.
Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct
a thorough clean up of stumps and other debris from the entire street
right-of-way.· If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed,
the disposal/debris site shall be indicated on the plan, and be suitably
covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.
8.6 Sewage Disposal.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate
sewage waste disposal and will not cause an unreasonable burden on
municipal services if they are utilized
B. Performance Standards - Sewage Disposal -
1. Public System. (In the event that such municipal infrastructure, facilities
and organizations are established and available)
a. When a subdivision is proposed to be served by the public sewage
system, the complete collection system within the subdivision,
including manholes and pump stations, shall be installed at the
expense of the applicant.
b. The sewer district shall certify that providing service to the proposed
subdivision is within the capacity of the system's existing collection
and treatment system or improvements planned to be complete prior
to the construction of the subdivision.
c. The sewer district shall review and approve the construction
drawings for the sewerage system. The size and location of laterals,
collectors, manholes, and pump stations shall be reviewed and
approved in writing by the servicing sewer district or department as
appropriate.
2. Private Systems.
a. When a proposed subdivision is not within the area designated for
public sewage disposal service in the comprehensive plan,
com1ection to the public system shall not be pennitted. Se\vage
disposal shall be private subsurface \Vastewater disposal system.s or a,
35
private treatment facility with sub-surface discharge. Surface
discharge (i.e. spray irrigation) shall only be by Planning Board
waiver and MDEP permit.
b. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface
sewage disposal on each lot prepared by a Maine Licensed Site
Evaluator in full compliance with the requirements of the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
i. The site evaluator shall certify in \\.Titing that all test pits, which
meet the requirements for a new system, represent an area large
enough to accommodate a 3-bedroom stone disposal area on
soils, which meet the Disposal Rules.
ii. In no instance shall a disposal system be located on any lot
different than the dwelling for which it was designed to serve.
iii. No subsurface wastewater disposal system shall be installed
within the 100-year flood, or land containing flood plain soils.
For the purpose of this chapter "Flood plain Soils" are soils
formed in Alluvial Deposits and include: Fryburg (Hadley),
Lovewell (Winooski), Cornish, Charles (Limerick), Medomak
(Saco, Lille, Ondawa, Podunk and Rumney soils.
8. 7 Municipal Solid Waste Disposal.
A. Statutory Criteria: The proposed subdivision will not cause an
unreasonable burden on the municipality's ability to dispose of solid waste, if
municipal services are utilized.
B. Performance Standards- Municipal Solid Waste Disposal -
If the additional solid waste from the proposed subdivision exceeds the capacity
of the municipal solid waste facility, causes the municipal facility to no longer
be in compliance with its license from the Department of Environmental
Protection, or causes the municipality to exceed its contract with a nonmunicipal
facility, the applicant shall make alternate aiTangements for the
disposal of solid waste. The alternate arrangements shall be at a disposal
facility that is in compliance with its license. The Board may not require the
alternate arrangement to exceed a period of five years.
8.8 Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision '~'ill not have an undue
adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics,
historic sites, s!gnificai1t wildlife habitat identified by Inland Fisheries ::ind
Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any
public rights for physical or visual access to the shoreline.
36
B. Design Guidelines -Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values -
1. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
Unless located in areas designated . as a gwwth area in the
comprehensive plan, a subdivision in which tlie land cover type at the
time of application is forested shall maintain a wooded buffer strip no
less than fifty feet in width along all existing public roads. The buff er
may be broken only for driveways and streets.
2. Retention of Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features.
a. The subdivision may reserve between 5% and 10% of the area of
the subdivision as open space in order to provide for the
recreational needs of the occupants of the subdivision and/or to
maintain the scenic or natural beauty of the area.
b. Subdivisions with an average density of more than two dwelling
units per acre shall provide no less than twenty-five percent of the
open space as usable open space to be improved for ball fields,
playgrounds or other similar active recreation facility. A site
intended to be used for active recreation purposes, such as a
playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry, have
a total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and
have no major dimensions of less than 200 feet.
c. Sites selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation purposes
shall have such access, as the Board may deem suitable and no
less than 25 feet of road frontage. The configuration of such sites
shall be deemed adequate by the Board with regard to scenic
attributes and significant wildlife habitat to be preserved, together
with sufficient areas for trails, lookouts, etc. where necessary and
appropriate.
d. Proposed subdivisions which include or are adjacent to buildings
or sites on the National Register of Historic Places or which the
comprehensive plan has identified as being of historical
significance shall be designed in such a manner as to minimize the
impacts on the historic features.
3. Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat and Impmiant Habitat Areas.
The following guidelines are designed to protect the significant wildlife
resources identified in the municipality. The Board recognizes that
wildlife management must take into account many site-specific
variables. Applicants proposing to subdivide land within identified
wildlife resources must consult with the Maine Depaiiment of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife or a qualified wildlife biologist and provide their
written comments to the Board. The guidelines of this section shall
37
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
apply to only those subdivisions, which include significant wildlife
habitat or resources.
a. Protection of Habitat of Endangered or Threatened Species.
i. Habitat or species appearing on the official state or federal
lists of endangered or threatened species shall be placed in
open space.
11. Deed restrictions and notes on the plan shall reflect
standards from the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife for removal of vegetation within 250 feet of the
habitat for species appearing on the list of endangered or
threatened species unless the Depmiment of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife has approved cutting of vegetation in
~Titing.
b. Protection of Waterfowl, Shorebird, and Wading Bird Habitat,
Atlantic Salmon Spawning and Nursery Areas.
L There shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land
extending 75 feet inland from the normal high-water mark of
the following habitat areas:
(a). Shorebird nesting, feeding and staging areas and
seabird nesting islands;
(b ). High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird
habitats, including nesting and feeding areas;
(c). Critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea
run salmon as defined by the Atlantic Sea Run
Salmon Commission, or
( d). Other important habitat areas identified m the
comprehensive plan.
11. This restriction shall appear as a note on the plan and as a deed
restriction to the affected lots.
c. Protection of Deer Wintering Areas.
The report prepared by a wildlife biologist, selected or approved by
the Board, shall include a management plan for any deer wintering
m·eas identified and mapped after the date of adoption of this
Ordinance by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as
having a high or moder~te value.
d. Protection of Important Shore land Areas.
38
----------------------------------------························································································
Tree removal and Clearing provisions for activities conducted within
the Shoreland Zones of Glenburn shall be in accordance with the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance of the· ToWl} of Glenburn.
_e. Protection of Other Important Wildlife Habitat
If the proposed subdivision includes other important wildlife habitat
as identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or
the comprehensive plan, the Department or a qualified wildlife
biologist shall review the restrictions on activities in and around
these areas and their comments presented in writing to the Board.
C. Performance Standards -Aesthetic, Cultural and Natural Values -
1. Preservation of Natural Beauty and Aesthetics.
a. The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit
the clearing of trees to those areas designated on the plan.
b. Except in areas of the municipality designated by the comprehensive
plan as growth areas, the subdivision shall be designed to minimize the
visibility of buildings from existing public roads.
c. The Board may require the application to include a landscape plan that
will show the preservation of any existing trees larger than 24 inches
diameter breast height, the replacement of trees and vegetation, and
graded contours.
2. Retention of Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features.
a. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated
by the comprehensive plan as open space or greenbelt, that portion
shall be reserved for open space preservation.
b. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as
a unique natural area by the comprehensive plan or the Maine Natural
Areas Program the plan shall indicate appropriate measures for the
preservation of the values, which qualify the site for such designation.
c. If any portion of the subdivision is designated a site of historic or
prehistoric importance by the comprehensive plan or the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission, appropriate measures for the
protection of the historic or prehistoric resources shall be included in
the plan.
d. The subdivision shall reserve sufficient undeveloped land to provide
~or the recreational needs of the occupants.
e. Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character,
configuration and location suitable for the particular use intended.
f. Reserved open space land .may be dedicated to the municipality.
39
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
g. Where land within the subdivision is not suitable or is insufficient in
amount, where the applicant prefers, or when suggested by the
comprehensive pl.an, a payment in lieu of dedication may be·
substituted for the reservation of some or part of the open space
requirement. Payments in lieu of dedication shall be calculated based
on the percentage of reserved open space that otherwise would be
required and that percentage of the projected market value of the
developed land at the time of the subdivision, as detennined by the
municipal tax assessor. The payment in lieu of dedication shall be
deposited into a municipal land open space or outdoor recreation
facility acquisition or improvement fund.
3. Protection of Significant Wildlife Habitat.
a. If any portion of a proposed subdivision lies within:
L 250 feet of the following areas identified and mapped by the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the comprehensive
plan as:
(a) Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists
of endangered or threatened species;
(b) High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats,
including nesting and feeding areas;
( c) Shorebird nesting, feeding and staging areas and seabird nesting
islands;
( d) Critical spavming and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon
as defined by the Atlantic Sea Run Salmon Cmmnission; or
11. 1,320 feet of an area identified and mapped by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as a high or moderate value deer
wintering area or travel corridor; or
m. Other important habitat areas identified in the comprehensive plan
including coastal wildlife concentration areas,
The applicant shall demonstrate that there shall be no adverse impacts on
the habitat and species it supports. A report prepared by a wildlife
biologist ce11ified by the Wildlife Society with demonstrated experience
with the wildlife resource being impacted shall be submitted. This
rep011 shall assess the potential impact of the subdivision on the
significant habitat and adjacent areas that are imp011ant to the
maintenance of the affected species and shall describe appropriate
mitigation measures to ensure that the subdivision will have no adverse
impacts on the habitat and the species it supports.
40
4. Preservation of Public Access to Shoreline.
Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be
maintained by means of easements or rights-of-wa)1, or" should be included
in the open space with provisions made for continued public access ..
8.9 Conformity With Local Ordinances and Plans.
A Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision confom1s to the duly adopted
subdivision regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan, development plan
or land use plan, if any. In making this determination, the municipal
reviewing authority may interpret these ordinances and plans.
B. Design Guidelines - Confom1ity With Local Ordinances and Plans -
1. Lots.
a. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the
street.
b. Deed restrictions and notes on the plan shall either prohibit future
divisions of the lots or specify that any future division shall
constitute a revision to the plan and shall require approval from the
Board, subject to the criteria of the subdivision statute, the
standards of this ordinance and conditions placed on the original
approval.
c. If a lot on one side of a stream, as defined by the Town of
Glenburn Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, road or other similar
barrier fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it may
not be combined with a lot on the other side of the stream, tidal
water, or road to meet the minimum lot size.
d. Even numbers shall be assigned to lots on one side of the street,
and odd numbers on the opposite side.
e. All street frontage shall be continuous.
2. Monuments.
a. The location of permanent markers or pins set or to be set at all
comers shall be shovvn on final plan.
b. All lot monuments or pins shall be set before any lot is sold in the
subdivision and ce1iified as such by a registered land surveyor and
submitted to the CEO'S office for filing.
41
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
C. Performance Standards - Conformity With Local Ordinances and Plans -
All lots shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning
ordinance for the zoning district in which they are located. The proposed
subdivision shall meet all applicable· performance standards or design
criteria of the existing lot size ordinance, zoning ordinance, or any other
applicable ordinance.
8.10 Financial and Technical Capacity.
A. Statutory Criteria - The subdivider has adequate financial and technical
capacity to meet the standards of this Ordinance.
B. Performance Standards - Financial and Technical Capacity -
1. Financial Capacity.
The applicant shall have adequate financial resources to construct the
proposed improvements and meet the criteria of the statute and the
standards of this ordinance. When the applicant proposes to construct the
buildings as well as the subdivision improvements, the applicant shall have
adequate financial resources to construct the total development. In making
the above determinations the Board shall consider the proposed time frame
for construction and the effects of inflation. See Performance
Guarantees.
2. Technical Ability.
a. The applicant shall retain qualified contractors and consultants to
supervise, construct and inspect the required improvements in the
proposed subdivision.
b. In determining the applicant's technical ability the Board shall consider
the applicant's previous experience, the experience and training of the
applicant's consultants and contractors, and the existence of violations
of previous approvals granted to the applicant.
8.11 Surface Waters; Outstanding River Segments.
A. Statutory Criteria - Whenever situated entirely or partially within a watershed
of any pond or lake, or within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or river as
defined in Title 38, Chapter 3, subchapter I, article 2-B, the proposed
subdivision will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or
unreasonably affect the shoreline of that body of water.
1. When lots in a subdivision have frontage on an outstanding river segment,
the proposed subdivision plan must requir~ principal structures to have a
combined lot shore frontage and setback from the nonnal high watermark
of 500 feet.
a. To avoid circumventing the intent of this provision, whenever a
proposed .subdivision adjoins a shoreland strip narrower than 250
42
feet, which is not lotted, the proposed subdivision shall be reviewed
as if lot lines extended to the shore.
b: The frontage and set-back provisions of this paragraph do not apply
either within areas zoned as general development or its equivalent
under shoreland zoning, Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter I, Article 2-
B, or within areas designated by ordinance as densely developed.
The detem1ination of which areas are densely developed must be
based on a finding that existing development met the definitional
requirements of Section 4401, Subsection 1, on September 23, 1983.
B. Design Guidelines - Surface Waters; Outstanding River Segments
1. Within a strip of land extending 100 feet inland from the normal highwater
line of a great pond or any tributary to a great pond, and 75 feet
from any other water body or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip
of vegetation shall be preserved. The deeds to any lots, which include any
such land, shall contain the following restrictions:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in
the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree
crown. However, a footpath not to exceed ten feet in width as
measured between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared
line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
Adjacent to a great pond, or a tributary to a great pond, the width
of the footpath shall be limited to six feet.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is pem1itted
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation
is maintained. No more than 40% of the total volume of trees four
inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 112 feet above ground
level may be removed in any ten-year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat adjacent to
great ponds, and tributaries to great ponds, existing vegetation
under three feet in height and other ground cover shall not be
removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses
as described above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom one third of the tree is
pem1itted.
C. Performance Standards - Surface Waters; Outstanding River Segments
Cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies shall not increase
Yvater temperature; result in shoreline erosion or sedimentation of water
bodies.
43
8.12 Ground Water.
A. Statutory Criteria - The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction
with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of ground
_ water.
B. Perfonnance Standards - Ground Water
1. Ground Water Quality.
a. When a hydro geologic assessment is submitted, the assessment shall
contain at least the following information:
L A map showing the basic soils types.
IL The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
iii. Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
iv. Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in
the subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
v. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on
ground water resources. In the case of residential developments,
the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post
development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within
the subdivision, or at the subdivision boundaries; or at a distance of
1,000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a
shortest distance
vi. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within
200 feet of the subdivision boundaries.
vii. The nitrogen plumes of all existing and proposed subsurface
wastewater disposal systems.
b. Projections of ground water quality shall be based on the assumption of
drought conditions (assuming 60% of annual average precipitation).
c. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the
ground water to more than one half of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration
in the ground water to more than the Secondary Drinking Water
Standards.
d. If ground water contains contaminants in -ex"ess of the primary
standards, and the subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water
supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how \Vater quality will be
improved or treated.
44.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
e. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary
standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the
parameters il}. question to exceed 150% of the ambient concentrat·ion ..
f. Subsurface waste water .disposal systems and drinking water wells shall
be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If
construction standards for drinking water wells or other measures to
reduce ground water contamination and protect drinking water supplies
are recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included as
a requirement on the final plan, and as restrictions in the deeds to the
affected lots.
2. Ground Water Quantity.
a. Ground water withdrawals by a proposed subdivision shall not lower the
water table beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.
b. The developer shall provide written documentation that a proposed
subdivision shall not result in a lowering of the water table at the
subdivision boundary by increasing runoff with a corresponding
decrease in infiltration of precipitation.
8.13 Flood Areas.
A. Statutory Criteria: Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and
information presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is in a
floodprone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area, the
subdivider shall determine the I 00-year flood elevation and flood hazard
boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must
include a condition of plan approval requiring that principal structures in the
subdivision will be constructed with their lowest floor, including the
basement, at least one foot above the I 00-year flood elevation.
B. Performance Standards - Floodplain Management
I. When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
a. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damages.
b. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
c. The plan shall include· a statement that structures in the subdivision
shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at
least one foot above the I 00-year flood elevation. Such a restriction
shall be included in any deed, lease, purchase ai1d sale agreement, or
_document transferring or expressing intent to transfe1: aiw interest in
45
---------------------------------·························································································
real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share
interest. The statement shall clearly articulate that the municipality
may enforce any violation of the constructio.n requirement and that fact
shall also be included in the deed or any other docm:nent previously
'described. The construction requirement shall also be dearly stated on
the plan.
8.14 Freshwater Wetlands.
A. Statutory Criteria: All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision
have been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application,
regardless of the size of these wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands
may be done with the help of the local soil and water conservation district.
B. Performance Standards - Freshwater Wetlands
Freshwater wetlands shall be identified in accordance with the 1987 Corps of
Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, published by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers. The term "regardless of the size" shall be a discretionary
judgment of the individual perfom1ing the wetland delineation. In a "Pit and
Mound" topography the predominance of hydric/non-hydric soils shall be the
determining factor. In those situations only a State of Maine Certified Soil
Scientist shall make the hydric/non-hydric soil percentage determinations.
8.15 River, Stream or Brook.
A. Statutory Criteria: Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
subdivision has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the
application. For purposes of this section, "river, stream or brook" has the
same meaning as in Title 38, Section 480-B, Subsection 9.
B. Performance Standards - River Stream or Brook
All rivers, streams and brooks as defined in Title referenced above shall be
identified.
8.16 Storm Water Management.
A. Statutory Criteria: The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm
water management.
B. Design Guidelines - Storm Water Management
I. Design of best management practices shall be substantially equivalent to
those described in the Storm Water Afanagement for Maine: Best
A1anagement Practices, published by the Maine Department of
E11yiro?IDental Protection, 1995.
2. Drainage easements for existing water courses or proposed drainage ways
shall be provided at least 30 feet wide, conforming substantially with the
lines of existing natural drainage.
46
-------------------------------······················································································
C. Performance Standards - Storm Water Management
1. Adequate provision shall be made for the management of the quantity and .
quality of all storm water generated within the subdivision, and any drained
ground water through a management system of swales, culverts, under
drains, storm drains and best management practices equivalent to those
described in the Stormwater ,~1anagement for Alaine: Best Management
Practices, published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
1995, in conformance with the policies of the comprehensive plan. The
storm water management system shall be designed to meet the following
standards:
a. Quantity.
Peak discharge rates shall be limited to the predevelopment levels for
the 2-year, 10-year, and 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration storm
unless storm water from the subdivision will drain directly into a major
water body such as a great pond or the ocean. If storm water will drain
into a major water body, a letter of review must be obtained from the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
b. Quality.
L Major Subdivisions.
Storm water run-off in major subdivisions must be treated by the use
of best management practices equivalent to those described in the
Stormwater Management for Alaine: Best Management Practices,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
1995, to achieve, by design, 40% reduction in total suspended solids
when the impervious area exceeds one acre.
11. Minor Subdivisions.
Storm water run-off in minor subdivisions must be treated by the
use of best management practices equivalent to those described in
the Stormwater Management for Maine: Best A1anagement
Practices, published by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, 1995, to achieve, by design, 15% reduction in total
suspended solids.
2. Where necessary to achieve the above standards, there shall be provided
easements or drainage rights-of-\vay with swales, culverts, catch basins or
other means of channeling surface water within the subdivision and over
other properties. W11erever the stonn drainage system is not within the
right-of-way of a public street, perpetual easements shall be provided to
the municipality allowing maintenance and improvement of the system.
47
8.17 Spaghetti-Lots Prohibited.
A. Statutory Criteria: If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage
on a'. river, stream, brook, great pond, or coastal wetland as ·these features are
defined in- Title 38, Section 480-B, none of the lots created within the
subdivision shall have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
B. Performance Standards - Spaghetti Lots Prohibited
All lots depicted within the proposed subdivision shall meet the 8.17 .A
Criterion above.
8.18 Lake Phosphorus Concentration.
A. Statutory Criteria: The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed
subdivision will not unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus
concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed
subdivision.
B. Design Guidelines - Lake Phosphorus Concentration
1. When a proposed subdivision is within the direct watershed of Pushaw
Lake and qualifies for the simplified review procedure, as detailed in the
publication Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide
for Evaluating New Development, revised September, 1992, buffer strips
shall be provided on the downhill side of all lots along all tributaries to
Pushaw Lake and along Pushaw Lake.
2. When the proposed subdivision is within the direct watershed of a great
pond and does not qualify for simplified reviewed, the phosphorus
control measures shall meet the design criteria in Phosphorus Control in
Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
revised September, 1992.
C. Performance Standards - Lake Phosphorus Concentration
1. Phosphorus Export.
DDA
ANAD
AAD
a. Any subdivision within the watershed of a great pond shall limit its
post development phosphorus export to the standards required on the
great pond in whose watershed the subdivision is located. Those
standards, as established by the Maine Depmiment of Environmental
Protection for the Pusha\v Lake Watershed, are indicated below:
Direct Land Drainage area in Township in acres: 5,152
Area not available for development in acres: 700
Areas available for development in acres: 4,452
(DDA-ANAD)
48
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
GF
D
F
WQC
Grmvth Factor
Area likely to be de:eloped in acres:
(GF xAAD)
lbs. Phosphorus allocated to towns share of
Watershed per ppb in lake
Water Quality Category (mod-sensitive)
0.25
1,113
44.62
LOP Level of Protection (h=high (cold water fishery)
c
p
(m=mediurn)
Acceptable increase in Lake's phosphorus
Concentration in ppb
lbs. Per acre phosphorus allocation (FC/D)
1.00
0.040
b. The Town shall keep an accurate record of permits issued by
watershed and shall notify the comprehensive planning
committee of the actual development rates at five year
intervals, as the comprehensive plan is revised. The above
table shall be amended as required by amendments to the
comprehensive plan, reflecting changes m expected
development rates.
2. Simplified Phosphorus Review.
The simplified review may be used for:
a. Proposed subdivision of thTee or four lots with less than 200 feet of
new or upgraded street with a cumulative driveway length not to
exceed 450 feet for a three-lot subdivision or 600 feet for a four-lot
subdivision;
b. Proposed subdivision of three or four lots with no new or upgraded
street with a cumulative driveway length not to exceed 950 feet for
three lot subdivisions or 1, 100 feet for four lot subdivisions; or
c. Proposed subdivision consisting of multi-family dwellings that
have less than 20,000 square feet of disturbed area including
building parking, driveway, lawn, subsurface wastewater disposal
systems, and infiltration areas, and new or upgraded streets not
exceeding 200 linear feet.
d. A proposed subdivision which creates lots, \Vhich could be further
divided such that five or more lots may result, shall be subject to
the standard review procedures unless there are deed restrictions
prohibiting future divisions of the lots.
49
-----------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
e. The standards for simplified review are:
Water quality buffers must be left or established down
gradient of developed areas (including lawns), and mµst be
protected by deed restrictions. The following buffer widths
(length of flow path through the buffer) are required (to the
maximum extent reasonably feasible given lot limitations):
n If watershed's areal allocation is 0.05 lb/acre or less, 75 ft
wooded or 125 ft non-wooded.
m If watershed's areal allocation is greater than 0.05 lb/acre, 50
ft wooded or 100 ft non-wooded
1v Driveways and parking areas must be designed and
constructed so that (a) runoff is quickly shed from driveway
to buffer areas (to the maximum extent reasonably feasible
given lot limitations) and (b) disruption of natural drainage
patterns is minimized:
(a) Water bars, broad based drainage dips and
razor blades
(b) Ditches, swales and ditch turnouts
( c) Proper grading of gravel
v Roof runoff may not be channelized to the lake but must be
distributed over stable, well vegetated areas or infiltrated into
the soil (i.e. dry well)
v1 Use of fertilizers containing phosphorus prohibited except
when establishing new turf
vn Septic system must meet current requirements - plumbing
code with loam liner where appropriate
3. Standard Review.
This section shall apply to proposed subdivisions, which do not qualify for
the simplified review. Phosphorus export from a proposed development
shall be cakulated according to the procedures in Phosphorus Control in
Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development,
published by the Maine Depaiirnent of Environmental Protection, revised
September 1992. When a proposed subdivision creates lots which are
more than twice the required minimum lot size and there are no deed
restrictions proposed to prohibit future divisions, the applicant shall either
calculate phosphorus loading based on the maximum feasible number of
lots, and shall design controls adequate to limit the resulting phosphorus
loading, or shall reserve a portion of the pennitted phosphorus exp01i for
future divisions.
4. Maintenance and Use Restrictions for Phosphorus Control Measures.
Provisions for monitoring, inspections, and maintenance of phosphorus
control measures shall be included in the application.
50
a. Vegetative Buffer Strips.
Individual lot owners shall be required to maintain buffer areas on
their individual lots in accordance witli the following standards, to be
specified in recorded deed restrictions and as notes .on the plan. Where
a vegetative buffer strip is to be owned in common by property owners
in the subdivision, documentation establishing the lot owners'
association shall include the following standards.
L Wooded Buffers.
Wooded buffers shall be maintained m accordance with the
following:
(a) Selective cutting shall be pennitted on any lot, in any ten (10)
year period, of not more than forty ( 40%) percent of the
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter,
measured 4 Y2 feet above ground level.
(b) Cutting of dead, storm-damaged, diseased, and/ or unsafe
trees shall be allowed.
11. Non-wooded Buffers.
(a) Non-wooded buffers may be allowed to revert or to be
planted to forest, in which case the standards above shall
apply.
(b) A buffer must maintain a dense, complete and vigorous cover
of "non-lawn" vegetation, which shall be mowed no more
than once a year. Vegetation may include grass, other
herbaceous species, shrubs and trees.
( c) Activity within the buffer shall be conducted so as to prevent
damage to vegetation and exposure of mineral soil. Burning
of vegetation shall be prohibited.
(d) Buffers shall not be used for all-terrain vehicles or other
vehicular traffic.
b. Infiltration Systems.
Individual lot owners shall be responsible for maintenance of
individual infiltration systems according to the standards specified in
Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for
Evaluating J.\Tew Development, published by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, and revised September 19~2. Requirements
for maintenance shall be included in deed restrictions and as notes
upon the plan. As an alternative to maintenance by individual lot
owners, the applicant may designate some other entity to be contracted
to take the responsibility, and shall include the above referenced
maintenance provisions in any contractual agreement. Where
51.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
infiltration systems serve more than one lot, a lot owners' association
shall be established and the above referenced maintenance provisions
shall be referen~ed in the documentation establishing the association.
c. Wet Ponds.
A lot owners' association shall be established to maintain wet ponds,
unless the municipality or some other public entity agrees to assume
inspection and maintenance duties. Documentation establishing the
association or establishing an agreement with a public entity shall
include the maintenance standards specified in the manual Phosphorus
Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New
Development, published by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, revised September, 1992.
8.19 Impact on Adjoining Municipality.
A. Statutory Criteria: For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal
boundaries, the proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic
congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public
ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of the subdivision is
located.
B. Design Guidelines - Impact on Adjoining Municipality
If any portion of a subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, the
reviewing authorities must hold all meetings and hearings to review the
application jointly from each municipality.
C. Performance Standards - Impact on Adjoining Municipality
The reviewing authorities of all municipalities shall consider and make a
finding of fact regarding the criteria described in Title 30-A Section
4404(19).
52
-------------------------------------·························································································
ARTICLE 9 - CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
RESERVATION OR DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE
OF OPEN SPACE AND C01\1MON LAND, FACILITIES
AND SERVICES.
9.1 Design Guidelines - Cluster Developments (Open Space Developments).
A. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to allow for flexibility in the design of
housing developments to allow for the creation of open space which
provides recreational opportunities or protects important natural features
from the adverse impacts of development, provided that the net residential
density shall be no greater than is permitted in the district in which the
development is proposed. If cluster developments are permitted under the
Zoning Ordinance, the Board, in reviewing and approving proposed
residential subdivisions, might, to the extent authorized in the Zoning
Ordinance, modify the provisions related to dimensional requirements to
permit flexibility in approaches to housing and environmental design in
accordance with the following guidelines. This shall not be construed as
granting variances.
B. Application Procedure.
1. If authorized under the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Board may
allow lots within subdivisions to be reduced in area and width
below the minimum normally required by the Zoning Ordinance in
return for open space where the Board determines that the benefits
of the cluster approach will decrease development costs, increase
recreational opportunities or prevent the loss of natural features
without increasing the net density of the development. If an
applicant desires to pursue a cluster development, two sketch plans
shall be submitted with one layout as a standard subdivision and
the second as a cluster development indicating open space and
significant natural features. Each lot in the standard subdivision
shall meet the minimum lot size and lot width requirements of this
ordinance, and if not senriced by public sewer have an area
suitable for subsurface wastewater disposal according to the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. The number of buildable
lot~ or dwelling units in the cluster development shall in _no case
exceed the number of lots or dwelling units in the standard
subdivision.
2. Estimated costs of infrastructure development (roads, utilities, etc.)
shall accompany the plan.- The \vritten statement shall describe the
53
--------------------------------------------························································································
natural features, which will be preserved or enhanced by the
cluster approach. Natural features include, but are not limited to
moderate-to.,high valt+e wildlife and waterfowl habitats, important
agricultural soils, moderate-to-high yield aquifers and imp01iant
natural or historic sites· identified by the comprehensive plan as
worthy of preservation. The statement shall also compare the
impacts upon the municipality from each plan. Examples of
impacts are municipal cost for roads, school bussing, solid waste
removal, utility efficiencies, recreational opportunities, protection
of floodwater storage areas, and environmental impacts on
sensitive lands caused by construction act1v1t1es, underground
utilities, and reclamation of land and provision of land for
conservation use.
3. Within ten days of receiving the application, the Board shall invite
comments on the application from the appropriate town agencies,
and abutters. The Board may schedule a public hearing on the
proposal, in which case notice thereof shall be provided in
accordance with Section 6.1.G. Within thirty days of receiving the
application, or within thirty days after a public hearing, the Board
shall determine whether to allow the subdivision to be developed
in accordance with the cluster standards of this section.
C. Basic Requirements for Cluster Developments (Open Space
Developments).
1. Cluster developments shall meet all requirements of this ordinance and
the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Each building shall be an element of an overall plan for site
development. Only developments having a total site plan for structures
will be considered. The application shall illustrate the placement of
buildings and the treatment of spaces, paths, roads, service and parking
and in so doing shall take into consideration all requirements of this
section and of other relevant sections of this ordinance.
3. The net residential acreage shall be calculated by taking the total area of
the lot and subtracting, in order, the following:
a. 15% of the area of the lot to account for roads and parking.
b. Portions of the lot which, because of existing land uses or lack of
access, are isolated and unavailable for building purposes or for use
in common with the remainder of the lot, as determined by the
Board.
c. Portions of the lot shO\vn to be in a floodway or a coastal high
hazard zone as designated in the Flood Boundary and Floodway
Map prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration.
54
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
d. Portions of the lot, which are unsuitable for development in their
natural state due to topographical, drainage or subsoil conditions
~uch as, but not limited to:
L· Slopes.greater than 20%.
IL Organic soils.
ui. Wetland soils.
iv. 50% of the poorly drained soils.
v. Portions of the lot subject to rights of way.
vi. Portions of the lot located in the resource protection zone.
vii. Portions of the lot covered by surface waters.
vui. Portions of the lot utilized for storm water management
facilities.
4. In order to determine the maximum number of dwelling units pem1itted
on a tract of land, the net residential acreage shall be divided by the
minimum lot size required by the zoning ordinance. No building shall
be sited on slopes steeper than 25%, within 100 feet of any water body
or wetland, or on soil classified as being very poorly drained.
5. Unless a community sewage collection and treatment system is
provided, no lot shall be smaller in area than 20,000 square feet.
6. The total area of reserved open space within the development shall equal
or exceed the sum of the areas by which any building lots are reduced
below the minimum lot area normally required by the zoning ordinance.
No less than 30% of the reserved open space shall be usable open space.
7. Every building lot that is reduced in area below the amount normally
required shall be within 1, 000 feet of the common land.
8. The distance between buildings shall not be less than 20 feet.
9. No individual lot or dwelling unit shall have direct vehicular access onto
a public road existing at the time of development.
10. Shore frontage shall not be reduced below the mmmrnm normally
required by the zoning ordinance.
11. Where a cluster development (open space developments) abuts a body of
water, a usable portion of the shoreline, as well as reasonable access to
it, shall be a part of the common land.
55
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
9.2 Performance Standards - Reservation or Dedication and Maintenance of
Open Space and Common Land, Facilities and Sen'ices of Cluster
Developments.
A. All open space common land, facilities and property shall be owned by:
I. The owners of the lots or dwelling units by means of an mvners'
association;
2. An association which has as its principal purpose the conservation or
preservation of land in essentially its natural condition; or
3. The municipality.
B. Further subdivision of the common land or open space and its use for other
than non-commercial recreation, agriculture, or conservation purposes,
except for easements for underground utilities, shall be prohibited.
Structures and buildings accessory to non-commercial recreational or
conservation uses may be erected on the common land. When open space is
to be owned by an entity other than the municipality, there shall be a
conservation easement deeded to the municipality prohibiting future
development.
C. The common land or open space shall be shown on the final plan with
appropriate notations on the plan to indicate:
1. It shall not be used for future building lots; and
2. Which portions of the open space, if any, may be dedicated for
acceptance by the municipality?
D. The final plan application shall include the following:
1. Covenants for mandatory membership in the owners' association setting
forth the owners' rights, interests, and privileges in the association and
the common property and facilities, to be included in the deed for each
lot or dwelling.
2. Draft articles of incorporation of the proposed owners' association as a
not-for-profit corporation; and
3. Draft by-laws of the proposed O\Vners' associat10n specifying the
responsibilities and authority of the association, the operating
procedures of the association and providing for proper capitalization of
the association to cover the costs of major repairs, maintenance and
replacement of common facilities.
E. - In combination, the documents referenced· in paragraph D above shall
provide for the following.
1. The homeovmers' association shall have the responsibility of
maintaining the ~ommon property or facilities.
56
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
2. The association shall levy annual charges against all ov.111ers of lots or
dwelling units to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance,
repair and replacement of common property and facilities and tpx
assessments.
3. The association shall have the power to place a lien on the property of
members who fail to pay dues or assessments.
4. The developer or subdivider shall maintain control of the common
property, and be responsible for its maintenance until development
sufficient to support the association has taken place. The Board upon
request of the ov.111ers' association or the developer shall make such
determination.
57
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ARTICLE 10 - DWELLING UNIT SUBDIVISION
CRITERIA
IN ADDITION TO THE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
AND DESIGN GUIDELINES IN ARTICLE 8 AND ARTICLE
9, THIS ARTICLE SHALL APPLY TO ALL SUBDIVISIONS
CONSISTING OF DWELLING UNITS.
10.1 Utilization of Site
The plan for the development must reflect the natural capabilities of the site to
support development. Buildings, lots, and support facilities must be located in
those portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development.
Environmentally sensitive areas must be maintained and preserved to the
maximum extent. Natural drainage areas must also be preserved to the
maximum extent. The development must include measures for protecting these
resources, including but not limited to, modification of the proposed design of
the site, timing of the construction, and limiting the extent of excavation.
10.2 Traffic Access and Parking
A. Vehicular access to the site must be on roads, which have adequate capacity
to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
B. Any driveway or proposed street must be designed so as to provide the
minimum sight distance according to the Maine Department of Transportation
standards, to the maximum extent possible.
C. Points of access and egress must be located to avoid hazardous conflicts with
existing turning movements and traffic flows.
10.3 Internal Vehicular Circulation
The layout of the site must provide for the safe movement of passenger, service
and emergency vehicles tln·ough the site.
10.4 Parking Layout and Design
A. Off-street parking must confonn to the following standards:
1. All dwelling units must be provided two (2) off-street parking spaces.
2. Parking _areas with more than t\VO (2) parking spaces must be ?JTanged so
that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into the streets.
3. All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces must be located
at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, except where standards
for buffers require a greater distance. .
58 .
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
4. In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow must
be indicated by signs, pavement markings or other permanent indications
and maintained as necessary.
5. Parking areas for nonresidential uses must be designed to permit each motor
vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles. Double stack parking
may be permitted for residential parking in conjunction with residential uses
if both spaces in the stack are assigned to the occupants of the same
dwelling unit.
6. Provisions must be made to restrict the "overhang" of parked vehicles when
it might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian or
bicycle movement on adjacent walkways, or damage landscape materials.
10.5 Pedestrian Circulation
The site plan must provide for a system of pedestrian ways within the
development appropriate to the type and scale of development.
10.6 Utilities
The development must be provided with electrical, telephone, and
telecommunication service adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project.
New utility lines and facilities must be screened from view to the extent
feasible.
10. 7 Exterior Lighting
The proposed development must have adequate exterior lighting to provide for
its safe use during nighttime hours, if such use is contemplated. All exterior
lighting must be designed and shielded to avoid undue glare, adverse impact on
neighboring properties and rights-of-way, and the unnecessary lighting of the
night sky.
10.8 Buffering of Adjacent Uses
The development must provide for the use of buffering for adjacent uses where
there is a transition from one type of use to another use and for the screening of
mechanical equipment and service and storage areas. The buffer may be
provided by distance, landscaping, fencing, changes in grade, and/or a
combination of these or other techniques.
10.9 Noise
The development must control noise levels such that it will not create a
nuisance for neighboring propertjes.
10.10 Storage of Materials
Exposed nonresidential storage areas, exposed machinery, and areas used for
the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or other
. ~ ..
59
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
articles of salvage or refuse must have sufficient setbacks and screening (such
as stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge) to provide a buffer sufficient to
minimiz~ their impact on abutting residential use an.d users of puplic streets.
10.11 Landscaping
Landscaping must be provided as part of site design. The landscape plan for
the entire site must use landscape materials to integrate the various elements on
site, preserve and enhance the particular identity of the site, and create a
pleasing site character. The landscaping should define street edges, break up
parking areas, soften the appearance of the development, and protect abutting
properties.
10.12 Building Scale
New buildings within a built-up area should be compatible with the neighborhood
such that they reflect the overall building bulk, square footage, dimensions,
placement of the building on the lot, and rhythm of buildings and spaces along the
street edge and minimize the visual impact on the neighborhood.
60
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ARTICLE 11 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
11.1 · Types of Guarantees.
A. With submittal of the application for final plan approval, the applicant shall
provide one of the following perfonnance guarantees for an amount adequate
to cover the total construction costs of all required improvements, taking into
account the time-span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for
construction costs:
1. Either a certified check payable to the municipality or a savings account or
certificate of deposit naming the municipality as ovmer, for the
establishment of an escrow account;
2. A perfonnance bond payable to the municipality issued by a surety
company, approved by the municipal officers, or tovm manager;
3. An in-evocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing
funding for the construction of the subdivision, from which the
Municipality may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by the
municipal officers, or town manager; or
4. An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots
sold until all required improvements have been constructed provided that
no lot in the subdivision may be sold and no pennit shall be issued for
construction or placement of any structure on any lot until the
improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
B. The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined
by the Board with the advice of the municipal engineer, road commissioner,
municipal officers, and/or municipal attorney. In no case shall the amount of
the guarantee be less then 125% of the estimated cost of completion or
upgrading of the required improvements.
11.2 Contents of Guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall be memorialized in an agreement between the
applicant and the Town, which agreement shall, at a minimum, contain a
construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking
into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the perfonnance guarantee to the
developer, a date after which the applicant will be in default and the municipality
shall have access to the funds to finish construction, and such other provisions as
the Town Manager deems appropriate or necessary.
61
11.3 Escrow Account.
A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by
either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit' into a
savings account,- or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. Any interest earned
on the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant unless the municipality
has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case the interest earned
shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the applicant and
the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements.
11.4 Performance Bond.
A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release
of the bond or portions of the bond to the applicant, and the procedures for
collection by the municipality. The bond documents shall specifically reference
the subdivision for which approval is sought.
11.5 Letter of Credit.
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution, to the
satisfaction of the town manager, shall indicate that funds have been set aside for
the construction of the subdivision and may not be used for any other project or
loan.
11.6 Conditional Agreement.
A. The Board at its discretion may provide for the applicant to enter into a
binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial
performance guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the
final plan on the condition that no lots may be sold or built upon until either:
1. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required
improvements have been installed in accordance with this ordinance and
the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
2. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in
an amount necessary to cover the completion of the required
improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the
portions of the required improvements already installed. Notice of the
agreement and any conditions shall be on the final plan that is recorded at
the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the
procedures for release of the perfonnance guarantees contained in Section
11.8.
11. 7 Phasing of Development.
The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and
distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those
lots abutting that section of the proposed subdivision street, which is covered by
a perfonnance guarantee. When development is phased, road construction shall
co1m~1ence from an existing public way. Final approval of _lots in subsequent
62
-----------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements
pertaining to previous phases.
11.8 Release of Guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Town
Manager/Town Council shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report
of the Plam1ing Board or other qualified individual retained by the municipality
and any other agencies and departments who may be involved, that the proposed
improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that
portion or phase of the subdivision for which the release is requested.
11.9 Default.
If upon inspection, the engineer retained by the municipality, finds that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans
and specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in
\vriting to the code enforcement officer, the municipal officers, the Board, and the
applicant or builder. The municipal officers shall take any steps necessary to
preserve the municipality's rights.
11.10 Improvements Guaranteed.
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required to meet
the standards of this ordinance and for the construction of the streets, storm water
management facilities, public sewage collection or disposal facilities, public water
systems, and erosion and sedimentation control measures. In addition, the costs
associated with oversight of inspection by the Town Engineer and representation
and review by the Town Attorney. Before acceptance of any improvements by
the Town, the subdivider shall. enter into an agreement with the Town to
guarantee the improvements for a period of not less than 2 years and 8 months,
which agreement shall contain such terms and conditions and shall contain such
performance guaranty mechanisms as the Town Manager deems necessary or
appropriate.
. 63
----------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ARTICLE 12 - WAIVERS
12.1 Waivers From Submission Requirements.
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that there are special
circwnstances of a particular parcel proposed to be subdivided, it may waive
portions of the submission requirements, unless otherwise indicated in the
regulations, provided the applicant has demonstrated that the performance
standards of this ordinance and the criteria of the subdivision statute have been or
will be met, the public health, safety, and welfare are protected, and provided the
waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, or this ordinance.
12.2 Waivers From Required Improvements.
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that due to special circumstances
of a particular lot proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required
improvements is not requisite to provide for the public health, safety or welfare,
or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities
adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed subdivision, it may waive the
requirement for such improvements, subject to appropriate conditions, provided
the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the
comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance, or this ordinance, and further provided
the performance standards of this ordinance and the criteria of the subdivision
statute have been or will be met by the proposed subdivision.
12.3 Conditions.
Waivers may only be granted in accordance with Sections 12.1 and 12.2. When
granting waivers, the Board shall set conditions so that the purposes of this
ordinance are met. The Planning Board shall enter into its record the reasons for
granting any waivers and any conditions, which it has required.
12.4 Waivers to be shown on final plan.
When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by this
ordinance, the final plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate
the waivers granted and the date on which they were granted.
64
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------········································································································
ARTICLE 13 - REVISIONS TO APPROVED PLANS
' 13.1 Procedure.
An applicant f6r a revision to a previously approved plan shall, at least fourteen
(14) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board, request to be placed on the
Board's agenda. If the revision involves the creation of additional lots or
dwelling units, the procedures for preliminary plan and final plan approval shall
be followed. If the revision involves only modifications of the approved plan,
without the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for final
plan approval shall be followed.
13.2 Submissions.
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan as well as eight (8) copies
of the proposed revisions. The application shall also include enough supporting
infonnation to allow the Board to make a determination that the proposed
revisions meet the standards of this ordinance and the criteria of the statute. The
revised plan shall indicate that it is the revision of a previously approved and
recorded plan and shall show the title of the subdivision and the book and page or
cabinet and sheet on which the original plan is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
13.3 Scope of Review.
The Board's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan, which
are proposed to be changed.
65
---------------------------------------------------------------------------·····························································································
ARTICLE 14 -APPEALS
14.1 Procedure
An appeal may be taken, within 30 days from the Planning Board's decision on
the Final Plan, by any party to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 80B of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
66
ARTICLE 15 - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
15.1 Inspection of Required'Improvements.
A. At least five days prior to commencing construction of required
improvements, the subdivider or builder shall:
1. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he/she
proposes to commence construction of such improvements, so that the
municipal officers can arrange for inspections to assure that all municipal
specifications, requirements, and conditions of approval are met during the
construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory
completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board.
2. Deposit with the municipal officers a check for the amount of 2% of the
estimated costs of the required improvements to pay for the costs of
inspection. If upon satisfactory completion of construction and cleanup
there are funds remaining, the surplus shall be refunded to the subdivider
or builder as appropriate. If the inspection account shall be drawn down
by 90%, the subdivider or builder shall deposit an additional 1 % of the
estimated costs of the required improvements.
B. If the inspecting official finds upon inspection of the improvements that any
of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications filed by the subdivider and approved by the
Board, the inspecting official shall so report in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer, municipal officers, Board, and the subdivider and
builder. The municipal officers shall take any steps necessary to assure
compliance with the approved plans.
C. If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the required
improvements before or during the construction of the required improvements,
the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock,
natural springs, etc. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this
section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the Board.
Revised plans shall be filed with the Board. For major modifications, such as
relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by more
than 1 %, etc., the subdivider shall obtain permission from the Board to modify
the plans in accordance with Article 13.
D. At the close of each summer construction season the Tovm shall, at the
expense of the subdivider, have the site inspected by a qualified individual.·
By October 1 of each year during \vhich construction occmred on the site, the
inspector shall submit a report to the Board based on that inspection,
addressing whether storm water and erosion control measures (both temporary
•1 and pem1anent) are in place, are properly installed, and appear adequate. The
67
----------------------------------------························································································
report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems,
which were encountered.
E. Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider' shall provide the Board with a letter
from a Registered Land Surveyor, st_ating that all monumentation shown on
the plan has been installed.
F. Upon completion of street construction and prior to consideration of
acceptance of the same as a town way, a written certification signed by a
professional engineer shall be submitted to the municipal officers at the
expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed town way meets or
exceeds the design and construction requirements of this ordinance and the
Glenburn Road Ordinance. If there are any underground utilities, the
servicing utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a
manner acceptable to the utility. "As built" plans prepared by a professional
engineer shall be submitted to the municipal officers.
G. The subdivider shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for
snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the improvements
by the municipality or control is placed with an owners' association.
15.2 Violations and Enforcement.
A. No plan of a division of land within the municipality, which would constitute
a subdivision, shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a final plan has
been approved by the Board in accordance with this ordinance (30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4406(1)):
B. No person may sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey for consideration, or
offer to agree to sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey for consideration
any land or dwelling unit in a subdivision that has not been approved by the
Planning Board, and subsequently recorded in the Penobscot County Registry
of Deeds. (30-A M.R.S.A. § 4406 (1))
C. A person shall not sell, lease or otherwise convey any land in an approved
subdivision, which is not shown, on the plan as a separate lot.
D. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any
kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which the Board has not approved
a final plan.
E. Development of a subdivision without Board approval shall be a violation of
law. Development includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land
or lots, or construction of buildings, which require a plan, approved as
'provided in this ordinance and recorded-in the Registry of Deeds.
F. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the
street upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance with this ordinance
up to and including the entir~ frontage of the lot. No unit in a multi-family
68
development shall be occupied before the street upon which the unit 1s
accessed is completed in accordance with this ordinance.
G. Failure to comply with any conditions of approval shall be. a violation of this
ordinance.
H. Failure to pay application fees, filing fees, and technical review fees shall be a
violation of this ordinance.
I. Any violation of this ordinance is a nuisance.
J. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce any violations
of this ordinance. If the CEO finds that any provision of this ordinance is
being violated, the CEO shall notify the developer, ovvner or any other person
responsible for the violation in writing setting forth the nature of the violation
and ordering such corrective action as the CEO deems necessary or
appropriate.
K. When there is a violation of the ordinance, the To\\n Council may authorize
and direct the institution of any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or
equitable, including seeking injunctive relief and the imposition of civil
penalties that may be necessary or appropriate to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance in the name of the To\\'ll of Glenburn.
L. Any violation of this ordinance is subject to an enforcement action under 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452, and to the remedies, civil penalties, expenses, costs, and
legal fees available to the To\\'ll of Glenburn pursuant to that statute. Each
violation and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. All
civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the Town.
M. Any contractor or subcontractor involved in any activity regulated by this
ordinance shall be held liable for violating this ordinance if the necessary
permits and/or approvals for such activity have not been obtained, or the
activity is done in violation of the provisions of this ordinance or the terms
and conditions of said permits and/or approvals.
69
..................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
ARTICLE 16-DEFINITIONS
In general, words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their customary dictionary
meanings. Mor~ specifically, any word or term defined in the GlenJ:mrn Land Use
Ordinance shall have the definition contained in that ordi~ance, unless defined differently
below; other words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
Affordable Housing: Housing units, which will meet the sales price and/or rental targets
established by the comprehensive plan for housing affordability.
Applicant: The person applying for subdivision approYal under this ordinance.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): The a\'erage number of Yehicles per day that enter and
exit the premises or travel over a specific section of road.
Blasting: The use of explosives to break up or otherwise aid in the
extraction or removal of a rock or other consolidated natural formation.
Blasting Plan: A site plan indicating proposed blast areas and locations of all off-site
structures and wells not owned or controlled by the applicant within 2,000 feet of
any blast site, together with a report prepared by a qualified professional that
includes the following: (a) assessment of the potential for adverse effects of blasting
on protected natural resources and structures and wells not ov.ined or controlled by
the applicant considering, at a minimum, ground vibration, peak particle velocities,
noise and airblast effects and on-site and off-site ground and surface water quality
or quantity and (b) a plan of action which addresses methods to control adverse
effects from ground vibration, airblast and flyrock; provides details on the proposed
blast design, monitoring of blasts (as applicable), and a blast schedule; and includes
provisions for pre-blast surveys, sign.age, warnings, and access control during blast
events.
Buffer Area: A part of a property or an entire property, which is not built upon and is
specifically intended to separate and thus minimize the effects of a land use activity
(e.g. noise, dust, visibility, glare, etc.) on adjacent properties or on sensitive natural
resources.
Capital Improvements Program (CIP): The municipality's proposed schedule of
future projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project.
Capital Investment Plan: The portion of the comprehensive plan that identifies the
projects for consideration for inclusion within the capital improvements program,
together with an estimate of the order of magnitude for the cost of each project.
Cluster Subdivision (Open Space Subdivision): A subdivision in \Vhich the lot sizes
are reduced belo\V those normally required in the zoning district in which the
development is located in return for the provision of permanent open space.
70
Certified Soil Scientist: As registered, licensed and/or ce1iified by the appropriate
licensing and registration boards in the State of Maine.
Common Open Space: Land withiri or related to a subdivision, not individually owned
or within an individual lot, which is designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development or the general public. It may include.
complementary structures and improvements, typically used for maintenance and
operation of the open space, such as for outdoor recreation.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete when the Planning
Board determines that the applicant has submitted all of the required fees and all
matters required by this ordinance, and that the submissions comply with the
requirements of this ordinance.
Complete Substantial Construction: The completion of a portion of the improvements
which represents no less than seventy (70) percent of the costs of the proposed
improvements within a subdivision. If the subdivision is to consist of individual lots
to be sold or leased by the subdivider, the cost of construction of buildings on those
lots shall not be included. If the subdivision is a multifamily development, or if the
applicant proposes to construct the buildings within the subdivision, the cost of
building construction shall be included in the total costs of proposed improvements.
Comprehensive Plan: A document or interrelated documents adopted by the Legislative
Body, containing an inventory and analysis of existing conditions, a compilation of
goals for the development of the community, an expression of policies for achieving
these goals, and a strategy for implementation of the policies.
Conservation Easement: A nonpossessory interest in real property imposing limitations
or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting
natural, scenic or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for
agricultural, forest, recreational or open space use; protecting natural resources; or
maintaining air or water quality.
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including
buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and streets.
Direct Watershed of a Great Pond: That portion of the watershed, which drains
directly to the great pond without first passing through an upstream great pond. For
the purposes of this ordinance, the watershed boundaries shall be as delineated in
the comprehensive plan. Due to the scale of the map in the comprehensive plan
there may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the watershed boundary.
Where there is a dispute as to exact location of a watershed boundary, the Board or
its designee and the applicant shall conduct an on-site investigation to detem1ine
where the drainage divides lies.. If the Board and the applicant can not agree on the
location of the drainage divide based on the on-site investigation, the burden of
proof shall lie with the applicant to provide the Board with information from a
registered land surveyor showing where the drainage divide lies.
71
Driveway: A vehicular access way serving two dwelling units or less.
Dwelling Unit: Any part of a structure which, through sale or lease, is intended for
human · habitation, including single-family and multi-family housing,
cond_ominiums, apartments and time-share units.
Engineered Subsurface Waste Water Disposal System: A subsurface wastewater
disposal system designed, installed, and operated as a single unit to treat and dispose
of 2,000 gallons of wastewater per day or more; or any system designed to be
capable of treating wastewater with higher BOD5 and total suspended solids
concentrations than domestic wastewater.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented
to the Board for approval and which, if approved, may be recorded at the Registry
of Deeds.
Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are
inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils; and are
not part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or brook. Freshwater
wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not
conform to the above criteria.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in
excess of ten acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased
which has surface area in excess of thirty acres, except for the purposes of this
ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is
completely surrounded by land held by a single owner.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A map prepared by a Certified Soil Scientist, identifying
the soil types down to 118 acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan
submitted. The soils shall be identified in accordance with the National Cooperative
Soil Survey. The map shall show the location of all test pits used to identify the
soils, and shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the
textural classification and the depth to seasonal high water table or bedrock at that
location. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for subsurface waste
water disposal systems shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil
surveys.
Year Flood: The highest level of flood that, on the average, has a one percent chance of
occurring in any given year.
High Water Mark:
Coastal Waters: The elevation at which vegetation changes. from predominantly
salt tolerant to predominantly non- salt tolerant. By way of illustration, salt
tolerant vegetation includes, but is not limited to: salt marsh grass, salt
meadow hay, black anow grass, seaside lavender, silverweed, salt marsh
bulrush, seaside plantain, orach, salt marsh sedge, salt marsh aster. In places
72
.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................._ ___________________________________________________•___ ______________ _
where vegetation is not present, the high water mark shall be the identifiable
debris line left by non-storm tidal action. On a sand dune, the high water mark
shall be the mean seaward limit of .salt tolerant vegetation.
Inland Waters: That line, which is apparent from. visible markings, changes in the
character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and
predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers,
streams, brooks, or ponds, the normal high-water mark is the upland edge of
the wetland, and not the edge of the open water.
Level of Service: A description of the operating conditions a driver will experience
while traveling on a particular street or highway calculated in accordance with the
provisions of the Highway Capacity ~Manual, 1991 edition, published by the
National Academy of Sciences, Transportation Research Board. There are six
levels of service ranging from Level of Service A, with free traffic flow and no
delays to Level of Service F, with forced flow and congestion resulting in complete
failure of the roadway.
Multifamily Development: A subdivision, which contains tlu·ee or more dwelling units
on land in common ownership, such as apartment buildings, condominiums or
mobile home parks.
Municipal Engineer: Any registered professional engineer hired or retained by the
municipality, either as staff or on a consulting basis.
Net Residential Acreage: The area of a lot, which is suitable for development,
determined by subtracting, in order, the following from the total acreage of the lots:
1. 15% of the total acreage of the lot as an allowance for roads and parking
2. Portions of the lot which, because of existing land uses or lack of access,
are isolated and unavailable for building purposes or for use in common
with the remainder of the lot, as determined by the building inspector/code
enforcement officer subject to review by the Planning Board in the event
of a dispute.
3. Portions of the lot shown to be in the floodway or coastal high hazard area
as designated on the Department of Housing and Urban Development
flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map.
4. Portions of the lot which are unsuitable for development in their natural
state due to topographical, drainage or subsoil conditions such as, but not
limited to (a) v,rater table at the surface for all or part of the year, or (b)
unstable soil such as Sebago mucky peat, coastal dune or tidal marsh, as
determined by the building inspector/code enforcement officer subject to
review by the Planning Board in the event of a dispute.
5. Po1iions of the lot subject to rights of way or easements.
6. Portions of the lot located in the resource protection district, except land
above the upland edge of a wetland, pursuant to the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance for the Tovm of Glenburn, Maine.
7. P01iions of the lot covered by surface water bodies.
73
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································
8. Pmiions of the lot utilized for stom1 water management facilities.
Net R~sidential Den,sity: The number of dwelling units per n~t residential aqeage.
New Structure or Structures: , Includes any structure for which constru~tion begins on
or after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing
structure is deemed to be a new structure.
Person: Includes a fim1, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or
corporation or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Glenburn.
Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for its consideration.
Professional Engineer: A professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
Professional Land Surveyor: As registered, licensed and/or certified by the appropriate
licensing and registration boards in the State of Maine.
Public Water System: A publicly owned or privately ovvned water supply system that
provides water for human consumption to at least 15 service connections or
regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily for at least 60 days a
year.
Recording Plan: An original of the Final Plan, suitable for recording at the Registry of
Deeds and which need show only information relevant to the transfer of an interest
in the property, and which does not show other information presented on the plan
such as sewer and water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Reserved Affordable Housing: Affordable housing which is restricted by means of
deed covenants, financing restrictions, or other binding long term methods to
occupancy by households making 80% or less of the area median household
mcome.
Sight Distance: The length of an unobstructed view from a particular access point to the
farthest visible point of reference on a roadway. Used in this ordinance as a
reference for unobstructed road visibility.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings, and supportive data describing the project
proposed by the applicant for initial review prior to submitting an application for
subdivision approval.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, highways, roads, and other
rights-of-way, as well as areas on subdivision plans designated as rights-of-way for
vehicular access other than dr-ivewav.s .
Street Classification:
Arterial Street: A major thoroughfare, which serves as a major traffic way for
travel between and through the municipality.
74
...................................................................................................................................................•........................................................................................................................................................................
Collector Street: See Road Ordinance for definition.
Cul-de-sac: A Street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal
of traffic movement.
Industrial or Commercial Street: Streets servicing industrial or commercial uses.
Minor Residential Street: See Road Ordinance for definition.
Private Right-of-Way: A right-of-way not intended to be dedicated as a public
way.
Subdivision: the division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any
5-year period that begins on or after September 23, 197 L This definition applies
whether the division is accomplished by sale, lease, development, and buildings
or otherwise. The term "subdivision" also includes the division of a new
structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more dwelling units
within a 5-year period, the construction or placement of 3 or more dwelling
units on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure
or structures previously used for commercial or industrial use into 3 or more
dwelling units within a 5-year period.
A. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots,
the first dividing of the tract or parcel is considered to create the first 2 lots and
the next dividing of either of these first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished, is
considered to create a 3rd lot, unless:
(1) Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one
of the lots for the subdivider's own use as a single-family residence that
has been the subdivider's principal residence for a period of at least 5 years
immediately preceding the 2nd division; or
(2) The division of the tract or parcel 1s otherwise exempt under this
definition.
B. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which
dividing or lots when made are not subject to this ordinance, do not become
subject to this ordinance by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land
or any portion of that tract or parcel. The Planning Board shall consider the
existence of the previously created lot or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision
created by a subsequent dividing.
C. A lot of 40 or more acres must be counted as a lot.
D-i. A division accomplished by devise does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objectives of this ordinance.
75
-------------------------------······················································································
D-2. A division accomplished by condemnation does not create a lot or lots for
the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objecti~es of this ordjnance.
D-3. A division accomplished by order of court does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objectives of this ordinance.
D-4. A division accomplished by gift to a person related to the donor of an
interest in property held by the donor for a continuous period of 5 years prior to
the division by gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition,
unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this ordinance. If
the real estate exempt under this paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another
person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate as provided in this
paragraph, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the
purposes of the ordinance. "Persons related to the donor" means spouse, parent,
grand parent, brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood marriage or
adoption. A gift under this paragraph cannot be given for consideration that is
more than 1h of the assessed value of the real estate.
D-5. A division accomplished by a gift to and acceptance by the Town of
Glenburn, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this
ordnance.
D-6. A division accomplished by the transfer of any interest in land to the owners
of land abutting that land that does not create a separate lot does not create a lot or
lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to
avoid the objectives of this ordinance. If the real estate exempt under this
paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another person without all of the merged
land, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of
this ordinance.
E. The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots and upon each of
which lots permanent dwelling structures legally existed before September 23,
1971 is not a subdivision.
F. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions of
this subsection regarding the determination of the number of lots apply, including
exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, leased dwelling units are not
subject to subdivision review if th~ Planning Board has determined that the W}its
are otherwise subject to municipal review at least as stringent as that required
under this ordinance.
76
---------------------------------·························································································
H. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been
exempted from the definition of subdivision under paragraphs D-1 to D-6, or
subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original J1older of the security interest
or that person's successor in interest, do.es not create a lot for the purposes of this
definiticm, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the ·objectives of this
ordinance.
Subdivision, Major: Any subdivision containing more than four lots or dwelling units,
or any subdivision containing a proposed street.
Subdivision, l\finor: Any subdivision containing four lots or dwelling units or less, and
in which no street is proposed to be constructed.
Tract or Parcel of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that
lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a
separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of
land on both sides thereof.
Usable Open Space: That portion of the common open space, which due to its slope,
drainage characteristics and soil conditions can be used for active recreation,
horticulture or agriculture. In order to be considered usable open space, the land
must not be poorly drained or very poorly drained, have ledge outcroppings, or
areas with slopes exceeding 10%.
Wet Pond: Any storm water detention impoundment that has a pool of water and also
has the capacity to temporarily store storm water runoff while it is released at a
controlled rate. The facility is designed to provide flood control as well as water
quality treatment. Properly sized and maintained, wet ponds can achieve high rates
of removal of a number of urban pollutants, and can be a cost-effective BMP for
large, intensively developed sites.
77
-----------------------------------------------------·····························································································