1
HARPSWELL NECK ROAD/MOUNTAIN ROAD PARKING ORDINANCE
I. Authority. This parking ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §3009(C).
II. Purpose. This Ordinance is intended to protect public health and welfare by
regulating the parking of motor vehicles on Harpswell Neck Road and Mountain Road.
Unrestricted parking on the Town road creates traffic congestion, prevents the passage of
fire and police equipment, impedes winter maintenance and is dangerous to pedestrians
and motorists. The purpose of this Ordinance is to reduce these dangers and to regulate
parking as necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
III. Definitions. Words used in this Ordinance shall be defined in accordance with 29-A
M.R.S.A. § 101; any undefined word shall have its common, ordinary meaning.
IV. Regulated Area. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park
any motor vehicle in regulated areas on Harpswell Neck Road and Mountain Road at any
time. The regulated areas are both sides of each road for a distance extending 500 feet
from their intersection.
V. Towing: Any motor vehicle parked in violation of the Ordinance may, at the request
and under the direction of the Board of Selectmen or its duly appointed designee, be
towed to a suitable garage or storage space and impounded thereon until all towing and
storage fees are paid. The Board of Selectmen or its duly appointed designee may use
such force as may be necessary to enter such motor vehicle and cause the same to be
placed in a condition to be moved, and may employ any reputable person engaged in the
business of towing or storing vehicles for such purpose. When any motor vehicle is
towed pursuant to this Ordinance, the following procedures shall be followed:
1. Notice shall be sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle by regular
first-class mail, postage pre-paid, within 24 hours following the tow.
2. The Notice shall contain the following information:
(a) registration number and brief description of the vehicle;
(b) name and address of person or company who performed the tow;
(c) location where the vehicle is stored;
(d) the provisions of the Ordinance that were violated and led to the
tow; and
(e) the towing fee and any storage fee.
2
VI. Release of Towed Vehicle: Any person seeking release of a motor vehicle towed
pursuant to this Ordinance must first (a) pay all towing charges and storage charges; and
(b) present satisfactory evidence of his or her right to possession and sign a receipt for the
motor vehicle.
VII. Prima Facie Evidence of Operation: No person shall cause, allow or permit a
motor vehicle registered in his or her name to park in violation of this Ordinance. The
fact that a motor vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be prima facie evidence of the
unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
VIII. Enforcement and Penalties: This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Board of
Selectmen or its duly appointed designee. This Ordinance may be enforced by the
Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department, a constable of the Town of Harpswell and any
other law enforcement agency, authorized by law to enforce parking ordinances. A
violation of this Ordinance is a civil violation punishable by a fine of $50. Any person
charged with a violation of this Ordinance may waive court action by paying a fee of $25
to the Town Clerk within 14 days of the violation. All fines and waiver fees shall accrue
to the benefit of the Town.
IX. Severability: In the event that any portion of this Ordinance is found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force
and effect.
X. Repeal of Prior Ordinance: Upon adoption of this Ordinance, any prior parking
ordinance for the affected area is repealed.
XI. Effective Date: This Ordinance shall become effective when adopted by a majority
of the Board of Selectmen.
Date adopted: May 25, 2006
1
HARPSWELL ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
Enacted March 16, 1985 Article 25
Amended March 28, 1987 Article 34
Amended March 12, 1994 Article 61
Amended March 20, 2010 Article 4
Amended March 12, 2011 Article 17
SEC. 101 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to require, in accordance with Title 7 M.R.S.A.
Part 9, that all dogs in the Town of Harpswell be kept under the control of their owners at
all times so that they will not injure persons, damage property, or create a nuisance.
SEC. 102 CONSTRUCTION
The provisions that apply to the owner of a dog apply equally to any person having
its custody or possession.
SEC. 103 DEFINITIONS
103.1 “Owner” means any person or organization that owns, possesses, or has
custody of a dog.
103.2 “At large” means off the premises of the owner or person charged with the
responsibility of control.
103.3 “Nuisance” means the causing of unreasonable noise, smell, litter, or other
property damage; the chasing of automobiles, motorcycles, bicycles or
other vehicles; the persistent or frequent entry on school grounds while
school is in session.
103.4 “Dangerous dog” means a dog that has bitten a person who was not a
trespasser with criminal intent on the owner’s premises at the time of the
incident; a dog that causes serious injury or death to another animal; or a
dog that causes reasonable fear of bodily injury to a person acting in a
peaceable manner outside the owner’s premises.
103.5 “Owner’s control” means that the dog is within 100 yards of its owner or
that the owner can demonstrate command of the dog to an enforcement
officer if requested.
SEC. 104 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION
Each owner or keeper of a dog that is six months of age or over, except dogs kept
under a kennel license as provided by Title 7 M.R.S.A. Part 9, shall on or before January
1, annually, or at such time as such dog becomes six months old, cause such dog to be
licensed with the Town Clerk. A dog that is at least two months old must wear a collar or
harness to which is attached an identification tag with the owner’s name and address or
telephone number.
2
After January 31, the Animal Control Officer shall notify all owners of unlicensed
dogs that they are subject to a late fee pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A. § 3923-A (4), as may be
amended from time to time, and an administrative fee in such amount as the Board of
Selectmen may from time to time establish by Board of Selectmen order, and that their
dogs must be licensed by July 31 or they shall face court action.
SEC. 105 RUNNING AT LARGE
A dog is not permitted to run at large. A dog that is off the premises of the owner
or the premises of a person having its custody and is not on a leash, or is on a leash
exceeding twelve feet in length, is prima-facie evidence of the unlawful running at large
of such dog.
105.1 Exception. A dog that is under owner’s control or is engaged in field trials,
training or legal hunting may run at large.
SEC. 106 DANGEROUS DOG
It shall be unlawful to own or possess a dangerous dog as defined in Section 103,
except when such dangerous dog is confined or muzzled.
SEC. 107 NUISANCE DOG
It shall be unlawful to own or possess a dog creating a nuisance as defined under
Section 103.
SEC. 108 IMPOUNDING
The Animal Control Officer shall apprehend any dog found running at large and
impound it in the humane society or other suitable place. As soon thereafter as practical,
he or she shall provide to the humane society and the Town Clerk’s Office the following
information, if known: breed, color, sex, license number, and name and address or
telephone number of the owner.
SEC. 109 REFUSING TO RECLAIM DOG
It is unlawful for a person to fail or refuse to reclaim his dog and pay the cost
required by Section 110 within one week after receiving oral or written notice of its
impoundment.
SEC. 110 NOTICE AND RECLAMATION
The Animal Control Officer shall immediately notify the owner, by telephone or by
certified mail that the dog has been impounded, and that he or she may reclaim it by
licensing the dog if it is unlicensed, and by paying the Town the following fee:
110.1 Impoundment fee in such amount as the Board of Selectmen
may from time to time establish by Board of Selectmen order.
3
SEC. 111 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOG
All impounded dogs shall be kept at the humane society shelter for six days. If the
owner has not reclaimed the dog within that time, and if it has not been placed with
another owner, the humane society shall become the owner of the dog. .
SEC. 112 DISPOSITION OF DOGS THAT HAVE BITTEN PERSONS
The owner of a dog who knows or has been advised that their dog has bitten a
person shall be notified by the Animal Control Officer that the dog must be confined at
home or at the humane society, at the owner’s expense, for at least ten consecutive days.
The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Health Officer immediately of the time,
place, and reason for the confinement. During the period of confinement, the owner shall
not destroy the dog nor allow it to be destroyed.
SEC. 113 EXAMINATION OF CONFINED DOGS
The Animal Control Officer shall have a dog that has been confined because of
having bitten a person kept under observation for symptoms of rabies. At the end of the
10-day period of confinement, the Animal Control Officer shall determine whether the
dog is infected with rabies. In making this determination, he or she shall employ such
expert assistance as may be necessary. If he or she deems it necessary to keep the animal
confined for longer than the 10-day period, he or she shall order it done. If the dog is
found to be rabid, he or she shall notify the owner and the person bitten, and shall have
the dog destroyed immediately, following any procedure recommended by the
Department of Human Services. If the dog is not rabid, the owner shall thereafter muzzle
the dog or keep it confined. All expenses incurred by the Town in carrying out the
procedure provided by this section shall be paid for by the owner of the dog.
SEC. 114 PENALTIES
The following penalties apply:
114.1 Running at Large. The owner of a dog that is found running at large shall
be punished by a fine consistent with 7 M.R.S.A. § 3915, as may be
amended from time to time. For the second and subsequent offenses, the
owner shall be punished by a fine consistent with 7 M.R.S.A. § 3915, as
may be amended from time to time.
114.2 Running at Large After Causing Nuisance. The owner of a dog that is
found running at large who knows or has been advised that the dog has
caused a nuisance and has failed to keep the dog on his premises or under
his control or under the control of a person charged with the responsibility,
shall, for the first offense, be punished by a fine as provided under Section
114.1. For second and subsequent offenses, the owner shall be punished by
a fine as provided under Section 114.1.
114.3 Disturbing the Peace/Barking Dog. The owner of a dog that disturbs the
peace of any person by frequently and habitually barking, howling, or
4
creating other noise shall be punished, on the first offense, by a fine in such
amount as the Board of Selectmen may from time to time establish by
Board of Selectmen order. For second and subsequent offenses, the owner
shall be punished by a fine in such amount as the Board of Selectmen may
from time to time establish by Board of Selectmen order.
114.4 Dangerous Dogs. If a dog that is required to be muzzled under Section 106
is allowed to go unconfined without a muzzle, the owner shall be punished
by a fine consistent with 7 M.R.S.A. § 3952, as may be amended from time
to time.
114.5 Nuisance Dog. The owner of a dog that is found to be a nuisance shall be
punished, on a first offense, by a fine in such amount as the Board of
Selectmen may establish. For second and subsequent offenses, the owner
shall be punished by a fine in such amount as the Board of Selectmen may
from time to time establish by Board of Selectmen order.
114.6 General Penalty. A person who violates any provision of this Ordinance
other than those set forth in Section 110 and Section 114.1 through 114.5
shall be punished by a fine in such amount as the Board of Selectmen may
from time to time establish by Board of Selectmen order.
SEC. 115 USE OF FEES AND FINES
The Town shall keep the portions of fees and fines retained by it in a separate
dedicated account that must be used for the salaries and costs of animal control, licensing,
law enforcement, care of injured or abandoned stray animals and the support of one or
more approved animal shelters. Any money remaining in the account at the end of the
Town’s fiscal year does not lapse, but shall be carried over to the next fiscal year.
SEC. 116 ENFORCEMENT
Except for the provisions required to be enforced by the Health Officer, the Animal
Control Officer shall enforce this Ordinance.
SEC. 117 SEVERABILITY
To the extent any provision of this Ordinance is deemed invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the balance of the Ordinance shall remain valid.
1
Town of Harpswell
Emergency Management Ordinance
Enacted March 10, 2007
SECTION 1. Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this ordinance to establish an Emergency Management Agency
in compliance and conformity with the provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A. Section 781 et seq., as
may be amended from time to time, to ensure the complete and efficient utilization of the
Town’s facilities and resources to combat disaster as defined herein.
SECTION 2. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this ordinance:
Agency. “Agency” means the Emergency Management Agency as established by this
ordinance.
Agent. “Agent ” means the director of the Town of Harpswell Emergency Management
Agency, appointed as prescribed in this ordinance.
Disaster. “Disaster” means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made cause.
These can include, but are not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil
spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage,
epidemic, air contamination, critical material shortage, infestation, explosion or riot.
Emergency Management. “Emergency Management” means the coordination and
implementation of an organized effort to mitigate against, prepare for, respond to and recover
from a disaster.
Emergency Management Forces. “Emergency Management Forces” means the employees,
equipment and facilities of all Town departments, boards, institutions and commissions and,
in addition, it shall include all volunteer persons, equipment and facilities contributed by or
obtained from volunteer persons or agencies.
SECTION 3. Organization
(a) The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the agency’s organization,
administration and operation. The Board of Selectmen may employ such permanent
or temporary employees as it deems necessary and prescribe their duties.
(b) The Board of Selectmen shall review the existing operational organization on a
periodic basis to ascertain the agency’s ability to cope with its responsibilities and
shall approve the Town’s Emergency Preparedness Plan.
SECTION 4. Appointment of Director; Duties and Responsibilities
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Emergency Management Agent, who shall
coordinate the activities of all Town departments, organizations and agencies for civil
2
emergency preparedness within the town and maintain a liaison with other emergency
management agencies, public safety agencies and have such additional duties as prescribed by
the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 5. Rules and Regulations
The Emergency Management Agent shall prepare such policies as may be deemed necessary
for the administration and operational requirements of the agency, which policies must be
approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to becoming effective.
SECTION 6. Emergency Proclamation
(a) The Chairman of the Board of Selectmen shall have the power and authority to issue a
proclamation that an emergency exists whenever a disaster or civil emergency exists
or appears imminent. The proclamation may declare that an emergency exists in any
or all sections of the town. If the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen is temporarily
absent from the town or otherwise unavailable, then the following persons shall have
the power and authority to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists, in the
following order of succession: the Emergency Management Agent, if he/she is
available in consultation with the Town Administrator if possible; and then the Town
Administrator. A copy of such proclamation shall be filed within twenty-four (24)
hours in the office of the Town Clerk. (See Example Reference A)
(b) Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the Chairman of the Board of
Selectmen would result in a substantial delay in an effective response in alleviating or
preventing an emergency or disaster, the Emergency Management Agent or his/her
successor as outline above is authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to
prevent the loss of life and property in the town.
(c) The Emergency Management Agent shall be responsible for submitting a full report to
the Board of Selectmen of all actions taken as a result of the declared emergency as
soon as possible.
SECTION 7. Termination of Emergency
(a) When the Board of Selectmen is satisfied that a disaster or civil emergency no longer
exists, it shall terminate the emergency proclamation by another proclamation
affecting the sections of the town covered by the original proclamation, or any part
thereof. Said termination of emergency shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
(b) No state of emergency may continue for longer than five (5) days unless renewed by
the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 8. Board of Selectmen Duties and Emergency Powers
(a) During any period when an emergency or disaster exists or appears imminent, the
Board of Selectmen may promulgate such regulations as it deems necessary to protect
life and property and to preserve critical resources within the purposes of this
ordinance. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in areas within
or without the Town;
2) Regulations facilitating or restricting the movement of persons within the
Town;
3
3) Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from hazardous areas
within the town; and
4) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority or responsibility of any
department to proceed under powers and authority granted to them by State statute or
local ordinance.
(c) The Board of Selectmen or its designee may order the evacuation of persons from
hazardous areas with the town.
(d) The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to request aid or assistance from the State
or any political subdivision of the State and shall render assistance to other political
subdivisions under the provisions of Title 37-B of the Maine Revised Statutes.
(e) The Board of Selectmen may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other items found
lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property during an emergency
without following normal purchasing or formal bid procedures.
(f) The provisions of this section will terminate at the end of the declared emergency.
(See example Reference B)
SECTION 9. Emergency Operational Plans
The Emergency Management Agent shall update an emergency operational plan for the
Town as necessary and shall present such modifications within 90 days of appointment to the
Board of Selectmen..
It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned and to maintain their portions of the plan in a current state of readiness.
The Town plan shall be reviewed periodically by the Board of Selectmen in conjunction with
the Emergency Management Agent.
SECTION 10. Immunity from Liability
All members of emergency management forces, while engaged in emergency management
activities, shall be immune from liability, as set forth in 37-B M.R.S.A. Section 822, as may
be amended from time to time.
SECTION 11. Compensation for Injuries
All members of emergency management forces shall be deemed to be employees of the State
when engaged in training or on duty and shall have all of the rights of State employees under
the Workmen’s Compensation Act, as set forth in 37-B M.R.S.A. Section 823., as may be
amended from time to time.
SECTION 12. Violation of Regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this ordinance, or of the
regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the emergency management organization, as herein defined, in the
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance or any regulation or plan issued hereunder.
4
SECTION 13. Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance or any rule or
regulation promulgated there under, upon adjudication thereof, shall be punished by a civil
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and the costs of prosecution.
SECTION 14. Severability
Should any provision of this ordinance be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration
shall not effect the validity of other provisions or of this ordinance as a whole, it being the
legislative intent that provisions of this ordinance shall be severable and remain valid
notwithstanding such declaration.
SECTION 15. Conflicting Ordinances, Orders, Rules and Regulations Suspended
At all times when an emergency proclamation is in effect, the orders, rules and regulations
made and promulgated pursuant to this ordinance shall supersede all existing ordinances,
orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent herewith.
5
REFERENCE A
EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION
Section 6 (after c)
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by the TOWN OF HARPSWELL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT ORDIANCE, I hereby proclaim that an emergency exists in the following
location(s) of the Town of Harpswell:
Location(s):
Due to the following emergency:
Date: Signed:
Time: Title:
6
REFERENCE B
PROCLAMATION TERMINATING EMERGENCY
Section 8 (after f)
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by the TOWN OF HARPSWELL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT ORDIANCE, I hereby proclaim that the emergency created by:
Emergency Proclamation dated:
Shall be terminated at (time) on (date).
Date: Signed:
Time: Title:
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS ORDINANCE
Purpose: The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide an orderly method for receiving certain types of gifts
and to authorize the Board of Selectmen to accept such gifts. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 5654 and 5655, as may be amended from time to time.
1. Delegation of Authority to Board of Selectmen
The Inhabitants of the Town of Harpswell hereby delegate to the Board of Selectmen the authority of the
municipality to accept (i) conditional gifts as referenced in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5654, and (ii) unconditional
gifts as referenced in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5655; subject, however to the exceptions set forth in Section 3 of
this Ordinance. Any gifts to the Town of Harpswell (the “Town”) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § § 5652
(donation of money) and 5653 (gifts of money or property in trust) as may be amended from time to time,
remain unaffected by this Ordinance.
2. Gifts Originating from the Donor
When the Board of Selectmen receives a written notice from a prospective donor or a representative
regarding a proposed gift, the Board of Selectmen shall submit the matter to public comment as an agenda
item during any duly noticed Board of Selectmen meeting. Input from the community may include, but not
be limited to, comment relating to the amount and scope of the gift received, the type of conditions, if any,
that should be attached to it, the duration of the conditions of the gift, if any, and any other related
comments and/or suggestions. The Board of Selectmen shall consider such comments from the public, but
at all times the Board of Selectmen shall retain independent discretion to accept the gift and/or other
conditions associated with said prospective gift. Within 10 days after the meeting at which a decision is
made to accept or reject a proposed conditional or unconditional gift, the Board of Selectmen shall
send written notice of their acceptance or rejection to the donor or the donor’s representative.
3. Exceptions
(a) If a proposed conditional or unconditional gift would obligate the Town to incur liabilities that
total $300 or more per year, as determined by the Board of Selectmen, such proposed conditional
or unconditional gift shall only be accepted by Town meeting.
(b) If a proposed conditional or unconditional gift of property is valued at $3,000 or greater, as
determined by the Board of Selectmen, that gift shall only be accepted by Town meeting.
(c) No conditional gift may be accepted which requires any form of naming, recognition or
representation of any religious or political symbols or affiliation.
4. Effective Date
Adopted by Town Meeting on March 20, 2010
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
STREET OPENING ORDINANCE
Enacted March 8, 2003
2
Section I. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the use of public right-of-ways owned or
controlled by the Town in the interest of public safety and convenience and the operation
and protection of public infrastructure. Excavation and restoration standards are required
to preserve the integrity, operational safety and function of public right-of-ways owned or
controlled by the Town.
Section II. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the following
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Town shall mean the Town of Harpswell, Maine.
Applicant shall mean a person applying for a permit required by this ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer shall mean the duly appointed Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town or his/her designee.
Emergency shall mean any event that may threaten public health or safety where action is
necessary to prevent personal injury, death or the loss or disruption of an existing vital
service. The burden of proof of such emergency rests with the applicant.
Excavation shall mean any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening in a lawful structure below the surface of a public place,
the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit
frequent openings without injury or damage to the public place.
Facility shall mean pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter,
gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box,
or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated
herein or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in,
upon, along, across, under, or over any public place.
Newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved streets shall mean any street which has
been newly constructed, reconstructed or repaved within the past five (5) years.
Permit Holder shall mean a person who has obtained a permit as required by this
ordinance.
3
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, municipality, state, county, political
subdivision, utility, joint venture or corporation and includes the employer of an
individual.
Public place shall mean the entire width between the right of way lines of every street,
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is owned or controlled by the
Town and dedicated to public use for purposes of traffic. This term includes any state
highway or state aid highway that is maintained by the Town.
Road Commissioner shall mean the duly elected Road Commissioner of the Town or
his/her designee.
Substructure shall mean any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable, or
wire, or any other similar structures located below the surface of any public place.
Utility shall mean a private company, corporation or quasi-municipal corporation under
the direction and control of the Public Utilities Commission.
Section III. Street Opening Permit Required.
A. Permit Required. No person, except utilities performing emergency
excavations, shall make any excavation in any public place or fill any excavation in any
public place without first obtaining an opening permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer. All such excavations are governed by 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 3351 through 3360-A, as
may be amended from time to time, and this ordinance.
B. Excavation Site. Prior to any excavation, applicants shall pre-mark the
proposed area of excavation in white paint, or as otherwise established by Dig Safe (see
Maine’s underground facility damage prevention statute, 23 M.R.S.A § 3360-A), prior to
notifying Dig Safe.
C. Application Required. No opening permit shall be issued unless a written
application on a form provided by the Town for the issuance of an opening permit is
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The written application shall state the name,
address and 24 hour emergency phone number of the applicant; the name of the public
place to be excavated and street number; the beginning date of proposed work; the type
of work to be done; the purpose of the excavation; the method of excavation; signatures
of utility approval; and a diagram of the location and size of the cuts to be made as part of
the planned excavation on the form. The applicant must agree to comply with the Dig
Safe law, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3360-A, as may be amended from time to time, and any separate
State of Maine highway opening permit required by 23 M.R.S.A. § 54, as may be
amended from time to time.
4
Utilities, although having to submit an application for a permit to the Code
Enforcement Officer, may contact other utilities involved by phone and the authorized
person doing so shall sign the application in the appropriate place. All applications shall
be presented to the Code Enforcement Officer for the issuance of an opening permit
within thirty (30) days from the date of the last utility approval. After the expiration of
this thirty (30) day period, such application shall become null and void and shall have to
be renewed.
D. Permit Fee/Deposit for Resurfacing. A fee as specified in the Street Opening
Fee Schedule established by the Board of Selectmen shall be paid for each issuance and
for each renewal of a street opening permit. The applicant shall deposit with the Town a
resurfacing fee to cover the cost of the work to be performed. Any resurfacing fee shall
not exceed the reasonable cost of replacement of the excavated pavement and base
material. When any proposed excavation is to be made in any paved public place and the
pavement is laid on a concrete base, the extra width of such excavation required under
Section VII(A) of this ordinance shall be charged to the person applying for the permit.
All such fees paid to the Town must be regularly accounted for in the Town
Treasurer’s report to the Board of Selectmen and constitute a special fund for the
repaving of excavations, repair of any roadway adjacent to the excavations and
inspections. When such excavations are repaired by the Town, the cost must be charged
to the special fund.
E. Proof of Insurance. Applicants for opening permits shall supply to the Code
Enforcement Officer a certificate of insurance listing the Town of Harpswell as an
additionally named insured. Coverage shall be for not less than $400,000, which amount
will be increased from time to time, but only if required to meet the minimum provisions
of the Maine Tort Claims Act as it may be amended.
F. Proof of Right, Title or Interest. Applicants for opening permits shall supply to
the Code Enforcement Officer written evidence in the form of an unqualified real estate
title opinion from an attorney licensed to practice in Maine of the legal interest of the
property owner to engage in the proposed work to be done in the public place. Such title
opinion shall address not only the applicant’s ownership rights but also the right of the
applicant to install any facility in, upon, along, across, under, or over the public place. To
the extent that the proposed work to be done in the public place is on property that is not
owned in fee by the Town of Harpswell, the applicant shall provide written evidence
from a person who is qualified by experience and training to opine on excavation matters
to the Code Enforcement Officer that the excavation shall not unreasonably interfere with
any Town obligation to keep the public place safe and convenient for travel. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall submit all such evidence to the Town Attorney for review and
approval.
5
To the extent that such legal review indicates that the proposed work to be done
requires that the applicant have an easement in perpetuity from the Town of Harpswell
for the construction, operation, replacement and maintenance of the facility, the applicant
must first seek and obtain the required easement from Town meeting. Factors that may
be considered by Town meeting in determining whether to grant such an easement
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) the proposed work to be done;
(ii) the proposed method of excavation;
(iii) the proposed method of installation of the facility;
(iv) the proposed method of maintenance of the facility;
(v) the life span of the facility;
(vi) the number of users of the facility;
(vii) the financial and technical ability of the person on whose behalf the facility
is being installed;
(viii) the willingness of the person on whose behalf the facility is being installed
to maintain adequate insurance against loss or damage to the facility;
(ix) the willingness of the person on whose behalf the facility is being installed
to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officers, agents and
employees, against any and all claims arising from any claims of such
liability; and
(x) the willingness of the person on whose behalf the facility is being installed
to provide the Town with the right, but not the obligation, to enter the
premises and have any malfunction adequately remedied and to provide for
the Town to recover any actual and direct expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees, incurred by the Town to remedy the malfunction by either a
civil action against the person on whose behalf the facility is being installed
or the assessment of a special tax against the real estate of the person on
whose behalf the facility is being installed.
G. Permit Issuance. Opening permits shall only be issued from April 1 to
November 15, unless an emergency or special circumstance exists. An explanation shall
be given to both the Code Enforcement Officer and the Road Commissioner explaining
the emergency or special situation prior to the issuance of a permit during the time period
November 16th through March 31st of the following year. Any oral explanation shall be
followed up by a written explanation within two (2) working days.
After an excavation is commenced, the Permit Holder shall prosecute with
diligence and expedite all excavation work covered by the opening permit and shall
promptly complete such work and restore the public place as specified in this ordinance.
Any permit issued shall specify the time period within which the Permit Holder must
complete the work and restore the public place as specified in this ordinance. The Permit
6
Holder shall perform such restoration work so as not to obstruct, impede or create a
safety hazard to public travel by foot or vehicle.
Section IV. Excavation.
Excavation work must be started no later than thirty (30) days from the date of
issue of the opening permit. After the expiration of this thirty (30) day period, such
permit shall become null and void and shall have to be renewed. Notification shall be
made to both the Code Enforcement Officer and the Road Commissioner on the actual
day the work will begin. No work shall be done under the permit on Saturdays, Sundays
or legal holidays, unless approved by both the Code Enforcement Officer and the Road
Commissioner. During all excavations, one-way traffic shall be maintained for
emergency vehicles. Temporary exceptions may be made only by the area Fire Chief
after consultation with the Road Commissioner and only when another means of access is
available.
Section V. Relocation and Protection of Utilities.
The Permit Holder shall not interfere with any existing facility without the written
consent of the Code Enforcement Officer, Road Commissioner, and the owner of the
facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its
owner. No facility owned by the Town shall be moved to accommodate the Permit
Holder unless the cost of such work is borne by the Permit Holder and covered in full in
advance. The cost of moving privately owned facilities shall be similarly borne by the
Permit Holder unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the facility.
The Permit Holder shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits,
poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work
and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across the work. The Permit Holder shall secure approval of method of support and
protection from the owner of the facility. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires
or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or
devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the Permit Holder shall promptly
notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be repaired by the person owning
them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the Permit Holder. It is the
intent of this section that the Permit Holder shall assume all liability for damage to
facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility damage
and such assumption of liability is a contractual obligation of the Permit Holder. The
only exception will be such instances where damage is exclusively due to the negligence
of the owning utility. The Town shall not be made a party to any action because of this
section. The Permit Holder shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all
underground facilities and protect the same against damage.
7
Section VI. Protection of Public Property.
The Permit Holder shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in the public place without first obtaining the written consent of the appropriate
Town department or Town official having control of such property.
Section VII. Pavement Breaking in Public Places.
A. All excavations on paved public place surfaces shall be pre-cut in a neat
straight line with pavement saws or asphalt cutters. When any excavation is made in any
paved public place and the pavement is laid on a concrete base, the excavation must have
the pavement and concrete cut back on each side of the excavation ditch a distance of 8
inches, and in issuing the permits for cutting the pavement, this extra width must be
charged to the person applying for the permits.
B. The use of pavement breakers is prohibited.
C. Cutouts of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.
D. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the
center line of the trench.
E. Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the
subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
F. The Permit Holder shall not be required to pay for repair of pavement damage
existing prior to the excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections that
may be unstable, in which case the Permit Holder shall remove the unstable portion and
the area shall be treated as part of the excavation.
G. When three (3) or more street openings are made in sequence (fifteen (15) feet
or less, center to center, between each adjacent opening), the Permit Holder shall neatly
cut and remove the area of pavement between these adjacent openings and shall patch as
one trench.
H. On concrete sidewalks, all cuts shall be made from the nearest joint or score
line on one side of the excavation to the nearest joint or score line on the other side of the
excavation.
Section VIII. Care of Excavated Material.
A. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any
street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in
the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as
8
possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of
the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside
the trench, the Road Commissioner shall have the authority to require that the Permit
Holder haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at
the time of backfilling.
B. It shall be the Permit Holder’ s responsibility to secure the necessary
permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
C. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and
kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably possible to vehicular
and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the Road Commissioner. Whenever necessary in
order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, boards or bins
may be required by the Road Commissioner to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic
lanes.
Section IX. Backfilling of Excavation.
Crushed stone or sand shall be used to bed and backfill all underground utilities
and shall be thoroughly compacted under, around and to a minimum of 6 inches above
the structure. After being properly bedded, the backfill material for all other
substructures shall be of a fine material, free from lumps, frozen materials and no stones
larger than four (4) inches in diameter. All backfill materials shall be placed in eight (8)
to ten (10) inch lifts and thoroughly compacted with approved mechanical compactors.
Within eighteen (18) inches of the subgrade of the pavement, backfill shall meet MDOT
specification Type B and be left four (4) inches below the surface. Within twenty-four
(24) hours after the trench has been backfilled, four (4) inches of cold bituminous
concrete shall be placed over the gravel and compacted, or permanent repairs completed
pursuant to Section XII of this ordinance. The Road Commissioner may require soil tests
to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional engineer
specializing in soil mechanics when, in his/her opinion, backfill for any excavation is not
being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must
show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the
Road Commissioner. The expense of such tests shall be borne by the Permit Holder.
Section X. Trenches.
The maximum length of open trench in an excavation permissible at any time shall
be two hundred (200) feet, and no greater length shall be opened for pavement removal,
excavation, construction, backfilling, patching or any other operation without the written
permission of the Road Commissioner.
9
Section XI. Excavations in Reconstructed Streets.
Whenever the Town has developed plans to reconstruct a public place, the Town
or its representative shall give written notice thereof to all abutting property owners, to
the Town departments, and to all utilities that have or may wish to lay pipes, wires or
other facilities in or under the public place. Upon receipt of such written notice, such
person shall have sixty (60) days in which to install or lay any such facility. If an
extension of time is needed by a person for the installation of such facilities, the person
shall make a written application to both the Code Enforcement Officer and the Road
Commissioner explaining fully the reasons for requesting such an extension of time. At
the expiration of the time fixed and after such public place has been reconstructed, no
permit shall be granted to open such public place for a period of five (5) years unless an
emergency condition exists or unless the necessity for making such installation could not
reasonably have been foreseen at the time such notice was given.
If the Town issues a permit to open a public place within five (5) years after that
public place was paved or substantially repaired, the Town may require the Permit Holder
to relay the full width of the road surface on both sides of the cut for a distance of 20 feet
from the furthest outside edges of the cut. If that repair overlaps the edge of a repair from
a previous opening, the Road Commissioner may require the Permit Holder to relay the
full width of the road to the furthest edge of that previous repair. The Road
Commissioner may prescribe the depth and method of restoring the pavement based upon
the class of the street under the Town’s Road Ordinance , except that in no case may the
depth of the restored pavement be less than 1½ inches. If the Town relays the pavement,
the cost of relaying the pavement, including materials, labor and inspection, must be paid
out of any money in the municipal treasury standing to the credit of the regular fund for
this purpose.
Section XII. Resurfacing of Public Places.
Prior to issuance of any permit under this ordinance, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall specify who shall perform the permanent resurfacing of the public place.
A. Temporary resurfacing by the Permit Holder. The top surface of backfill shall
be covered with four (4) inches compacted depth of bituminous temporary resurfacing
material by the Permit Holder. Such temporary paving material shall be cold mix, except
that the Permit Holder may use or the Road Commissioner may require hot mix. All
temporary paving material shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth
enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it, as well as for vehicular traffic to pass
safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The Permit Holder shall maintain the temporary
paving and shall keep the same safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the
excavation has been resurfaced with permanent paving by the Town, except if it is not
10
possible to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, then the Permit Holder shall maintain barriers and lights.
B. Permanent resurfacing by the Town. Permanent resurfacing of excavations in
public places shall be made by the Town. Actual square yards opened or disturbed will
be measured by the Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer and the Permit
Holder will be billed for the difference between the estimated fee paid and the final fee as
determined by the measurement of the opening. Additional costs will be billed as set
forth in Section XV of the ordinance.
C. Permanent resurfacing by the Permit Holder. The Town, at its option, may
allow the Permit Holder to permanently resurface that portion of the street surface
damaged by the Permit Holder’ s excavation. In such event, permanent resurfacing shall
be done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by the Town and subject to
inspection by the Town and shall be completed within a period of ninety (90) days after
such authorization to complete final resurfacing. If such permanent resurfacing is
satisfactory to the Town, all resurfacing fees (excluding any permit fee or inspection fees)
will be refunded to the Permit Holder. The Permit Holder shall, for a period of three (3)
years thereafter, be fully liable for all defects in materials and workmanship relating to
such resurfacing and shall promptly repair or replace the same upon notice of the Road
Commissioner and to the satisfaction thereof.
Section XIII. Incurred Expenses Through Repairing and Backfilling by Town.
If the work or any part thereof mentioned in this ordinance for repairing or
backfilling the trenches or excavations shall be unskillfully or improperly done, the Town
shall cause the same to be skillfully and properly done, and shall keep an account of the
expense thereof, and in such case such person shall pay the Town an amount equal to the
whole of the expense incurred by the Town with an additional amount of fifty (50)
percent. Thereafter, upon completion of the work and the determination of the costs
thereof, the Town shall issue no further or new permits to such person until it shall
receive payment of such amount.
Section XIV. Inspection.
The Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer shall make such
inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this ordinance. In the event
the Town provides an on-the-job inspector to supervise excavation, backfilling of
temporary or permanent repairs or resurfacing, the Permit Holder shall be charged an
inspection fee equal to the appropriate hourly rate of the inspector, plus twenty-five (25)
percent overhead for the services of such inspector.
11
Section XV. Billing Procedures.
For any amounts due under Section IX, XII, XIII or XIV of this ordinance, a bill
will be mailed to the Permit Holder. Bills rendered in accordance with this section shall
be due and payable by the Permit Holder immediately upon receipt thereof. If a Permit
Holder does not pay any such bill within thirty (30) days after receipt, the Town shall
issue no further permits to any such Permit Holder until it receives payment of such
outstanding bill.
Section XVI. Violations.
Any person failing to comply with or violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be served by the Code Enforcement Officer (who shall first consult with the Road
Commissioner prior to issuing any written notice under this paragraph) with written
notice stating the nature of the failure or violation and providing a reasonable time limit
for the necessary corrective actions. Such person shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease or correct all failures or violations.
In order to ensure public safety, both the Code Enforcement Officer and the Road
Commissioner shall have the right to verbally notify and require immediate corrective
actions of any person whose failure to comply with this ordinance could cause a safety
hazard. Any person who shall continue any failure or violation beyond the time limit
required for compliance in any notice given pursuant to this ordinance shall be in
violation of this ordinance.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable to the
Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such
violation. The Town may institute any and all actions or proceedings either legal or
equitable that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of
this ordinance, the same to be brought in the name of the Town.
Any violation of this ordinance that is also a violation of 35-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2509
or 2511 or a violation of 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 3353 or 3355 shall subject the person to a fine
as provided in said statutes, as said statutes may be amended from time to time. Any
violation of this ordinance other than the violations of state law prescribed in the
preceding sentence shall subject the person to a $50 fine per day for each day that a
violation continues. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification
thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
Any person who continues to violate any section of this ordinance shall receive no
further permits until such time as the Town is satisfied that the person shall comply with
the terms of this ordinance.
12
Section XVII. Appeals Process.
Whenever a person shall deem themselves aggrieved by an order made by the
Code Enforcement Officer or the Road Commissioner, the person may file an appeal to
the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) days of the date of the order, and the person shall
be afforded a hearing on the matter before the Board of Selectmen or its designee, and
unless by its authority the aggrieved order is revoked, such order shall remain in force
and be forthwith complied with by the person.
The Board of Selectmen shall consider the appeal and determine whether the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Road Commissioner erred in the interpretation or application
of the ordinance. In considering an appeal, the Board of Selectmen shall give due
consideration to the purposes of the ordinance in preserving public safety and
convenience, integrity of public infrastructure and the operational safety and function of
public right-of-ways.
The Board of Selectmen shall inform the person in writing of its decision and the
reasons thereof. Any decision of the Board of Selectmen under this section may be
appealed to Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the decision pursuant to Rule 80B
of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Section XVIII. Conflict with Other Enactments.
In the event that this ordinance conflicts with any other law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, the provision of the law, ordinance, rule or regulation that imposes the greater
restriction shall prevail.
Ordinance for the Recall of Elected Officials
of the Town of Harpswell
Enacted March 13, 2005
Amended March 14, 2009
SECTION 1. Authority
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 2602(6).
SECTION 2. Applicability
Any elected official of the Town of Harpswell, Maine, may be recalled and removed
from office as provided herein.
This Ordinance does not apply to Directors of S.A.D. 75.
SECTION 3. Grounds for Recall
An elected official may be recalled for (a) failure to appropriately carry out the duties and
responsibilities of the office; (b) engaging in conduct which brings the office into disrepute; (c)
engaging in conduct which displays an unfitness to hold the office; or (d) for the indictment or
conviction of a crime under the laws of the State of Maine or a felony under the laws of the
United States or entry of a plea of guilty to such an offense.
SECTION 4. Petitions for Recall
a. Only registered voters of the Town of Harpswell may sign petitions for recall. To be
valid the recall petition shall contain a number of valid signatures equal to twenty-five percent
(25%) of the number of votes cast for Governor in the last gubernatorial election in Harpswell.
b. The petition shall be addressed to those members of the Board of Selectmen who are not
subjects of the petition; if petitions for the recall of all Selectmen are submitted, the petitions shall
be addressed to the Town Clerk.
c. The petition shall state the name and office of the person whose removal is being
sought and shall list the specific reasons for recall and cite specific examples of behavior for
which recall is being sought.
d. If recall of more than one person is being sought, there shall be a separate petition for
each person whose removal is being sought.
e. Each page of the petition shall provide a space for each voter’s signature, address and printed
name.
f. All petition pages shall be filed as a single document.
g. At the bottom of each page of the petition, the circulator of that page shall certify that to the
best of his or her knowledge, each signature is genuine.
SECTION 5. Clerk’s Certification
Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the petition, the Town Clerk, or Deputy Town Clerk in
cases where the removal of the Town Clerk is sought, shall certify the signatures
contained on the petition and shall determine if the petition meets all of the procedural
qualifications as set forth in Section 3 and 4 of this Ordinance. Should the petition be found
insufficient, the petition shall be filed in the Clerk’s office and the voter who filed the petition
shall be notified.
SECTION 6. Calling the Recall Election
a. If the petition is certified by the Town Clerk to be sufficient, he or she shall submit the
same with his or her certification to the Board of Selectmen at their next regular meeting
and shall notify the person or persons whose removal is being sought of such action.
b. The Selectmen, upon receipt of the certified petition, shall within ten (10) days time of
receipt order an election by secret ballot, pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 2528 to be held not
less than 45 nor more than 60 days thereafter, provided that a regular municipal election
is not scheduled to be held within 90 days of receipt of the certified petition and, in this case, the
Selectmen may at their discretion provide for the holding of the recall election on the date
of the regular municipal election.
c. In the event that the Selectmen fail or refuse to order an election as herein provided,
the Town Clerk shall call the election to be held not less than 45 days nor more than 60
days following the Selectmen’s failure or refusal to order the required election.
d. If at any time between the time of ordering the election and the date of the election the
person whose recall is sought requests a public hearing, the Selectmen shall promptly
schedule such a public hearing on the recall election.
SECTION 7. Ballots for the Recall Election
Unless the official(s) whose removal is being sought resigns within ten (10) days of receipt of the
certified petition by the Board of Selectmen, the ballots shall be printed and shall read:
“SHALL_____________________BE RECALLED?” with the name of the person
whose recall is being sought inserted in the blank space.
SECTION 8. Result of Election
If a fifty-five percent (55%) majority of those voting in a recall election shall vote in favor of
recalling such official, such official is thereby removed from office upon certification of the vote
by the Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk.
SECTION 9. Vacancies to be Filled
Any vacancy resulting from removal from office under this Ordinance shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of Maine law.
1
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
BETHEL POINT TOWN LANDING
PARKING ORDINANCE
Adopted December 11, 1997
Amended November 16, 2000
Amended July 20, 2017
Amended March 28, 2019
Section 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as the Town of Harpswell Bethel Point Town Landing Parking
Ordinance.
Section 2. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY: The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the use of available
parking for residents and visitors to the Bethel Point Town Landing, This Ordinance is enacted by
the municipal officers under the authority of MRS Title 30-A §3009.
Section 3. PERMIT PROCEDURE: Any resident or visitor requesting to park at the Bethel Point Town
Landing may be issued a designated space parking permit, subject to annual availability. Limited
parking spaces are available on a first come, first issued basis. Permits may be issued by the municipal
officers according to the following priority:
A. Property Owner Permits for the season: For persons who own property on the islands of Big Yarmouth,
Little Yarmouth, Pine and George, up to 7 property owner permits may be issued on an annual basis.
1. Permit cost will be $25.00 per vehicle
2. Permit expires December 31st of the given issuance year.
3. Property ownership must be confirmed in the Town records.
4. One permit per property may be issued.
5. Property owners will have until June 1st, of the given year, to obtain these priority permits.
B. Temporary Permit: For all remaining parking permits, including those not issued under Section 3.A,
Temporary Permits may be issued as follows:
1. Temporary Permits: Each permit will be issued for up to 14 days on a first come, first issued basis.
2. Cost: The cost of a Temporary Permit will be $5.00 per vehicle.
3. Date Eligibility: A Temporary Permit may be obtained after June 1st of the given year of issuance.
4. Expiration: A Temporary Permit is valid for a period not to exceed 14 days from issue date.
Expiration day will be entered on each permit.
5. Parking Availability: Parking will be based only on availability of spaces.
C. Handicapped Parking Permit: There shall be at least one designated handicapped parking space.
1. The handicapped parking permit shall meet the requirements for the temporary permit.
2. Applicant must have proof of handicap parking status at time of permit request.
3. The Town may issue a handicapped parking permit at any time.
Section 4. PERMIT FREE PARKING: The remaining spaces shall be available for parking on a first come, first
serve basis at the discretion of the municipal officers.
Section 5. PARKING SPACES: The municipal officers may amend the number, location and type of available
parking spaces on an as needed basis. Signage at the site will indicate the areas requiring permits and the
areas not requiring permits.
Section 6. UNAUTHORIZED PARKING: No person may park a trailer under this ordinance during the period of
May 15th through September 15th, annually. No person may park a motor vehicle at the designated permit
parking area at Bethel Point Town Landing without a permit issued by the municipal officers or
2
employees. Parking is restricted to the east side of Bethel Point Road at or near the Town Landing in the
Designated Permit Parking areas or Permit Free Parking Areas only.
Section 7. AUTHORITY TO TOW AND IMPOUND. Any illegally parked motor vehicle at Bethel Point Town
Landing may be towed. Those persons authorized to enforce this Ordinance are authorized to order the
removal and impounding of any motor vehicle parked at Bethel Point Town Landing in violation of this
Ordinance by a Tow Operator on the Towing List.
A. TOWING LIST. The Town Administrator is authorized to approve Tow Operators who meet the
objective standards set forth in Sections B, C and D herein to be listed on the Towing List. The Town
Administrator shall remove Tow Operators who fail, on a single incident basis and/or a continuing basis, to
meet the objective standards set forth in Sections B, C and D herein from the Towing List. Notice of any
changes to the Towing List shall be provided to the affected Tow Operator(s) and those persons authorized
to enforce this Ordinance.
B. APPROVED FACILITIES. Every Tow Operator on the Towing List shall provide and maintain a
facility for the storage of vehicles. Such facilities shall be within 15 miles of the limits of the Town of
Harpswell. All motor vehicles towed under the provisions of this Agreement shall be stored within the
facility maintained by each Tow Operator.
C. TOW OPERATOR INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION REQUIREMENTS. Every Tow
Operator on the Towing List shall maintain, at its own expense, and provide a copy to the Town, such
policies of insurance as follows:
(1) Commercial liability policy covering the operation of the Tow Operator’s business,
equipment or other motor vehicles for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in
the minimum amount of Four Hundred Thousand Dollars ($400,000.00) combined single limit for
personal injury and property damage, or such other amount as may be required by the Maine Tort
Claims Act (14 M.R.S. § 8001 et seq.), as amended from time to time, whichever amount shall be
greater.
(2) The lapsing or cancellation of any policy as required herein shall result in the automatic
removal of the Tow Operator from the Towing List without any action on the part of the Town.
(3) Tow Operators shall defend, indemnify and hold the Town harmless from all claims for
damages to property and injuries to persons resulting from the Tow Operator’s negligence or intentional
misconduct in the towing or storage of vehicles pursuant hereto.
D. TOW OPERATOR SERVICE CHARGES. The maximum rates for services performed by Tow
Operators on the Towing List pursuant to this Ordinance shall be as follows:
(a) Tows: $85.00 per tow.
(b) Storage fee: $30.00 per 24 hour day, which begins to accrue after the vehicle is towed.
(c) Vehicle release fee: When an owner requests release of the vehicle during night, weekend or
holiday release hours as defined herein, an additional charge of $25.00 may be assessed. If a vehicle is
released outside of night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein, no charge shall be assessed for
the release.
(d) Minimal call out fee: In the event that a Tow Operator has been requested to perform service
and, upon arrival at the scene, towing services are no longer required, a $15.00 fee may be assessed if call
out is outside of night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein and a $20.00 fee may be assessed
if call out is during night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein.
3
(e) The municipal officers may amend the fees cited in this Section on an annual basis, provided that
any altered fees shall be posted on Town’s website.
E. NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS. Within 24 hours from the time of the authorized removal of any
motor vehicle granted by this Ordinance, notice of the fact that the motor vehicle has been impounded
shall be sent by a person authorized to enforce this Ordinance to the owner of record of that motor vehicle.
Such notice shall be sent by regular first-class mail and shall contain the following information:
(a) registration number and a brief description of the motor vehicle;
(b) name and address of person or company who performed the tow;
(c) location from which the motor vehicle was removed;
(d) location where the motor vehicle is stored and may be claimed;
(e) the provisions of the Ordinance that were violated and led to the tow; and
(f) the maximum towing, storage and release fees pursuant to this Ordinance.
Any person seeking release of a motor vehicle towed pursuant to this Ordinance must first (a) pay all
towing, storage and release fees; and (b) present satisfactory evidence of his or her right to possession
and sign a receipt for the motor vehicle.
If any motor vehicle has not been claimed, the Tow Operator shall comply with the procedures set
forth in 29-A M.R.S. §§ 1851-1861, Abandoned Vehicles, as may be amended from time to time. In the
event of an unclaimed or abandoned vehicle, the Town Operator’s sole remedy shall be as outlined in said
State statute.
F. RECORDS OF MOTOR VEHICLES TOWED. The Town’s duly authorized law enforcement
provider shall keep a record of all motor vehicles towed and impounded and shall be able at all reasonable
times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of
such motor vehicles.
G. LIABILITY FOR FINE OR PENALTY. The payment of towing, storage and release fees to the Tow
Operator shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any motor vehicle from liability for any fine
or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which the motor vehicle was towed and
impounded.
H. UNLAWFUL REDEMPTION. No person shall move a motor vehicle after it has been towed to an
approved facility without payment of all applicable towing, storage and release fees.
I. FINES AND PENALTIES. A violation of this Ordinance is a civil violation punishable by a fine of
Fifty Dollars ($50.00). Whoever moves a motor vehicle after it has been towed to an approved facility
without payment of the towing, storage and release fees shall be subject to a fine of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) for the first offense and Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent offense.
Section 8. ENFORCEMENT. This Ordinance may be enforced by any law enforcement provider duly authorized
by the Town or any person specifically authorized by formal vote of the Board of Selectmen to enforce
this Ordinance.
Section 9. EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall become effective when enacted by the municipal officers
after seven (7) days' notice of the meeting at which the Ordinance is to be considered; and shall replace
the Town of Harpswell Bethel Point Town Landing Parking Ordinance in its entirety.
Section 10. SEVERABILITY: Should any section of the Ordinance be found invalid, it will not affect the validity of
any other section.
Town of Harpswell
Blasting Ordinance
As Adopted March 20, 2010
Amended March 12, 2011
Amended March 9, 2019
2
Blasting Ordinance
Table of Contents
Page
Section 1. Purpose ………………………………………………………………. 3
Section 2. Definitions …………………………………………………………… 3
Section 3. Permit Required …………………………………………………….. 3
3.4 Fees ……………………………………………………………….. 4
3.5 Proof of Insurance ………………………………………………… 4
3.6 Effective Period …………………………………………………… 5
Section 4. Performance Standards ………………………………………….……. 5
4.1 Hours of Blasting …………………………………………………. 5
4.2 Water Quality Protection …………………………………………. 5
Section 5. Notices Required Following Issuance of a Permit ……………………. 5
Section 6. Exceptions ………………………………….…………………………. 6
Section 7. Severability ……………………………………………………………. 6
Section 8. Enforcement and Penalties ……………………………………………. 7
Section 9. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ……………………………………… 7
Section 10. Authority ……………………………………………………………… 7
Section 11. Amendments ………………………………………………………….. 7
Section 12. Effective Date ………………………………………………………… 7
3
Section 1. Purpose
1.1 The purpose of this ordinance is to minimize the effects of airblast overpressure,
ground vibration, dust and noise associated with blasting which may be detrimental to
individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property and the conduct of
business through the establishment of standards and notice requirements of blasting
operations.
1.2 It is also the intent of this ordinance to prevent permanent damage to the geologic,
hydrogeologic and wildlife resources and ecological balance in the region and to have a
process which can be effectively and efficiently administered without causing undue
financial and administrative hardship to blasting operators.
Section 2. Definitions
Airblast - An airborne shock wave resulting from detonation of explosives. "Airblast" may be
caused by burden movement or the release of expanding gas into the air. "Airblast" may or may
not be audible.
Applicant - The person, company or corporation responsible for managing and conducting
blasting operations.
Blast/Blasting - Any activity entailing the use of explosives for the purpose of producing an
explosion to demolish structures or to fragment rock for mining, quarrying, excavation and
construction.
Blasting Operations - Drilling and site preparation solely for blasting and detonation.
Explosives - Any substance, chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
for the purpose of producing an explosion to fragment rock for mining, quarrying, excavation
and construction. Initiating devices (detonators, detonating cords, etc.) are also included under
this definition.
Ground Vibrations - A shaking of the ground caused by the blast wave emanating from a blast.
Seismograph - An instrument that measures and may supply a permanent record of earthborn
vibration induced by blasting.
Turbidity – The cloudiness or haziness of a fluid caused by large numbers of individual particles
that are generally invisible to the naked eye.
Section 3. Permit Required
A permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer prior to any blasting with
explosive devices or materials for development purposes within the boundaries of the Town of
Harpswell.
3.1 Application forms for a permit may be obtained in the Code Enforcement Office.
Permits for blasting will be reviewed as follows:
4
(a) Any removal of a total of 300 cubic yards or less of material per project will
be reviewed and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer following
consultation with the Town Planner; or
(b) Permits for blasting and removal of more than 300 cubic yards of material
total per project must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. For the
purposes of this section, the "project" shall include all blasting anticipated to be
undertaken during the completion of a contract or series of contracts, for
demolition, excavation or construction, or during the anticipated life of a quarry
operation. Applications for the Planning Board shall be transmitted to the
Planning Board for review at its next available meeting.
3.2 All applications shall contain the following information:
(a) The name of the applicant
(b) The name of the property owner
(c) The general contractor
(d) The location(s) of the proposed blasting activity
(e) The total number of cubic yards of material estimated to be removed by
blasting
(f) An estimate of the number of blasts required to remove the specified amount
of material
(g) Hours and dates of proposed blasting activity
(h) A pre-blast assessment that includes:
a. interior and exterior inspections of structures located within a two
hundred fifty (250) ft. radius of the blasting location (contingent
upon owner agreement) and;
b. water samples from wells located within a two hundred fifty (250)
ft. radius of the blasting location (contingent upon owner
agreement) demonstrating the pre-blast water quality including the
turbidity of the water.
(i) Proof that the entity applying for the Town’s blasting permit has a permit to
use explosives as issued by the State of Maine Fire Marshall’s Office.
3.3 Upon receipt of a completed application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall review
and act upon the application or refer it to the Planning Board if required within ten (10)
days. Failure to do so shall not be deemed an approval of the permit application.
3.4 Fees. All applications for blasting permits shall be accompanied by a fee as set from
time to time by Board of Selectmen order.
3.5 Proof of Insurance. The applicant and/or the blasting contractor shall present proof
of liability insurance in a minimum amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit per
occurrence.
5
3.6 Effective Period. Permits shall be effective for no more than 365 days from the date
of approval. For blasting operations the scope of which exceeds one year, renewal of the
permit shall be accomplished by reapplying in accordance with the procedure for a new
permit, except that a public hearing may be held to review past compliance with the
standards contained herein and any effects on existing uses and property owners in the
vicinity of such blasting operations.
Section 4. Performance Standards
4.1 Hours of Blasting. Hours of blasting shall be limited to daylight hours, no earlier than
8:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday inclusive. Detonation of misfires may
occur outside of these times but must be reported to the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance
with Section 5 of this Ordinance. Blasting shall be prohibited on the following legal holidays:
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
4.2 Water Quality Protection. Water is a precious resource and measures shall be taken to
protect groundwater quality.
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer may require post-blast monitoring of groundwater
quality to assure no adverse impacts to any water supplies or wells within two-hundred
fifty (250) feet of the blasting location. If post-blast monitoring is required it shall be
done no sooner than twenty-four (24) hours and no later than four (4) business days
after the completion of blasting.
(b) The blasting activity shall not increase the turbidity of the water in any monitored well
above the level of turbidity documented in the pre-blast assessment or otherwise
decrease the pre-blast water quality in the well. If there is an increase in the turbidity
of the water in a monitored well or any other decrease in water quality, the applicant
shall be responsible for improving or treating the water to meet this requirement.
4.3 Ground vibrations, air blast overpressure and seismographic records shall comply with 38
M.R.S.A. § 490-Z (14) (B), (C), (I), (J), (K), (L) and (M), as may be amended from time to time.
Section 5. Notices Required Following Issuance of a Permit
5.1 Any person intending to detonate explosives shall first notify the Code Enforcement
Officer or his duly authorized representative that a blast is planned. Such notification
shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the planned detonation and shall
give the time (within two (2) hours), location where the blasting is to be done, the amount
of explosives to be used and the name and business address of the person responsible for
the blasting operation. The notification may be given orally over the telephone; however,
the burden of proof as to whether the notification was in fact received rests with the
person responsible for the blasting operation.
5.2 The person responsible for a blast shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in the
event of any misfires and the proposed corrective action within five (5) business days of
the misfire.
6
5.3 Following the submission of the application to the CEO and at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the intended date of the commencement of the blasting, the person responsible
for the blast shall inform all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the
blasting location. Such notification stating the purpose, warning procedures, date and
time of the blast shall be given by first class mail and certified mail. Evidence that such
notification was sent shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer. Failure of a
property owner to receive the required notice does not invalidate the blasting permit.
5.4 If an abutter does not respond to an applicant’s notification within eight (8) days of
sending notice, then the applicant may proceed with blasting. A receipt of certified
mailing shall constitute proof of sending notice.
5.5 Prior to any blast, the person responsible for the blast shall publish notice of the date,
time and place of the blast in a local newspaper of general circulation and provide a copy
of the notice to the local cable channel.
5.6 The person responsible for the blast shall place warning signs along property lines of
the blasting site at least seven (7) days in advance.
Section 6. Exceptions
Applications for a permit for an exception from the performance standards designated in this
ordinance may be made to the Code Enforcement Officer, on the basis of hardship or emergency.
Any permit granted hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been
granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant the exception as applied for only if:
(1) The activity or operation will be of a temporary duration, i.e. a limited number of
blasts at a specific site, and only if it cannot be done in a manner that would
comply with this ordinance;
(2) No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicants; and
(3) The applicants represent, and the Code Enforcement Officer finds, that blasting as
permitted will not violate recognized safety standards.
B. Upon the issuance of any exception permit, the Code Enforcement Officer may
prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the community.
Section 7. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
Section 8. Enforcement and Penalties
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent, or
7
contractor who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized
in accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 4452, as may be amended from time to time. For purposes
of this Section, each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Section 9. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
Section 10. Authority
This Ordinance is adopted under powers granted to the Town by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, as may
be amended from time to time.
Section 11. Amendments
Amendments may be made by a majority vote of the Town at any Harpswell Town Meeting and
shall take effect upon enactment unless otherwise specified.
Section 12. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption.
Town of Harpswell
Basic Land Use Ordinance
Adopted February 3, 1994
As Amended March 15, 1997
As Amended March 6, 1999
As Amended March 11, 2000
As Amended August 23, 2001
As Amended March 16, 2002
As Amended November 23, 2002
As Amended March 8, 2003
As Amended May 20, 2004
As Amended March 13, 2005
As Amended March 11, 2006
As Amended March 10, 2007
As Amended March 14, 2009
As Amended March 20, 2010
As Amended March 12, 2011
As Amended June 12, 2012
As Amended March 9, 2013
As Amended March 15, 2014
As Amended March 14, 2015
As Amended March 12, 2016
As Amended March 11, 2017
As Amended March 9, 2019
Replaces Land Use Ordinance adopted February 3, 1994
BASIC LAND USE ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Section 1. Purpose…………………………………………………………..…….. 1
Section 2. Authority………………………………………………………..……… 1
Section 3. Applicability……………………………………………………..…….. 1
Section 4. Effective Date……………………………………………………..…… 1
Section 5. Availability……………………………………………………..……… 2
Section 6. Severability……………………………………………………..……… 2
Section 7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances………………………………..……… 2
Section 8. Amendments……………………………………………………..…….. 2
Section 9. Land Use Requirements…………………………………………..……. 2
Section 10. Nonconformance……………………………………………………….. 2
10.1 Purpose…………………………………………………………..……... 2
10.2 General…………………………………………………………..……… 3
10.2.1 Transfer of Ownership……………………………………..……. 3
10.2.2. Repair and Maintenance…………………………………..……. 3
10.3 Nonconforming Structures……………………………………………… 3
10.3.1 Expansions…………………………………………………..…... 3
10.3.2 Relocation, Reconstruction or Replacement………………..…… 4
10.3.2.1 Relocation………………………………………..…….. 4
10.3.2.2 Reconstruction or Replacement………………………... 4
10.3.2.3 Authority of Planning Board to Exercise
Jurisdiction over an Application…………………..…… 5
10.3.2.4 Greatest Practical Extent Setback Factors………..……. 6
10.4 Nonconforming Lots……………………………………………….…… 6
10.4.2 Nonconforming Lots……………………………………….……. 6
10.4.2.1 Setback Reduction for Small Nonconforming Lots….… 6
10.4.3 Contiguous Built Lots……………………………………………. 7
10.4.4 Contiguous Lots – Vacant or Partially Built……………..……… 7
10.4.5 Creation of Nonconforming Lot(s) for Preservation or
Conservation Purposes……………………………..…………… 8
Section 11. Standards……………………………………………………..…………. 9
11.1 Minimum Lot Standards………………………………………..……….. 10
11.2 Minimum Lot Frontage………………………………………..………... 10
11.2.1 Off-Shore Island…………………………………………..……... 10
11.3 Principal and Accessory Structures……………………………..………. 10
11.3.1 Setback……………………………………………………..……. 10
11.3.2 Height of Structures………………………………………………
11.3.3 Accessory Temporary Living Accommodation..…………..…….
11
11
11.4 Subsurface Waste Disposal………………………………………..……. 13
11.4.3 Existing Use – Continuation of Use……………………..………. 13
11.4.4 Change in Use……………………………………………..…….. 13
Page
11.5 Roads and Driveways……………………………………………..…….. 13
11.6 Storm Water Runoff……………………………………………..……… 14
11.7 Campgrounds……………………………………………………..…….. 14
11.8 Individual Private Campsites and Temporary Residential Use…..…….. 14
11.9 Agriculture………………………………………………………..…….. 14
11.10 Earth Moving, Erosion and Sedimentation Control……………..……… 14
11.11 Water Quality Protection…………………………………………..……. 14
11.12 Accessory Residential Units……………………………………..……… 14
11.13 Utilities and Essential Services…………………………………..……... 15
11.14 Soils……………………………………………………………..………. 15
11.15 Timber Harvesting and Vegetative Buffers……………………..……… 15
11.16 Home Occupations………………………………………………..…….. 16
11.17 Archeological and Historic Sites………………………………..………. 16
11.18 Workforce Housing……………………………………………..………. 16
11.18.1 Purpose……………………………………………………..…... 16
11.18.2 Applicability………………………………………………..…... 16
11.18.2.1 Single Lot Development Standards……………..…… 16
11.18.2.2 New Subdivisions………………………………..…... 17
11.18.3 Standards for Development of Workforce Housing
Subdivisions………………………………………………..…... 18
11.18.3.1 Density Bonus Provisions……………………..…….. 18
11.18.3.2 Plan Notations and Recorded Documentation
Of Affordability…………………………………………..……. 18
11.18.3.3 Location………………………………………..…….. 19
11.18.3.4 Neighborhood Compatibility…………………..…….. 19
11.18.3.5 Workforce Housing Covenant…………………..…… 19
11.18.3.6 Development of Workforce Housing Lots……..……. 19
11.18.3.7 Off Site Option………………………………..……... 19
11.18.3.8 Administration of Workforce Housing………..…….. 20
11.18.4 Qualified Buyers………………………………………..……… 20
11.19 Swimming Pools………………………………………………..………. 20
11.20 Wheelchair Ramps and Other Accessibility Structures…………..……. 20
Section 12. Administration…………………………………………………..……… 21
12.1 Administrative Bodies and Agents………………………………...……. 21
12.1.1 Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)………………………...……... 21
12.1.2 Powers and Duties………………………………………..……… 21
12.2 Planning Board………………………………………………..………… 21
12.2.1 Appointment……………………………………………..………. 21
12.2.2 Organization and Rules………………………………..………… 22
12.2.3 Duties and Powers……………………………………..………… 22
12.2.3.2 Notification to Abutters………………………..………. 22
12.2.3.3 Technical Review Fee………………………..………... 22
12.3 Board of Appeals……………………………………………..…………. 23
12.3.1 Powers and Duties……………………………………..………… 23
12.3.1.1 Administrative Appeals………………………...………. 23
12.3.1.2 Variance Requests………………………………..…….. 23
12.3.1.3 Boundary Line Determinations…………………..…….. 24
12.3.1.4 Notification to Abutters……………………………..….. 24
12.4 Definitions…………………………………………………………..…... 24
Section 13. Permits, Approvals and Certificates of Compliance Required……..…... 24
13.1 Permits or Approvals………………………………………………..….. 24
13.2 Certificates of Compliance…………………………………………..…. 24
13.2.1 Temporary Certificates of Compliance………………………..… 24
13.3 Table 1-Land Uses and Activities…………………………………..…... 25
13.3 Permit and Approval Application…………………………………..…... 29
13.4 Procedure for Administering Permits………………………………..…. 30
13.5 Fee and Time Limits………………………………………………..…... 32
13.6 Violation, Enforcement, Penalties and Legal Actions………………..… 33
Section 14. Variances and Appeals……………………………………………..…… 34
14.1 Variances…………………………………………………………..……. 34
14.1.4.3 Disability Variance………………………………..……. 35
14.1.4.4 Setback Variance for One-Unit Residential Uses ..……. 35
14.1.4.5 Practical Difficulty Variance……………………..…….. 36
14.1.5 Variance Recorded…………………………………………..…... 36
14.1.6 Interpretation of Ordinance Requirements…………………..…... 36
14.2 Appeals……………………………………………………………..…… 37
14.2.1 Administrative Appeal……………………………………..……. 37
14.3 Decision by Board of Appeals……………………………………...…… 37
14.4 Appeal to Superior Court……………………………………………...… 38
14.5 Reconsideration…………………………………………………..……... 38
Appendix I. Shoreland Zoning Map………………………………………………...… 39
THIS UNOFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS IS NOT A PART OF THE ORDINANCE AND IS PROVIDED FOR
CONVENIENCE ONLY.
1
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for reasonable and orderly development within all
areas of the Town while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens.
This Ordinance seeks to preserve the character of Harpswell as a residential, fishing, and
vacation community with clean waters, healthy wetland functions and wildlife habitats, scenic
attractiveness and a sense of openness. It seeks also to preserve to the maximum extent possible,
traditional rights of landowners to use their lands as they desire, while at the same time
protecting nearby residential owners from excessive conflicting uses that might degrade property
values and damage the attractiveness of the community to the detriment of all.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted under powers granted to the town by 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 and
4352, as may be amended from time to time.
Throughout this Ordinance there are "Citizen's Notes". These notes shall not be considered part
of this Ordinance as adopted by the Town, but shall only be considered as aids for citizens to use
this Ordinance and as guides to the intent of Ordinance provisions and their proper interpretation.
Section Titles of this Ordinance do not constitute official ordinance language. These Titles shall
only be considered as an aid for citizens using this Ordinance.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all dwellings, accessory structures, and uses that are not subject to
Shoreland Zoning. The provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to nonconformance apply to all
nonconforming, nonresidential structures, developments, and uses not subject to the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance. In addition, the procedural and administrative provisions contained in this
Ordinance govern the administration of all the Town's land use ordinances. Insofar as this
Ordinance is inconsistent with state law as it relates to mobile home parks, the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4358, as may be amended from time to time, shall prevail.
Citizen’s Note: For creation of subdivisions, see Subdivision Ordinance. For activities in the
Shoreland Zone requiring permits, see Shoreland Zoning Ordinance. Multi-family dwellings and
nonresidential development, wherever located, are also subject to the provisions of the Site Plan
Review Ordinance.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Ordinance is September 15, 1997.
2
SECTION 5. AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible
to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at
the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
SECTION 7. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this Ordinance or of any other Ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision
shall control unless state law provides otherwise.
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS
Amendments may be made by a majority vote of the Town at any Harpswell Town Meeting and
shall take effect upon enactment unless otherwise specified.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board, by a majority vote of the
Board of Selectmen or by written petition signed by a number of registered voters equal to ten
percent (10%) of Harpswell voters voting in the last gubernatorial election.
SECTION 9. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Except as hereinafter specified, no structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, altered,
replaced and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the area or district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted by the Board
of Appeals.
SECTION 10. NONCONFORMANCE
10.1. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
lawful nonconforming conditions that existed before September 15, 1997 and the effective dates
of any amendments to this Ordinance creating new nonconforming conditions shall be allowed to
continue, subject to the requirements set forth in this section.
Citizen's Note: Nonconformance should not be considered illegal or unacceptable.
Nonconformance means lots of record or uses that are grandfathered because they were in
conformance with the standards in effect before the adoption of this Ordinance or any
3
amendments creating new nonconforming conditions. The concerned party is encouraged to read
through this Ordinance and contact a town official should a question arise. If the property is
located in the Shoreland Zone, see the relevant provisions in the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
10.2. General.
10.2.1. Transfer of Ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots and uses may be transferred,
and the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
10.2.2. Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep
and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repair or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as Federal, State, or local building and safety codes may
require.
Citizen's Note: See Definitions Addendum for the definitions of nonconforming structures,
nonconforming uses, and nonconforming lots.
10.3. Nonconforming Structures
10.3.1. Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a
permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, an increase to the nonconformity of the structure shall mean:
· any expansion towards a property line or road that decreases the shortest existing
nonconforming setback distance from property line or road, or
· any expansion which would cause the total area covered by the structures, driveways,
parking lots, and other impermeable surfaces to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
total lot area, or
· any expansion which would cause the structure to exceed the height limits of this
Ordinance.
The shortest existing nonconforming setback distance from a property line or a road may not
be measured from an existing area, such as a small patio, terrace, landing, or small set of stairs,
used mainly for access to a structure.
Citizen’s Note: It should be understood that small patios, terraces, landings, or small sets of
stairs within minimum setbacks do not change the setback of the adjacent structure and cannot
be used to justify expansion of any other part of the structure into that setback.
4
10.3.1.1. After September 15, 1997, or the effective date of any amendment to this
Ordinance creating any new nonconforming conditions, if any portion of an existing
structure is less than the required setback from the road or property line, that portion of the
structure shall not be expanded in floor area or volume, by more than thirty percent (30%),
during the lifetime of the structure.
10.3.1.2. Construction of a foundation beneath an existing building that is nonconforming
as to setbacks shall not be considered an expansion of the structure provided that:
10.3.1.2.1. The foundation shall not extend beyond the exterior dimension of the
building as it existed on September 15, 1997 or the effective date of any amendment to
this Ordinance creating any new nonconforming condition, or as expanded in
accordance with Section 10.3.1.1.
Citizen's Note: Disputed decisions may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
10.3.2. Relocation, Reconstruction, or Replacement
10.3.2.1. Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of
the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all
setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the CEO, and provided
that the applicant demonstrates that the present sub-surface wastewater disposal system meets
the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules,
or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case
shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
Any relocation approved by the CEO pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed in writing
by the CEO.
10.3.2.2. Reconstruction or Replacement. Any nonconforming structure that is located less
than the required setback from a property line or road and which is removed, damaged, or
destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the structure, as adjusted
by the Town’s assessment ratio as most recently certified by the Assessors to the State of
Maine, before such damage, destruction, or removal, as determined by the Assessors or their
designee in consultation with the CEO, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a
permit is obtained within one (l) year of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and
provided such replacement or reconstruction is in compliance with the setback requirements to
the greatest practical extent as determined by the CEO in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance; provided, however, that any nonconforming structure that is located less than the
required setback from a property line or road and that is damaged or destroyed by fire or any
cause other than the willful act or negligence of the owner or the owners agent may be
reconstructed on the same footprint as the structure that was destroyed. In no case shall a
structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity. Any reconstruction
or replacement approved by the CEO pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed in writing
by the CEO.
5
10.3.2.3 Authority of Planning Board to Exercise Jurisdiction over an Application.
Except as provided for below, for any application for relocation of a nonconforming structure,
or for the reconstruction or replacement of a nonconforming structure that was removed,
damaged, or destroyed by more than fifty percent (50%) of the adjusted assessed value of the
structure, made under Section 10.3.2, the CEO shall provide written notice to the Planning
Board and all property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property as listed on
the Town’s most recent assessing records that a relocation, reconstruction or replacement
application has been received and is being reviewed. The opportunity for the Planning Board
to take jurisdiction under this provision and to receive notice shall not apply in the following
situations:
(a) The relocation, replacement, or reconstruction will be carried out such that the structure
complies with all applicable setback requirements, or
(b) The structure being relocated is an accessory structure that meets all the following
requirements:
1) The floor area of the existing nonconforming structure is less than two hundred
(200) square feet,
2) The floor area or volume of the structure will not be increased,
3) The structure is and will continue to be accessory to the principal use of the
property,
4) The structure will not be served by water, and
5) The structure has not been and will not be used for human habitation.
(c) The structure being reconstructed or replaced is an accessory structure that meets all of
the following requirements:
1) The floor area of the existing nonconforming structure is less than two hundred
(200) square feet,
2) The floor area and volume of the replacement or reconstructed structure will not
be larger than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the floor area and volume of
the existing structure,
3) The existing structure is accessory to the principal use of the property and the
replacement or reconstructed structure will continue to be so,
4) The replacement or reconstructed structure will not be served by water, and
5) The replacement or reconstructed structure will not be used for human habitation.
During that forty (40) day time period, the Planning Board may elect to exercise jurisdiction
over the relocation, reconstruction or replacement application. The Planning Board’s review,
if any, shall be governed by the same review standards as govern the CEO review. The CEO
shall not issue any permit under this Section until the earlier of (a) forty (40) days after the
date that the CEO provides such written notice to the Planning Board and all property owners
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property as listed on the Town’s most recent
assessing records or (b) the date the Planning Board declines to exercise jurisdiction over the
application. Any relocation, reconstruction or replacement application approved by the
Planning Board pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed in writing. Failure of any
property owner to receive the notice sent under this subsection does not invalidate any action
taken by the CEO or Planning Board.
6
10.3.2.4. Greatest Practical Extent Setback Factors. In determining whether the building
relocation, reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the
CEO or Planning Board, as applicable, shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic systems and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems,
and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
10.4. Nonconforming Lots
10.4.1. Nonconforming lots whether located in legal subdivisions or elsewhere are subject to the
provision of this section.
10.4.2. Nonconforming Lots. A nonconforming lot of record as of September 15, 1997 or the
effective date of any amendment to this Ordinance creating any new nonconforming conditions
may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership
and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this
Ordinance except lot size and frontage are met; provided, further, that reduced setback
requirements may be applicable to those lots that meet the criteria set forth in Section 10.4.2.1.
Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot size or frontage shall be
obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
The status of a nonconforming lot of record shall not change as a result of realigning a common
boundary line with the owner of a contiguous parcel of land, provided that (a) neither lot ends up
more nonconforming after the transaction than it was prior to the transaction, as evidenced in
writing by a land surveyor licensed to practice in Maine; (b) the parties cause copies of the
recorded deeds to be submitted to the CEO within thirty (30) days of the recording of the deeds at
the registry; and (c) no permits or approvals relating to such nonconforming lot shall be issued
unless or until the applicant complies with subsections (a) and (b) herein.
10.4.2.1. Setback Reduction for Small Nonconforming Lots. The setback of structures from
lot lines may be reduced to five (5) feet and the setback of structures from traveled ways may
be reduced to ten (10) feet in order to allow the expansion or construction of a structure to be
used solely for one-unit residential purposes or an accessory structure appurtenant to it,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The nonconforming lot in question was lawfully created prior to September 15, 1997
and is evidenced by a recorded deed or subdivision plan;
(b) The lot meets the following size requirements:
(i) less than one-quarter (¼) acre (i.e., less than 10,890 square feet) in size; and
(ii) if, as determined by the Code Enforcement Office, less than one-half (1/2) of the
eligible owner(s) of lots under Section 10.4.2.1(b)(i) do not apply for the
reduced setback described herein within two (2) years of the adoption of this
subsection, then owner(s) of lots less than one-half (1/2) acre (i.e. less than
21,780 square feet) in size may apply for the reduced setback established
herein; provided, however, that no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
number of eligible lots will be permitted the reduced setbacks described
herein;
7
(c) The lot is not located in whole or in part within the Shoreland Zone;
(d) There exist two (2) or more other nonconforming lots meeting the size requirement
then applying under Section 10.4.2.1(b) that have been improved with one-unit
residential uses within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the lot in question;
(e) Neither Section 10.4.3 nor Section 10.4.4 apply to the lot; and
(f) The owner or owners of the property located along the boundary line adjacent to
which the setback reduction is requested consents in writing to the reduction; and
(g) That any new structure constructed pursuant to this Section is consistent with the
character of the local area in which it is to be situated, as determined by the Planning
Board.
If a reduced setback is approved pursuant to this Section on previously unimproved lots, the
impermeable surface coverage requirements set forth in Section 11.1.1 shall continue to
apply.
If a reduced setback is approved pursuant to this Section on lots that have been previously
improved with a structure, that structure shall not be expanded in floor area or volume, by
thirty percent (30%) or more, during the lifetime of the structure, and the impermeable
surface coverage requirement set forth in Section 11.1.1 shall not apply.
10.4.3. Contiguous Built Lots. If two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or
joint ownership of record as of September 15, l997 or the effective date of any amendment to this
Ordinance creating any new nonconforming conditions if all or part of the lots do not meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot,
the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum
Lot Size Law and Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two (2) or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record as of September l5,
l997 or the effective date of any amendment to this Ordinance creating new nonconforming
conditions, each may be sold as a separate lot, provided that State Minimum Lot Size Law and
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with. When such lots are divided, each lot
thus created must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
10.4.4. Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built. If two (2) or more contiguous lots or
parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since September l5, l997 or the
effective date of any amendment to this Ordinance creating new nonconforming conditions, if any
of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments, and if one (1) or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal
structure, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two (2) or more contiguous lots, at least one (1) of which is
nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons as of September 15, 1997 or the effective
date of any amendment to this Ordinance creating new nonconforming conditions and recorded in
the Registry of Deeds, if the lot is served by the public sewer, or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Rules
and:
8
10.4.4.1. Each lot contains at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage and at least twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area; or
10.4.4.2. Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of subparagraph
10.4.3. Are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least one hundred (100)
feet of road frontage and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area.
10.4.5. Creation of Nonconforming Lot(s) for Preservation or Conservation Purposes
An existing conforming lot or a nonconforming lot may be divided so as to create not more than
two (2) lots, one (1) or both of which are nonconforming lots, provided that the Harpswell
Planning Board finds that the following conditions are met:
10.4.5.1. One (1) of the resulting lots is conveyed to a governmental body or a nonprofit tax
exempt organization (preservation grantee) for conservation or preservation purposes.
10.4.5.2. The division does not create or exacerbate a public health or safety problem on
the nonconforming lot not to be conveyed to a preservation grantee (the remaining lot) to the
extent that the remaining lot does not have adequate (as defined by the appropriate code) well
and septic waste disposal options.
10.4.5.3. If the lot conveyed to the preservation grantee is undeveloped land, or is to be
returned to an undeveloped state, the deed or instrument of conveyance shall contain
restrictions which require that the land be preserved or maintained in its natural state (although
not necessarily "forever wild") in perpetuity for one (1) or more generally recognized purposes
which benefit the natural, cultural, or architectural history of the Town or which preserves a
diminishing or threatened place, parcel of land, resource, or habitat.
10.4.5.4. If the lot conveyed to the preservation grantee contains a pre-existing structure or
improvement, the structure or improvement must have a demonstrable historic, cultural or
architectural importance and the deed or instrument of conveyance shall contain restrictions
which require that the land and the improvements thereon be preserved and maintained so as
to protect and preserve said historic, cultural or architectural importance. No structure on the
lot conveyed to a preservation grantee pursuant to this section may be inhabited as a dwelling.
9
SECTION 11. STANDARDS
11.1. Minimum Lot Standards
AREAS OF TOWN NOT SUBJECT TO SHORELAND ZONING1,2&3
AREAS LOCATED
OUTSIDE OF A
SUBDIVISION
AREAS LOCATED WITHIN A
SUBDIVISION4
MIN. LOT SIZE (S.F.) PER DWELLING UNIT
40,000
80,000
ROAD FRONTAGE (FT)
1503
1505
PROPERTY LINE SETBACK (FT)
See Section 11.3.1
See Section 11.3.1
ROAD SETBACK (FT) See Section 11.3.1 See Section 11.3.1
STRUCTURE HEIGHT (FT)
32
32
1. For uses in the Shoreland Zone, see Sections 15.1 and 15.2 of the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance and the Site Plan Review Ordinance.
2. Nonresidential development in these areas is governed by the Site Plan Review Ordinance.
3. For any road serving more than two (2) lots or dwelling units, the road must comply with the
requirements of the Town of Harpswell Road Ordinance. For any lot to which access is only
by one (1) or more roads terminating at the lot, no minimum road frontage is required
provided that access to any development on the lot is wide enough to accommodate
emergency vehicles but in no event less than twelve (12) feet in width.
4. The minimum lot size and road frontage requirements may be reduced for lots in
subdivisions developed in accordance with the Flexible Lot Size Subdivision provisions of
the Subdivision Ordinance.
5. The frontage requirement for lots on a hammerhead or T-shaped turnaround for dead end
roads in a subdivision may be reduced to fifty (50) feet where no future road is either
feasible or provided for on the subdivision plan, provided that all of the requirements of the
Town of Harpswell Road Ordinance are met.
11.1.1. The total area covered by all structures, driveways, parking lots, and other impermeable
surfaces shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the lot with the following
exceptions:
11.1.1.1. Lots in Flexible Lot Size subdivisions that have a lot area of less than 40,000 square
feet may have up to 7,500 square feet of impermeable surface.
10
11.1.1.2. Lots with a principal residential use utilizing green infrastructure and low impact
development (LID) techniques may have up to twenty-five (25%) percent impermeable
surface.
11.1.1.3. Lots with a principal nonresidential use utilizing green infrastructure and low impact
development (LID) techniques may have up to fifty (50%) percent impermeable surface.
11.1.2. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a
separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both
sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
11.1.3. The following land shall not be included in the calculation of the area of a lot for the
purposes of meeting minimum lot size or other density or dimensional requirements:
11.1.3.1 Land below the minimum high water line of a great pond, stream, or tributary stream,
11.1.3.2 Land below the HAT of a coastal wetland,
11.1.3.3 Land below the upland edge of a freshwater wetland with a contiguous are of more
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
11.1.3.4 Land which is part of a road, or a transportation right-of-way, or easement serving
more than two (2) lots, except rights-of-way or easements used exclusively for pedestrian
access, and
11.1.3.5 Land created by the filling or draining of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, or
coastal or freshwater wetland.
11.2. Minimum Lot Frontage
11.2.1. Off-Shore Island. Lots on off-shore islands not covered by Shoreland Zoning will be
exempt from Frontage requirements.
11.3. Principal and Accessory Structures
11.3.1. Setback. All principal structures and expansions of existing principal structures shall be
set back at least forty (40) feet from the edge of the traveled way and at least twenty (20) feet
from all lot lines; provided, however, that if more than one (1) traveled way abuts a lot, the
dwelling need only be set back from the traveled way that serves as access to the driveway for the
lot. All accessory structures shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all lot lines or the edge
of a traveled way, whichever is more restrictive. If the location of a property line along a traveled
way is unknown, the setback for accessory structures shall be forty (40) feet from the edge of the
traveled way.
11
11.3.1.1. One accessory structure not to exceed eighty (80) square feet and not to exceed ten
feet six inches (10’6”) in height may intrude up to ten (10) feet into a sideline or rear setback
without the need for a variance if the CEO determines that the proposed location meets the
setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as described in Section 10.3.2.4, has been
consented to in writing by the property owner(s) abutting the lot line in question, and will
meet all other requirements of the ordinance.
11.3.1.2. One accessory structure not to exceed eighty (80) square feet and not to exceed ten
feet six inches (10’6”) in height may intrude up to fifteen (15) feet into a sideline or rear
setback without the need for a variance if the CEO determines that the structure will be
accessory to a principal structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, that the
intrusion into the setback has been determined by the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission to be necessary to maintain the historic character of the property, that the
intrusion has been consented to in writing by the property owner(s) abutting the lot line in
question, and the accessory structure will meet all other requirements of the ordinance.
11.3.2. Height of Structures. All principal and accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) feet in height. All expansions of principal and accessory structures that increase the footprint
of the structure shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet in height. For any principal or accessory
structure existing as of March 10, 2007 that lawfully exceeds thirty-two (32) feet in height, such
structure may be expanded without the need for a variance provided that (a) the expansion does
not increase the footprint of the structure; and (b) the expansion does not exceed the greatest
height of the existing structure. Expansions of nonconforming structures must comply with all
other expansion limitations of this Ordinance. The CEO shall review any proposed expansion of a
structure and shall determine, in writing, whether the requirements of this subsection are met prior
to the issuance of any permit. This subsection does not apply to structures having no floor area,
such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas and similar structures.
The height of a structure shall be determined by using the vertical distance, as measured from
halfway between the mean original grade at the downhill side of the structure and the mean
original grade at the uphill side of the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding
chimneys, steeples, antennas and similar appurtenances which have no floor area.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, cupolas or similar portions of a structure having no
floor area and exceeding any of the following dimensions (a) a side wall of sixteen (16) square
feet; (b) a side wall of four (4) feet in height; (c) sixteen (16) square feet of horizontal area; or
(d) a twelve/twelve (12/12) roof pitch, shall be included in the measurement of the height of a
structure.
If the measurement cannot be made from the original grade where the structure is to be
located, the CEO shall establish a reasonable approximation of original grade for the purposes
of determining height.
11.3.3. Accessory Temporary Living Accommodation. During the construction or
reconstruction of a one-unit residential use, a property owner may place an accessory temporary
living accommodation on the lot in conformance with this section. Prior to installing the
accessory temporary living accommodation on the lot, the property owner must obtain a
12
temporary certificate of compliance from the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO). The CEO shall
issue the temporary certificate only if he/she finds that all of the provisions of this section have
been met. The temporary certificate of compliance shall be for a period of not more than twelve
(12) months. The owner may apply for up to two (2) twelve (12) month renewals of the
temporary compliance permit and the CEO shall approve such renewals only if he/she finds that
the property owner is in compliance with all of the provisions of this section.
The placement and use of the accessory temporary living accommodation shall conform to all of
the following requirements:
11.3.3.1. The accessory temporary living accommodation shall be a travel trailer,
recreational vehicle, tent, or other similar enclosure that is not permanently attached to the
ground.
11.3.3.2. The temporary living accommodation shall have a maximum of three hundred
(300) square feet of area that can be occupied.
11.3.3.3. The accommodation shall be used only for the temporary living quarters of the
property owner and her/his immediate family while construction is in progress on the home.
11.3.3.4. The temporary living accommodation shall be located on the lot in full
conformance with the shoreland and property line setbacks.
11.3.3.5. The temporary living accommodation shall not be located on any type of
permanent foundation and if the accommodation is a travel trailer, recreational vehicle, or
similar mobile enclosure with integral wheels, the wheels shall remain on the vehicle while
it is on the lot.
11.3.3.6. The owner shall prepare a written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed
method and location of provisions for sewage disposal. The plan must be approved by the
local plumbing inspector. When disposal is off-site, written authorization from the
receiving facility or land owner is required.
A property owner who has been issued a temporary certificate of compliance for the
placement of an accessory temporary living accommodation on the lot shall remove the
temporary living accommodation within fifteen (15) days of being notified by the CEO in
writing that the use is not in compliance with the standards and/or that the temporary
certificate of compliance has expired, or shall disconnect the unit from all permanent
utilities and sewage disposal provisions within fifteen (15) days of receiving a certificate of
compliance for the new or replacement home. Failure to remove the accessory temporary
living accommodation or disconnect it from all permanent utilities and sewage disposal
provisions as required shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance subject to the penalties
described in Section 13.6 herein.
13
11.4. Subsurface Waste Disposal
11.4.1. All subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall be permitted and installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and to minimize
adverse impacts on ground water quality.
11.4.2. All new, replacement, renovated, or expanded structures or uses generating waste, shall
provide evidence of the type specified in Section 13.3.4 that an adequate wastewater disposal
system can be constructed or that an adequate wastewater disposal system already exists.
11.4.3. Existing Use - Continuation of Use. The use of any legal system that exists on the
effective date of this Ordinance, or which had previously been approved for installation, may be
continued without change except as may be specifically covered by the Maine State Plumbing
Code or deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector, for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.
11.4.4. Change in Use - It shall be unlawful to make any change in the use of any system, or to
erect, enlarge, or change the use of a structure that uses an existing system without the approval of
the plumbing inspector and certification that such change does not result in any hazard to public
health, safety, and welfare.
11.4.5. The minimum setback for new subsurface wastewater disposal fields shall be not less than
one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the maximum high water line of a perennial water body.
The minimum setback distance from the water body for new subsurface wastewater disposal
fields shall not be reduced by variance.
11.4.6. Replacement systems shall meet the standards for replacement systems as contained in the
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
11.4.7. The owner of the proposed system may locate the system or components partially on
property not owned or controlled by the owner of the system, provided that the owner of the
property where the system is to be located executes an easement in perpetuity for the construction,
operation, replacement, and maintenance of the system, giving the system’s owner authorization
to cross any land or right-of-way between the two parcels. The easement shall be filed and crossreferenced
in the Registry of Deeds and the Code Enforcement Office prior to issuance of a
disposal system permit. The easement shall provide sufficient buffer around the disposal field and
fill material extensions for future replacement and maintenance of the system.
Citizens Note: The Town recommends that all owners of new and replacement systems install
low-flow flushes and shower heads.
11.5. Roads and Driveways. Roads serving more than two (2) lots or dwelling units must comply
with the requirements of the Town of Harpswell Road Ordinance.
Citizen's Note: Roads in the Shoreland Zone are also governed by the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance. Any owners of lots fronting on State Route 123, State Route 24, the Cundy's Harbor
14
Road, or the Mountain Road are encouraged to share driveways to reduce curb cuts and improve
safety. A curb cut must be approved by Maine DOT and the Town Road Commissioner.
11.6. Storm Water Runoff
11.6.1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff
from the site in excess of the natural pre-development conditions. Where possible, green
infrastructure and low impact development (LID) techniques (rain gardens, infiltration planters,
bioswales), as well as existing natural runoff control features (berms, swales, terraces, and
wooded areas) shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwater.
11.6.2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
11.7. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall be subject to the same provisions as those set forth in
Section 15.4 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
11.8. Individual Private Campsites and Temporary Residential Use. Individual private
campsites and temporary residential uses shall be subject to the same provisions as those set forth in
Section 15.5 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
11.9. Agriculture. Agriculture shall be subject to the same provisions as those set forth in Section
15.13 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
11.10. Earth Moving, Erosion and Sedimentation Control. Earth moving, erosion and
sedimentation control shall be subject to the same provisions as those set forth in Section 15.16 of
the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
11.11. Water Quality Protection. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to
the water of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or
substances will impair designated uses or the water classification of a water body.
No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or
inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness,
toxicity, or temperature that run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters so as to
contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances.
11.12. Accessory Residential Units. An accessory residential unit may be added to any dwelling
unit provided that (a) the property is owner-occupied; (b) that Harpswell is the principal residence
of the occupant(s) of the accessory residential unit; (c) a building permit is obtained; (d) all of the
requirements of this Ordinance, with the exception of shore frontage, road frontage, and minimum
lot size, are met; (e) all requirements of the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules in
accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. § 42, as may be amended from time to time, are met; and (f) all
requirements of the Maine State Minimum Lot Size Rules 12 M.R.S.A. § 4807, as may be amended
from time to time, are met. The CEO shall have the right to inspect all accessory residential units to
ensure compliance with this section.
15
11.13. Utilities and Essential Services. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall
be limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors and above ground facilities must be
located so as to avoid crossing open areas and scenic views as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
11.14. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a soils report based in an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine
Certified Soil Scientists, and Maine State Certified Geologists. The report shall include an analysis
of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water
elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator
deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract
soil limitations where they exist.
11.15. Timber Harvesting and Vegetative Buffers. Within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the maximum high water line of a tributary stream, harvesting of timber or clearing
of existing vegetation in areas other than the Shoreland Zone, shall be conducted in accordance with
the following provisions.
11.15.1. There shall be no clearcut openings greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet in
the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown, and a well-distributed stand
of trees and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained. Selective
cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed stand of trees
and other vegetation is maintained.
11.15.2. No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet of the maximum high water
line of a tributary stream. Slash shall either be removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies
on the ground and no part of it extends more than four (4) feet above the ground. Any debris that
falls below the maximum high water line of a tributary stream shall be removed.
11.15.3. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use a water body, tributary stream, or wetland as a
travel route except when:
11.15.3.1. Surface waters are frozen; and
11.15.3.2. The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
11.15.4. All crossing of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert except in areas with low
banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock, or similar hard surface which would
not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
11.15.5. Skid trail approaches to a water crossing shall be located and designed so as to prevent
water runoff from directly entering the tributary stream. Upon completion of timber harvesting,
temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed.
16
11.15.6. Except for water crossings, and skid trails, the operation of machinery used in timber
harvesting may not result in the exposure of mineral soil.
11.15.7. Cleared openings legally in existence as of March 10, 2001 may be maintained, but shall
not be enlarged, except as permitted by this Ordinance.
11.15.8. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be
regulated under the provisions of this section.
11.15.9 Prior to all timber harvesting, written notification shall be provided to the Code
Enforcement Officer.
11.16. Home Occupations. All home occupations are subject to the provisions of Section 15.20 of
the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance setting forth performance standards for home occupations
regardless of whether they are located within the Shoreland Zone.
11.17. Archeological and Historic Sites. All proposed land use activities shall be designed to
protect archeological and historic sites that have been identified in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan,
or by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission or the National Park Service. Any proposed land
use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on sites listed on the National
Register of Historic Places shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) business days prior to action being taken
by the applicable Town permitting authority; provided, however, that the CEO may, in the event of
an emergency as determined by the CEO, take appropriate action to allow only such limited land
use activity as is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare in order to cure the
emergency situation. The Town permitting authority shall consider comments received from the
Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
11.18. Workforce Housing
11.18.1. Purpose
The 2005 Harpswell Comprehensive Plan sets forth the need in Harpswell for the availability of
Workforce Housing to maintain the diversity of Harpswell's population. To that end, this Section
is intended to provide and promote the acquisition and construction of housing that is affordable
for current and future generations of Harpswell residents.
11.18.2. Applicability
11.18.2.1. Single Lot Development Standards
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, a Workforce Housing
Unit may be built upon a lot, located outside of the shoreland zone and in lawful existence as
of March 13, 2010 but that does not meet the Section 11.1 minimum lot size requirements,
subject to an acceptable soils test and an engineering design for a one-unit residential
subsurface wastewater disposal system approved by the CEO of the Town of Harpswell and
the following requirements:
17
a. Lot Size
A lot with a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet may be used for
a single Workforce Housing Unit.
b. Road Setback
If there is a predominate pattern of development in the immediate neighborhood with
respect to the relationship of the principal structure to the road as determined by the
CEO, the Workforce Housing Unit must be located on the lot so that it has a similar
relationship to the road as other neighboring principal structures on the same side of
the road. If this requires the Workforce Housing Unit to be closer to the front lot line
than the required front yard setback, the Workforce Housing Unit may encroach into
the front setback area and no variance is required.
c. Property Line Setback
If there is a predominate pattern of development in the immediate neighborhood with
respect to the relationship of the principal structure to the property lines to the side of
the structure as determined by the CEO, the Workforce Housing Unit must be
located on the lot so that it has a similar relationship to the side property lines as
other neighboring principal structures on the same side of the road. If this requires
the Workforce Housing Unit to be closer to the property line(s) to the side of the
structure than the required property line setback, the Workforce Housing Unit may
encroach into the setback area(s) and no variance is required.
Prior to issuance of a building permit for a single Workforce Housing Unit, the Workforce
Housing Lot shall be subjected to a Workforce Housing Covenant as set forth in Section
11.18.3.5 and that is recorded at the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds. The applicant
shall provide a copy of the recorded instrument to the CEO.
11.18.2.2. New Subdivisions
Applications for new subdivisions may provide permanently restricted Workforce Housing
Lots or Units by means of one or more of the following, as determined by the Planning Board:
a) Provide one (1) or more permanently restricted Workforce Housing Lots or Units
within the project; or
b) Provide one (1) or more off-site permanently restricted Workforce Housing Lots
or Units.
11.18.2.3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary, two (2) or
more Workforce Housing Lots or Units may share a subsurface wastewater disposal system,
subject to review and approval of the CEO.
11.18.2.4. An applicant who is qualified to purchase a Workforce Housing Lot or Unit under
this Section at the time of purchase of such Lot or Unit shall not be required to vacate such
Lot or Unit due to a subsequent increase in income, provided that said applicant otherwise
18
remains in compliance with this Section and any rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Selectmen for its management.
11.18.3. Standards for Development of Workforce Housing Subdivisions
11.18.3.1. Density Bonus Provisions. If a subdivision application provides Workforce
Housing Lots or Units, the subdivision shall be eligible for a density bonus of one (1) additional
market rate lot or unit for each moderate income Workforce Housing Lot or Unit and two (2)
additional market rate lots or units for each low or very low income Workforce Housing Lot or
Unit. Non-bonus lots shall meet all requirements of this ordinance and the Subdivision
Ordinance. The reduced minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, as allowed
in Section 11.18.2.1a, shall apply only to the creation of Workforce Housing Lots or bonus lots
in a new subdivision. No density bonus shall be applied where offsite Workforce Housing Lots
or Units are provided.
The following chart illustrates calculations under this subsection:
Proposed
Units/Lots in
subdivision
# of Market
Rate Units
or Lots
# of Moderate
Income
Workforce
Housing
Units/Lots
# of Low/Very
Low Income
Workforce
Housing
Units/Lots
Bonus Market
Rate Units/Lots
Allowed
Total # of
Units/Lots
Possible
3 2 1 0 1 4
5 4 0 1 2 7
5 3 1 1 3 8
6 5 1 0 1 7
6 5 0 1 2 8
10 8 2 0 2 12
For example, if developer/applicant proposes a three (3) lot subdivision and one (1) of those
lots is affordable at the moderate income level, a bonus market rate lot would be allowed and
then the total number of lots allowed would be four (4). If the developer/applicant proposes a
five (5) lot subdivision and one (1) of those lots is affordable at the low income level, then the
developer/applicant gains two (2) additional or “bonus” lots which may be market rate for a
total of seven (7) lots. The same analysis and calculations apply to units.
11.18.3.2. Plan Notations and Recorded Documentation of Affordability. A note shall be
added to all subdivision plans designating the lots or units that shall be permanently restricted
Workforce Housing Lots or Units. The Workforce Housing Covenant shall be recorded in the
Cumberland County Registry of Deeds concurrently with the recording of the approved plan.
A copy of the recorded instrument shall be provided to the CEO within thirty (30) days after
recording. Any deed or conveyance of title to a Workforce Housing Lot or Unit shall include
reference to the recorded Workforce Housing Covenant imposed upon the initial approval of
such Unit or Lot and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
19
11.18.3.3. Location. Workforce Housing Lots and Units shall, to the greatest extent possible,
be geographically dispersed throughout the subdivision or, if developed offsite, throughout the
town.
11.18.3.4. Neighborhood Compatibility. The appearance and design of Workforce Housing
Units on Workforce Housing Lots shall be compatible with the appearance and design of
dwellings in the remainder of the subdivision. Exterior designs of the outside facades of both
the market rate units and Workforce Housing Units shall be submitted to the Planning Board
during the subdivision review process.
11.18.3.5. Workforce Housing Covenant. During the Planning Board review process and prior to
final approval of a subdivision that includes Workforce Housing Lots or Units, the applicant shall
submit to the Board of Selectmen, for approval on behalf of the Town, an executed Workforce
Housing Covenant agreement that preserves the long-term affordability of the Workforce
Housing Lots or Units to very low, low and moderate income households. The agreement
must be in a form acceptable to the town and include, at a minimum, provisions for the following:
a) Permanent affordability for low and moderate income buyers;
b) A formula for accruing limited equity recapture to the owner of a Workforce
Housing Lot or Unit which includes approved physical improvements;
c) Enforcement provisions;
d) Administrative costs to the Town; and
e) Supervision of the agreement.
The Planning Board shall not grant final subdivision approval until the Board of Selectmen
has approved the Workforce Housing Covenant agreement.
11.18.3.6. Development of Workforce Housing Lots.
For subdivisions for which the applicant chooses not to develop the Workforce Housing Unit
or Workforce Housing Lot, the applicant may convey the Unit or Lot to a nonprofit
corporation recognized under state and federal law as qualified to accept funding for the
development of Workforce Housing. The nonprofit corporation shall complete the Unit or Lot
pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
11.18.3.7. Off Site Option.
The Planning Board is authorized to allow acquisition and construction of Workforce Housing
Lots or Units offsite. If the applicant chooses to utilize the offsite option for Workforce
Housing Lots or Units, the applicant may join with others to provide the units through new off
site construction or renovation of existing offsite structures.
Any deed or conveyance of title to an offsite Workforce Housing Lot or Unit shall include
reference to the recorded Workforce Housing Covenant imposed upon the initial approval of
such Lot or Unit and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
20
11.18.3.8. Administration of Workforce Housing.
The Town may contract with a qualified individual or entity for the administration of
Workforce Housing Lots or Units for the screening of qualifying potential purchasers and the
long term monitoring and administration of this Section. The costs for administration of the
Workforce Housing provisions of this ordinance shall be paid for out of the Workforce
Housing Fund.
11.18.4. Qualified Buyers.
Preference for buyers of Workforce Housing Lots or Units shall be given to Town residents,
persons employed in the Town, persons with family members or relatives in Town, and former
Town residents who wish to re-establish Town residency.
11.19. Swimming Pools. All swimming pools, as that term is defined in 22 M.R.S.A. § 1631(2),
shall comply with the fence enclosure requirements set forth in 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 1631-1632, as may
be amended from time to time. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
11.20. Wheelchair Ramps and Other Accessibility Structures
Notwithstanding any other setback provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, the CEO may issue a
permit to allow a wheelchair ramp or other structure necessary for access to or egress from a
structure within a required setback provided that the following standards are met:
(1) The wheelchair ramp or other structure necessary for access to or egress
(“accessibility structure”) from a structure is only for the purpose of making a
structure accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the
structure;
(2) The accessibility structure is designed to limit the encroachment into the required
setback to the greatest practical extent;
(3) The design, construction and location of the accessibility structure is appropriate to
the context of the existing structure and neighborhood; and
(4) All of the requirements of this Ordinance, with the exception of setback
requirements, are met.
All permits issued pursuant to this Section shall contain a condition of approval shown on the face
of the permit as follows: “This permit approval is limited to the duration of the disability or the
time that the individual requiring the accessibility structure resides in or regularly uses the structure.
The encroachment into the setback shall be removed when the individual requiring the accessibility
structure no longer resides in or regularly uses the structure. The permit shall be renewed within
five (5) years from its issuance.”
For the purposes of this Section, the term “structure necessary for access to or egress from a
structure” is defined to include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness
of the accessibility structure, and the term “disability” has the same meaning as a physical or mental
disability under 5 M.R.S.A. § 4553-A, as may be amended from time to time.
21
SECTION 12. ADMINISTRATION
12.1. Administrative Bodies and Agents
12.1.1. Code Enforcement Officer (CEO). A CEO shall be appointed or reappointed annually
by March 31.
12.1.2. Powers and Duties. The CEO shall enforce the provisions of the Town's land use
ordinances and monitor all activities within the jurisdiction of the Town's land use ordinances.
The CEO shall follow up all building permits to ascertain compliance with any conditions or
restrictions imposed on the permittee by the CEO, Planning Board, Board of Appeals, or the
Town's land use ordinances. The CEO shall also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of
the Town's land use ordinances. He or she shall enforce the Town's land use ordinances, as
defined in his or her job description, for which purpose he or she shall establish reasonable
procedures.
The CEO shall have all of the duties, responsibilities, and powers set forth in the State statute or
local ordinance, including but not limited to the power to issue "stop work" orders, notices of
violation of the Town's land use ordinances, and orders to cease violations. He or she shall also
have the authority to revoke building permits as a result of violations of the Town's land use
ordinances by the permit holder or his or her agents or contractors, noncompliance with
conditions of building permits, or other sufficient cause under the Town's land use ordinances.
12.1.3. The CEO shall keep a complete written record of all essential transactions of his or her
office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied,
revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated,
violations found, and fees collected. Such records shall be available for inspection by the public.
On a biennial basis, a summary of this record for the shoreland districts shall be submitted to the
Director of the Bureau of Land Quality Control within the Department of Environmental
Protection.
12.1.4. The CEO shall maintain a list of permits granted by his or her office, the Board of Appeals
and the Planning Board. Permits will remain on the list as long as they are active.
12.1.5. The CEO shall report to the Board of Selectmen any changes that may be needed in the
Town's land use ordinances and prepare a file for review by the Selectmen and appropriate town
boards and committees for future action.
12.2. Planning Board. A Planning Board is created in accordance with the provisions of State law.
12.2.1. Appointment.
12.2.1.1. Appointment to the Board shall be made by the Selectmen as terms expire and/or as
vacancies occur. Terms shall be for three (3) years.
12.2.1.2. The Board shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) associate members.
22
12.2.1.3. Associate members shall be appointed annually for one (1) year terms.
12.2.1.4. Resignations from the Board shall be filled by appointments for the unexpired terms.
12.2.2. Organization and Rules.
12.2.2.1. The Board shall elect a chairman and a secretary from its members and create and fill
such offices as it may determine. The term of all offices shall be one (1) year, with eligibility
for re-election.
12.2.2.2. When a member is unable to act because of conflict of interest, physical incapacity,
absence, or any other reason satisfactory to the chairman, the chairman shall designate an
associate member to sit in his stead.
12.2.2.3. An associate member may attend all meetings of the Board and participate in its
proceedings, but may vote only when he has been designated by the chairman to sit for a
member.
12.2.2.4. Any question as to whether a member shall be disqualified from voting shall be
decided by a majority vote of the members except the member who is being challenged.
12.2.2.5. The Chairman shall call at least eight (8) regular meetings of the Board each year.
12.2.2.6. Four (4) persons shall be a quorum of the Board.
12.2.2.7. The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and the secretary shall
keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings, and determinations.
All records shall be deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
12.2.2.8. The Selectmen may appoint a replacement for any member with two (2) or more
consecutive unexcused absences from regularly scheduled meetings.
12.2.3. Duties and Powers.
12.2.3.1. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided by
Town Ordinances and State Law.
12.2.3.2. Notification to Abutters. Owners of properties, any part of which is located within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of the nearest boundary of any property on which a development
requiring Planning Board approval is proposed shall be notified by the Municipal Office, at
the applicant's expense, by first class mail, of the date on which the application will be
considered by the Planning Board. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice sent as
required under this subsection shall not necessitate another public meeting or invalidate any
action taken by the Planning Board.
23
12.2.3.3. Technical Review Fee.
In addition to the application fee, every applicant to the Planning Board may also be required
by the Planning Board to pay a technical review fee to defray the Town’s legal and technical
costs of the application review. This fee must be paid to the Town and shall be deposited in an
individual trust account, which is separate and distinct from all other Planning Board and
Town accounts. When a technical review fee is required, the application will be considered
incomplete until evidence of payment of this fee is submitted to the Planning Board. If the
initial fee proves to be insufficient to meet the Town’s legal and technical costs of reviewing
the application, the Planning Board may assess an additional fee(s) to cover such legal and
technical costs.
The technical review fee may be used by the Planning Board only to pay reasonable costs
incurred by the Board, at its discretion, which relate directly to the review of the application
pursuant to the review criteria. Such services may include, but need not be limited to,
consulting, engineering or other professional fees, attorney fees, recording fees, and appraisal
fees. The Town shall provide the applicant, upon written request, with an accounting of his or
her account and shall refund all of the remaining monies, including accrued interest, in the
account after the payment by the Town of all costs and services related to the review. Such
payment of remaining monies shall be made no later than sixty (60) days after the approval of
the application, denial of the application, or approval with conditions of the application. Such
refund shall be accompanied by a final accounting of expenditures from the fund. The monies
in such fund shall not be used by the Board for any enforcement purposes.
12.3. Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals is created in accordance with the provisions of State
law.
12.3.1. Powers and Duties. The Board of Appeals has the following powers and duties:
12.3.1.1. Administrative Appeals. To hear and decide appeals, on an appellate basis, where it
is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by,
or failure to act by, the Planning Board or the Assessors or their designee in the administration
of the Town's land use ordinances; and to hear and decide administrative appeals, on a de novo
basis, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the CEO or Local Plumbing Inspector in the administration or
enforcement of the Town’s land use ordinances, the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal
Rules, Internal Plumbing Code, Minimum Lot Size Law and Regulations, and Rules for
Conversion of Seasonal Dwelling Units into Year-Round Residences in the Shoreland Zone;
provided, however, that the CEO or Local Plumbing Inspector’s exercise of his or her
discretionary judgment whether to pursue enforcement activity under the Town’s land use
ordinances, the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules, Internal Plumbing Code,
Minimum Lot Size Law and Regulations, and Rules for Conversion of Seasonal Dwelling
Units into Year-Round Residences in the Shoreland Zone is not subject to appeal.
Citizen's Note: Some decisions made by the Planning Board in administering the Subdivision
Ordinance are not subject to appeal. See Section 14 of the Subdivision Ordinance.
24
12.3.1.2. Variance Requests. To authorize variances upon request or otherwise, on a de novo
basis, within the limitations set forth in the Town's land use ordinances.
12.3.1.3. Boundary Line Determinations. To hear and decide disputes, on a de novo basis,
regarding the location of the boundary line for the Shoreland Zoning District.
12.3.1.4. Notification to Abutters. Owners of properties, any part of which is located within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of the nearest boundary of any property subject to an
administrative appeal, variance request, or dispute about the Shoreland Zoning District
boundary line shall be notified by the Municipal Office, at the applicant's expense, by first
class mail, of the date on which the appeal, request, or dispute will be heard by the Board of
Appeals. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice sent as required under this
subsection shall not necessitate another public meeting or invalidate any action taken by the
Board of Appeals.
12.4. Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be
defined as set forth in the Definitions Addendum attached hereto and made a part hereof.
SECTION 13. PERMITS, APPROVALS AND CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
REQUIRED
13.1. Permits or Approvals. After the effective date(s) of the applicable land use ordinance and
amendments thereto, no person shall, without first obtaining a permit or approval, engage in any
activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit or approval under the applicable Town land
use ordinance governing the area in which the activity or land use would occur. Permits shall be
posted on site in a manner that is readily visible within two (2) working days of issuance. Permits or
approvals are required as noted in Table 1.
13.2. Certificates of Compliance. Prior to occupancy or use of any structure or land use requiring a
permit or approval, the owner shall obtain a certificate of compliance from the CEO. No occupancy
or use of a structure, development, or land use may occur without a certificate of compliance, unless
specifically allowed by the conditions of an approval or permit. The CEO shall not issue a
certificate of compliance until he or she has determined that the structure, development or land use
has been completed in accordance with all of the Town’s land use ordinances and with any
conditions of permits or approvals imposed under those ordinances.
13.2.1. Temporary Certificates of Compliance. Residing in a basement or foundation before the
structure has been completed shall be permitted for a period of three (3) years from the date of
issuance of a building permit subject to issuance of a one (1) year temporary certificate of
compliance, renewable annually, provided the following conditions are met:
a. reasonable progress, as determined by the CEO, is being made toward completion of the
structure as permitted;
b. nuisance conditions do not exist;
c. a valid plumbing permit has been issued and all conditions of that permit are being met;
d. dimensional requirements of the applicable ordinance are being met; and
e. all other applicable requirements of the Town’s ordinances are being met.
25
13.3. TABLE 1. LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
Land Uses Interior Shoreland Districts
INT RP SR SB CFI CFII MFMB16
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring
structures such as hunting, fishing, and hiking
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes15
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and
trails
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber
harvesting
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No
4. *Timber Harvesting Yes NA NA NA NA NA NA
5. *Clearing of vegetation for approved construction
and other allowed uses
Yes CEO Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
6. Fire prevention activities Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7. Wildlife management practices Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
9. Mineral exploration Yes No No No No No No
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel
extraction
PB No No No No No No
11. Surveying and resource analysis Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
12. Emergency operations Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
13. *Agriculture Yes PB Yes Yes No1 Yes No
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB PB PB PB PB16
15. Principal structures and uses
15.1 One and two–unit residential uses including
driveways
CEO PB10 CEO CEO No CEO No
15.2 Multi-unit residential PB No No No No No No
15.3 *Commercial PB No13 No13 PB PB4 PB2 PB16
15.4 *Industrial PB No No PB No No PB16
15.5 *Governmental and Institutional PB No9 PB No No No PB
15.6 Small nonresidential facilities for marine,
scientific or nature related purposes
PB No PB PB PB PB PB17
26
13.3. Table 1. Land Uses and Activities (Cont.)
Land Uses Interior Shoreland Districts
INT RP SR SB CF1 CF2 MFMB16
15.7 Nonagricultural Fertilizer Use
15.7.1 Chemical fertilizer, sludge, and noncomposted
manure
No No No No No No No
15.7.2 Organic fertilizer and composted manure Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21
15.8 Community Shoreland Access PB20 CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
16. Accessory structures and uses CEO11 PB 11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO
17. Structural repair Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
17.1 Structural alteration/replacement: residential CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No
17.2 Structural alteration/replacement:
nonresidential
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/PB
18.1 *Noncommercial piers, docks, wharves, bridges
and other structures and uses extending over or below
the HAT, maximum high water line or wetland
Yes PB14
CEO
14/18
CEO
14/18
CEO
14/18
CEO
14/18
CEO
14/18
18.2 *Commercial piers, docks, wharves, bridges
and other structures and uses extending over or below
the HAT, maximum high water line or wetland
Yes
CEO/
PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/
PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/
PB
14/19
18.3 Community piers, docks, and wharves NA PB PB PB PB PB PB
19. Conversions of seasonal residences to year round
residences
Yes No LPI LPI No LPI No
20. *Home occupations Yes8 PB8 Yes8 Yes8 Yes8 Yes8 No
21. Sewage disposal systems LPI
PB10/
LPI
LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
22. *Essential services Yes PB PB PB PB PB PB
23. Service drop for allowed uses Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
24. Public and private recreational areas involving
minimal development, but no building
Yes12 PB PB CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. *Individual private campsites Yes CEO CEO CEO No CEO No
26. *Campgrounds PB No5 PB PB No PB No
27. *Road construction Yes12 No6 CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
28. *Parking areas - residential Yes
CEO/
PB
CEO CEO CEO CEO No
29. *Parking areas – nonresidential PB No9 PB PB PB4 PB PB
30. *Marinas PB No No PB PB7 PB7 PB16
31. Boat Repair Facility PB No No PB PB PB PB16
32. Filling and earth moving < 50 cubic yards Yes CEO Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
33. Filling and earth moving > 50 cubic yards but less
than 1,000 cubic yards12
Yes PB CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
27
13.3. Table 1. Land Uses and Activities (Cont.)
Land Uses Interior Shoreland Districts
INT RP SR SB CF1 CF2 MFMB16
34. Filling and earthmoving > 1,000 cubic yards 12 PB PB PB PB PB4 PB PB
35. *Signs CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
36. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
37. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
38. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB PB4 PB PB
39. Projects which use more than 1000 gallons of
water/day
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO PB
40. Land Management Roads Yes PB Yes Yes Yes Yes No
41. Mobile Food Handlers BOS No BOS BOS BOS BOS No
Yes = Allowed (no permit required but the use must
comply with all applicable land use standards)
No = Prohibited
BOS = License or other approval issued by the
Board of Selectmen may be required under
the Town’s Mobile Food Handlers
Ordinance or Mitchell Field use policies;
site plan review and approval by the
Planning Board may be required if a seating
area for customers is provided.
PB = Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
LPI = Plumbing permit required
CEO = Permit required from Code Enforcement
Officer
MHW = Maximum High Water
NA = Not Applicable
INT = Areas not in the Shoreland Zone
RP = Resource Protection Zone
SR = Shoreland Residential
SB = Shoreland Business
CFI = Commercial Fisheries I
CFII = Commercial Fisheries II
HAT = Highest Annual Tide
Citizen's Note: If you are uncertain about the activity you wish to conduct, that is not listed above, you
are advised to contact the Code Enforcement Office for further details.
FOOTNOTES: Land Use Table
* For further information on the * uses in land use chart, see Section 15 of the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance.
1. No - except grandfathered properties.
2. Marine related services only. Retail stores limited to nine hundred (900) or less square
feet in size.
3. No except limited Commercial Fishing activities.
4. Functionally water-dependent and accessory to Commercial Fishing uses only.
28
5. Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to flood plain criteria in which
case a permit is required from the Planning Board.
6. Except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or where no reasonable
alternative route or location is available outside the RP area, in which case a permit is
required from the Planning Board.
7. Primarily commercial fishing related use.
8. Home occupations that provide public restrooms and showers or serve food to the
public require a CEO permit. All home occupations are subject to the provisions of
Section 15.20 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance regardless of whether they are located
within the Shoreland Zone.
9. Additions or expansions to existing Town Office Complex may be allowed with
Planning Board approval
10. Only as provided in Section 13.1.1 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
11. When a structure is accessory to both residential and nonresidential uses, the provisions
of the more restrictive ordinance shall apply.
12. May require site plan review approval. See Town of Harpswell Site Plan Review.
13. Except for other allowed commercial uses listed in the Table that are allowed in the
respective district.
14. Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit
is required.
15. Hunting is prohibited on all property at Mitchell Field that is owned by the Town of
Harpswell.
16. At least forty-five percent (45%) of the gross leasable lot area within the district must be
utilized for aquaculture, marinas, boat repair facilities, and/or functionally waterdependent
uses as defined in the Definitions Addendum. Not more than fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross leasable lot area in the district may be used for commercial or
industrial uses that are not functionally water-dependent uses, aquaculture, marinas,
and/or boat repair facilities nor other marine-related businesses as defined in the
Definitions Addendum provided that these uses may not be located within two hundred
fifty (250) feet of the HAT of the coastal wetland. Marine-related business uses are
allowed within the district provided that the limitations set forth above are met. The use
of the pier and the causeway leading to the pier is limited to activities involving public
access and recreation and activities related to and in support of functionally waterdependent
uses and marine related businesses that are located within the Mitchell Field
29
Marine Business District provided that the private use of these facilities does not unduly
restrict reasonable public access to and use of the pier.
17. The limitation on the size of nonresidential facilities for marine, scientific, or nature
related purposes shall not apply in the Mitchell Field Business Districts if the Planning
Board finds that the scale and location of the facility are consistent with the objectives of
shoreland zoning and the Mitchell Field Master Plan.
18. Permit applications for noncommercial, private piers, docks or wharves with a maximum
width of six (6) feet as measured parallel to the shoreline and which do not extend below
the low water line shall be reviewed and issued by the CEO. Noncommercial, private
piers greater than six (6) feet wide as measured parallel to the shoreline or which extend
below the low water line are prohibited.
19. Permit applications for commercial piers, docks or wharves with a maximum width of
twelve (12) feet as measured parallel to the shoreline and which limit the length of the
structure to the minimal amount necessary to provide access to the boats intended to use
the facility shall be reviewed and issued by the CEO. Permits for commercial piers
greater than twelve (12) feet wide as measured parallel to the shoreline or which exceed
the minimum length necessary to provide access to the boats intended to use the facility
shall be reviewed and issued by the Planning Board.
20. Only as provided in Section 13.1.2. of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
21. Organic fertilizer and composted manure may not be applied within twenty-five (25) feet
of the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the
coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland as outlined in Section 15.21.1
of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
Citizen's Note: Land use activity adjacent to protected natural resources requires a permit from
the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act,
38 M.R.S.A.§ 480-C, as may be amended from time to time. Please see CEO for more
information.
13.3. Permit and Approval Application
13.3.1. Every applicant for a permit or approval shall submit a written application including a
scaled site plan on a form provided by the CEO to the appropriate administering body or agent.
Application forms shall account for all aspects to which the Town's land use ordinances apply.
13.3.2. All applications shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property, certifying that
the information in the application is complete and correct. If the person signing the application
is not the owner of the property, then that person shall submit a letter of authorization from the
owner.
30
13.3.3. All applications shall be dated and the CEO shall note upon each application the date
and time of its receipt.
13.3.4. A completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved
by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of a proposed structure
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system. Whenever the nature of
the proposed use includes any construction, installation, or alteration of plumbing facilities, the
applicant shall provide one or more of the following, as appropriate, documenting that the
structure or use will be served by an adequate wastewater disposal system:
- A valid plumbing permit or completed application for a plumbing permit, including
the site evaluation approved by the plumbing inspector.
- A certificate of approval indicating the existing system was installed after July 1974
and was inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector.
- Documentation from the DEP showing that a licensed overboard discharge system
exists in accordance with 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 and § 414, as may be amended from
time to time.
- Written documentation, acceptable to the plumbing inspector that an adequate
wastewater disposal system exists for the property.
The plumbing inspector may require that systems installed prior to 1974 be inspected and
documented if the applicant cannot provide evidence that an adequate system exists. In lieu of
this inspection, a replacement system may be designed for future installation.
13.4. Procedure for Administering Permits
13.4.1. With the exception of applications for subdivision and site plan review approvals and
applications for which the Planning Board is provided the opportunity to take jurisdiction, the
Planning Board or CEO, as appropriate, shall examine all written applications for permits or
other actions under the Town's land use ordinances and within thirty-five (35) days from the
date of receipt of such written application, shall notify the applicant in writing either that the
application is a complete application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified
additional material is needed to make the application complete.
13.4.2. With the exception of applications for subdivision and site plan review approvals and
applications for which the Planning Board is provided the opportunity to take jurisdiction, the
Planning Board may or CEO shall, as appropriate, within the thirty-five (35) day time frame,
visit the site for which the permit is sought.
13.4.3. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in
conformity with the purpose and provisions of the Town's land use ordinances and any State or
Federal law, regulation or rule.
31
13.4.4. With the exception of applications for subdivision and site plan review approvals and
applications for which the Planning Board is provided the opportunity to take jurisdiction, the
Planning Board or CEO, as appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all
permit applications in writing within thirty-five (35) days of receiving a completed application.
However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application
shall occur within thirty-five (35) days of the public hearing if one is held, or within thirty-five
(35) days of the next regularly scheduled meeting at which the application is considered.
Citizen’s Note: See Section 13.4.7 if Planning Board approval is required for activity in the
Shoreland Zone.
13.4.5. Permits shall be approved and approvals given when the proposed use or structure is
found to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of the applicable ordinance.
13.4.6. No permit or approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance or regulation or any State law, or Federal law or regulation or rule, which the Town
is responsible for enforcing.
13.4.7. The Planning Board shall approve, or approve with conditions, a request for a permit in
the Shoreland Zone if the Board finds that the proposed use:
13.4.7.1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
13.4.7.2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
13.4.7.3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
13.4.7.4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or
other wildlife habitat;
13.4.7.5. Will conserve shore cover and points of access to inland and coastal waters;
13.4.7.6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as identified in the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan, or by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission or the National
Park Service;
13.4.7.7. Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime activities in a
Commercial Fisheries I or II District;
13.4.7.8. Will avoid problems associated with flood plains development and use; and
13.4.7.9. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards of the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
32
If a permit or approval is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as
conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving
a structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any
other local ordinance or regulation or any State or federal law or regulation or rule which the
municipality is responsible for enforcing.
13.5. Fee and Time Limits
13.5.1. Unless otherwise provided by law, permits and approvals shall expire if substantial start
of construction or other permitted or approved activity has not commenced within twelve (12)
months from the date on which the permit or approval was granted. An extension of time to
commence shall be granted upon application to and approval by the CEO, if reasonable need
can be shown. A permit or approval is transferable unless otherwise specified.
13.5.2. Unless otherwise provided by local law, when a substantial start of construction, as
defined in the Definitions Addendum, has been made in accordance with 13.5.1 and the
Certificate of Compliance has not been issued by the Code Enforcement Office within five (5)
years from the date on which the permit or approval was granted, the permit or approval shall
expire. An extension of time to obtain a Certificate of Compliance may be granted upon
applications to and approval by Board of Appeals, if reasonable need can be shown due to
exigent circumstances. Exigent circumstances would include severe family, medical, or
financial problems which prevented substantial completion of construction within the required
five (5) year timeframe, as determined by the Board of Appeals.
13.5.3. A nonrefundable fee, in such amount as may be established by the Board of Selectmen
from time to time, shall be charged for applications, permits and approvals required under the
Town’s land use ordinances, and a higher fee shall be charged for permit and approval
applications that are filed by the applicant after the commencement of the activity for which
the permit or approval is required.
13.5.4. When a permit or approval has expired, a new permit or approval must be obtained in
order for construction to continue. Further construction must meet the requirements of the
Town’s land use ordinances in effect at the time the new permit or approval is sought.
13.5.5. The provisions of Sections 13.5.2 and 13.5.4. of this Ordinance apply only to permits
and approvals issued on or after April 1, 1998
13.5.6. Failure of the Planning Board to act upon a request for action or upon an application for
a permit or approval, or of the CEO to act upon a request for action or upon an application for a
building permit, within thirty-five (35) days of the date of receipt of a complete application
shall constitute denial of that request or application, unless the applicable ordinance provides
otherwise.
33
13.6. Violation, Enforcement, Penalties, and Legal Actions
13.6.1. Any violation of the Town's land use ordinances shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
13.6.2. If the CEO finds that provisions of the Town's land use ordinances are being violated,
he or she shall notify personally or in writing, if necessary by certified mail return receipt
requested, the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation, and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order the discontinuance of illegal
use of land, structures, or work being done, removal of illegal structures, or of additions,
alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done or
nuisance conditions; or shall take any other action authorized by this Article to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of the Town's land use ordinances. A
copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen and shall be maintained as a
permanent record.
13.6.3. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent, or
contractor who orders or conducts any activity in violation of the Town's land use ordinances
shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 4452, as may be amended from time to
time.
Citizen's Note: Current penalties include fines of not less than one hundred ($100) dollars nor
more than twenty-five hundred ($2,500) dollars. Fines may be assessed for each day the
violation occurs.
13.6.3.1. In addition to penalties provided herein, the Town may bring an action in the
Superior Court or District Court to enjoin violators of the Town's land use ordinances, for
collection of penalties, and for such other relief as may be provided by law.
13.6.3.2. Each day in which a violation is proved to exist shall constitute a separate offense
under this Section.
13.6.3.3. In addition to the penalties provided above, any violation of Section 15.15.2. of
the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance regarding clearing of vegetation within the seventy-five
(75) foot shoreland setback must be remedied by replanting such that the standards of
Section 15.15.2.2. of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance for a well distributed stand of trees
and other vegetation are met, unless the Selectmen find that the violation is minor, in which
case they may determine such lesser penalty as law allows.
13.6.4. When notification and penalties for actions in violation of the Town's land use
ordinances do not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition,
the CEO shall advise the Board of Selectmen, who may institute any and all actions and
proceedings either legal or equitable, to correct the violation, including seeking injunctions of
violations, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the
Town's land use ordinances in the name of the Town. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to
34
enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of the
Town's land use ordinances and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements shall
not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence
that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous
advice given by an authorized Town official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in
bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public
health and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
SECTION 14. VARIANCES AND APPEALS
14.1. Variances.
Variances may be permitted only under the following conditions:
14.1.1. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including but not
limited to, lot width, structure height, and setback requirements.
14.1.2. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by the
applicable ordinance.
14.1.3. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting
information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the Board of Appeals or its
designee to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty
(20) days prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and
shall be taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals
14.1.4. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
14.1.4.1. The proposed structure or use would meet the requirements of the applicable
Town land use ordinance except for the specific provision(s) which has created the
nonconformity and from which relief is sought; and
14.1.4.2. Except as provided in subsections 14.1.4.3 and 14.1.4.4, and 14.1.4.5, the Board
may grant a variance only if strict application of the ordinance to the applicant and the
applicant’s property would cause undue hardship. The term “undue hardship” as used in
this subsection means:
1. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
2. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
35
3. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
4. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
14.1.4.3. Disability Variance. The Board may grant a variance to an owner of a dwelling
for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who
resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The Board shall restrict any variance granted
under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. The Board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the
variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability
lives in the dwelling. For the purposes of this subsection, a disability has the same
meaning as a physical or mental disability under 5 M.R.S.A., § 4553, as may be amended
from time to time, and the term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the
dwelling” is defined to include railing, wall, or roof systems necessary for the safety or
effectiveness of the structure.
14.1.4.4. Setback Variance for One-Unit Residential Uses. The Board may grant a
setback variance for a one-unit residential use. The Board may consider a variance from a
setback requirement only when strict application of the zoning ordinance to the applicant
and the applicant's property would cause undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" in
the subsection means:
1. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
2. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
3. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner;
4. The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of
an abutting property; and:
5. That the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need, not
convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
A variance granted under this subsection is strictly limited to permitting a variance from a
setback requirement for a one-unit residential use that is the primary year-round residence
of the applicant. A variance under this subsection may not exceed twenty percent (20%)
of a setback requirement and may not be granted if the variance would cause the area of
the dwelling to exceed the maximum permissible lot coverage. The Board may allow for
a variance under this subsection to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the setback
requirement, except for minimum setbacks from a water body, or the upland edge of a
wetland, or a tributary stream within the Shoreland Zone, if the applicant has obtained the
written consent of an affected abutting land owner.
36
14.1.4.5. Practical Difficulty Variance. The Board may grant a variance from the
dimensional standards of a zoning ordinance when strict application of the ordinance to
the applicant and the applicant's property would cause a practical difficulty and when the
following conditions exist:
1. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general condition of the neighborhood;
2. The granting of the variance will not produce an undesirable change in the
character of the neighborhood and will not unreasonably detrimentally affect the
use or market value of abutting properties;
3. The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the petitioner or a
prior owner;
4. No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the petitioner;
5. The granting of a variance will not unreasonably or adversely affect the natural
environment; and
6. The property is not located in whole or in part within the Shoreland Zone.
As used in this subsection, "dimensional standards" means and is limited to ordinance
provisions relating to lot area, lot coverage, frontage, and setback requirements.
As used in this subsection, "practical difficulty" means that the strict application of the
ordinance to the property precludes the ability of the applicant to pursue a use permitted
in the zoning district or area in which the property is located and results in significant
economic injury to the applicant.
14.1.5. Variance Recorded. If the Board of Appeals grants a variance under this section, a
certificate indicating the name of the current property owner, identifying the property by
reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a variance,
including any conditions on the variance, has been granted and the date of the granting, shall
be prepared in recordable form. This certificate must be recorded in the local Registry of Deeds
within ninety (90) days of the final written approval of the variance or the variance is void. The
variance is not valid until recorded as provided in this subsection. For the purpose of this
subsection, the date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written
approval.
14.1.6. Interpretation of Ordinance Requirements. The Board of Appeals shall limit any
variances granted as strictly as possible in order to insure conformance with the purposes and
provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so, may impose such
conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply
with any conditions imposed.
37
14.1.7. A copy of all variances granted by the Board of Appeals in the Shoreland Zone shall be
submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of the
decision.
14.2. Appeals
14.2.1. Administrative Appeal. An administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision of the CEO, the Planning Board, or the
Assessors or their designee unless otherwise noted in the appropriate land use ordinance or any
decision of the Local Plumbing Inspector in the administration of the Maine Subsurface Waste
Water Disposal Rules, Internal Plumbing Code, Minimum Lot Size Law and Regulations, and
Rules for Conversion of Seasonal Dwelling Units into Year-Round Residences in the
Shoreland Zone. Such appeal shall be taken within forty (40) days of the date of the decision
appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon showing of good cause, may
waive the forty (40) day requirement.
14.2.2. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of
appeal which includes:
1. A concise written statement indicating the decision of the Planning Board, CEO
or Local Plumbing Inspector being appealed from, the specific provisions of the
applicable ordinance, to which the decision is alleged to be in error, and what
relief is requested.
2. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing structures and other
physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
14.2.3. Upon being notified of an administrative appeal, the CEO, Local Plumbing Inspector or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
14.2.4. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five (35)
days of its receipt of an appeal request.
14.3. Decision by Board of Appeals
14.3.1. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an
appeal, request, or dispute. A member who abstains shall not be counted in determining
whether a quorum exists.
14.3.2. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals present and
voting shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
CEO, Local Plumbing Inspector or Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter on which it is required to decide, or to grant any variance, or to settle a dispute
about the Shoreland Zoning District boundary. When acting in an appellate capacity, the Board
38
of Appeals may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only when there is an error in the
Planning Board’s interpretation or application of specific provisions of the ordinance. When
acting in a de novo capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh,
undertaking its own independent analysis of the evidence.
14.3.3. The person filing the variance application, administrative appeal or dispute about the
Shoreland Zoning District boundary line shall have the burden of proof.
14.3.4. The Board shall decide all appeals, requests, or disputes within thirty-five (35) days
after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
14.3.5. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings
and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis thereof, and the appropriate order, relief or
denial thereof.
14.4. Appeal to Superior Court
Any aggrieved party who participated in the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take
an appeal to Superior Court as set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691(3), as may be amended from
time to time.
14.5. Reconsideration
The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision as set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691(3), as
may be amended from time to time. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive
additional evidence and testimony.
Page 1 of 5
GOVERNING
HARPSWELL
A Brief Guide to
Town Government
Page 2 of 5
For more information
The Town’s website is www.harpswell.maine.gov. Contact the Selectmen or Town Administrator at 207-833-
5771. Also watch Harpswell Community Television on broadcast and cable channel 14 and see local
newspapers such as the Harpswell Anchor, the Times-Record, The Forecaster and Portland Press-Herald.
Revised 4/08, 3/13, 3/19
History
The Harpswell form of government – Town Meeting and Selectmen – dates from well before the American
Revolution. In much of colonial New England, the religious congregation, having decided to be selfgoverning,
also constituted the Town Meeting, a body which levied a local tax and selected men to supervise
the spending of the funds raised. By the end of the 1700s, with the separation of the church from the functions
of government, the Town Meeting and Selectmen became the usual form of government in Massachusetts
(including the District of Maine), New Hampshire and Vermont. Harpswell was incorporated in 1758. In
1820, Maine became a State and the Town Meeting form of government has remained to the present day as the
most prevalent form of local government. This form of government is unique to New England.
Maine Law and Home Rule
Municipalities have no independent standing but are considered political subdivisions of the State. As a result,
Harpswell may only act as authorized by Maine law. The Maine Constitution grants Harpswell and other
municipalities home rule authority to handle many matters, except where expressly banned from doing so, and
those which are “local and municipal.” The State mandates certain matters, although in some cases the Town
may adopt more strict provisions than the law requires. One good example is the State requirement that each
municipality have a Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, which must adhere to specific requirements but which may
be more restrictive in some respects.
Town Meeting
The Town Meeting is the legislature of the Town of Harpswell. It is composed of all registered voters of the
Town who choose to assemble when called into session. Although the term “town meeting” is used loosely
elsewhere, in Maine it means a formal institution of government. When it assembles, the Town Meeting elects
a Moderator to preside over the session.
Only the Town Meeting may decide to raise funds through taxes to support municipal activities and determine
what activities are to be supported. No municipal activity may be undertaken without such Town Meeting
approval except when mandated by the State.
The Town Meeting also has the principal authority to adopt ordinances, the local laws applying in Harpswell.
Both the spending and ordinance articles for consideration are listed on the Warrant for the Town Meeting,
which must be completed and posted publicly seven days before the people assemble. The Warrant may not
be changed and proposed ordinances may not be amended during the Town Meeting.
Page 3 of 5
The Town Meeting takes action either at public gatherings or by referendums. Each town is required to have
at least one session of the Town Meeting each year, but special Town Meetings may also be called. The
Annual Town Meeting in Harpswell customarily takes place the second Saturday in March. The Selectmen
may call for a referendum or such votes may be called by petition, used mainly when the Selectmen do not act.
Selectmen
The executive and administrative functions of the Town of Harpswell are the responsibility of the three
Selectmen, who are elected for three-year terms by a vote of the Town Meeting conducted by secret ballot.
The Selectmen usually meet every other Thursday evening, but may hold other meetings as needed.
The Selectmen have the responsibility for the expenditure of public funds and must vote in public on all
spending, which has been authorized by the Town Meeting. They also have responsibilities authorized by laws
and ordinances. They adopt ordinances concerning parking, cable television and general public assistance.
They adopt policies relating to the exercise of their responsibilities or matters under their supervision. They
conduct public hearings. All decisions of the Selectmen must be made at a public meeting.
Harpswell has more shoreline than any other municipality in Maine, so many municipal activities relate to the
shore and adjoining waters including shellfish management, harbors, the placement of moorings, and water
quality. The Selectmen also supervise codes enforcement, especially relating to land use matters and are
assisted by a professionally qualified staff. They also are assisted by a planning staff. The Town operates
recycling and waste transfer facilities under the supervision of the Selectmen. In addition, with the help of
staff, they are responsible for public recreation activities.
The Selectmen prepare the Warrant for the Town Meeting, and it is customary in Harpswell that they make
recommendations on the various articles.
With the approval of the Town Meeting, the Selectmen contract with the Cumberland County Sheriff for law
enforcement services. Fire and rescue protection is provided by three separate volunteer companies –
Harpswell Neck, Cundy’s Harbor and Orr’s-Bailey Islands – which are partially taxpayer supported. The
Town has 911 service. Paramedic service provided through a contract with Midcoast Hospital was instituted in
2012.
Assessors
The Selectmen also serve as Harpswell’s Assessors. Because taxation is exclusively a State matter, levying
property taxes is a delegated State function and the Assessors must follow State guidelines and are not subject
to the Town Meeting in these matters. The Assessors determine the value of land and buildings within the
Town. The day-to-day work is carried out by Assessors’ Agents, professional qualified staff members. The
Assessors set the tax rate and order the collection of taxes through the Tax Commitment, consider requests for
abatement and may allow hardship abatements. Appeals from decisions of the Assessors are heard by the
Cumberland County Commissioners.
Page 4 of 5
Overseers of the Poor
Dealing with public assistance matters is also a responsibility of the Selectmen. The trained staff reviews
requests for assistance or identifies situations where assistance might be warranted. The Overseers of the Poor
may direct specific measures or act as a review body for staff decisions.
Town Administrator
The Selectmen have decided that the day-to-day administration on Town affairs and the supervision of the
staff should be carried out by the Town Administrator. The Town Meeting has approved this arrangement
through its appropriations. The Town Administrator acts on behalf of the Town on many administrative
matters and maintains liaison with the Town Attorney, Town Engineer, and Town Auditor, outside entities
chosen from time to time by the Selectmen.
Committees, Commission, Boards
Harpswell has a number of bodies which play their roles in town government. The Planning Board and Board
of Appeals are required by State law and serve as quasi-judicial bodies to make decisions concerning certain
matters prescribed by law or ordinance, mostly relating to land use. They are independent of other town
institutions and their decisions may be appealed to the Maine Superior Court.
Two other bodies are also provided for under the law. The Town has decided to have a Conservation
Commission, which is responsible for keeping an index of all open areas and recommending programs for the
protection, development or use of these areas. The Comprehensive Plan Committee produces a draft plan
every 10 years for consideration by the Town Meeting and an Implementation Committee follows up on the
plan adopted.
The Harbor and Waterfront and Marine Resources Committees are established by ordinance. Other
committees include Budget Advisory, Fire and Rescue, Recreation, Solid Waste and Town Lands.
These committees are advisory to the Selectmen and Town Meeting. The Selectmen make appointments to all
committees annually and townspeople are encouraged to volunteer.
Road Commissioner
The Road Commissioner is appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The job description is described in State
law: “The road commissioner, under the direction of a majority of the selectmen, shall have charge of the
repairs of all highways and bridges within the towns and shall have authority to employ the necessary
personnel and equipment and purchase material for the repair of highways and bridges. The road
commissioner shall give bond to the satisfaction of the selectmen and be responsible to them for the
expenditure of money and discharge of his duties generally.”
Treasurer
The Treasurer, whose duties are prescribed by law, is appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a three-year
term. The Treasurer disburses funds when authorized by the Selectmen, maintains a bank account and keeps
the municipal financial records. In Harpswell, the Treasurer carries out other functions including handling the
issuance of debt and oversight over many financial operations.
Page 5 of 5
Town Clerk
The Town Clerk, also elected by the Town Meeting for a three-year term, carries out duties set by State law.
The Town Clerk manages Town Meetings and elections, issues permits and local and State licenses. The
Town Clerk is also assigned specific duties under four of the Town’s ordinances, most notably the Shellfish
Ordinance. The Town Clerk issues annual mooring permits. The Selectmen also customarily appoint the
Town Clerk to be Registrar of Voters.
Tax Collector
The Tax Collector is elected by the Town Meeting for a three-year term. The job description is contained in
Maine law. Just as the Assessors exercise delegated State responsibilities in levying taxes, the Tax Collector
also carries out delegated responsibilities in collecting taxes both property and excise. The Tax Collector is
assigned the duty of executing the Tax Commitment and obtaining the required revenues for the Town. The
Tax Collector also issues motor vehicle and boat registrations.
Maine Freedom of Access Law
Maine has a strong “sunshine” law, which guarantees any person access to meetings of boards of public
officials (Selectmen, Board of Appeals, Planning Board, committees) for their deliberations and decisions as
well as to almost all documents. Harpswell has its own Freedom of Access Policy with some more specific
requirements. When dealing with administrative matters, the Selectmen hold informal meetings, which are
open to the public. Executive sessions are limited and no decision can be made in such a session.
Page 1 of 5
GOVERNING
HARPSWELL
A Brief Guide to
Town Government
Page 2 of 5
For more information
The Town’s website is www.harpswell.maine.gov. Contact the Selectmen or Town Administrator at 207-833-
5771. Also watch Harpswell Community Television on broadcast and cable channel 14 and see local
newspapers such as the Harpswell Anchor, the Times-Record, The Forecaster and Portland Press-Herald.
Revised 4/08, 3/13, 3/19
History
The Harpswell form of government – Town Meeting and Selectmen – dates from well before the American
Revolution. In much of colonial New England, the religious congregation, having decided to be selfgoverning,
also constituted the Town Meeting, a body which levied a local tax and selected men to supervise
the spending of the funds raised. By the end of the 1700s, with the separation of the church from the functions
of government, the Town Meeting and Selectmen became the usual form of government in Massachusetts
(including the District of Maine), New Hampshire and Vermont. Harpswell was incorporated in 1758. In
1820, Maine became a State and the Town Meeting form of government has remained to the present day as the
most prevalent form of local government. This form of government is unique to New England.
Maine Law and Home Rule
Municipalities have no independent standing but are considered political subdivisions of the State. As a result,
Harpswell may only act as authorized by Maine law. The Maine Constitution grants Harpswell and other
municipalities home rule authority to handle many matters, except where expressly banned from doing so, and
those which are “local and municipal.” The State mandates certain matters, although in some cases the Town
may adopt more strict provisions than the law requires. One good example is the State requirement that each
municipality have a Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, which must adhere to specific requirements but which may
be more restrictive in some respects.
Town Meeting
The Town Meeting is the legislature of the Town of Harpswell. It is composed of all registered voters of the
Town who choose to assemble when called into session. Although the term “town meeting” is used loosely
elsewhere, in Maine it means a formal institution of government. When it assembles, the Town Meeting elects
a Moderator to preside over the session.
Only the Town Meeting may decide to raise funds through taxes to support municipal activities and determine
what activities are to be supported. No municipal activity may be undertaken without such Town Meeting
approval except when mandated by the State.
The Town Meeting also has the principal authority to adopt ordinances, the local laws applying in Harpswell.
Both the spending and ordinance articles for consideration are listed on the Warrant for the Town Meeting,
which must be completed and posted publicly seven days before the people assemble. The Warrant may not
be changed and proposed ordinances may not be amended during the Town Meeting.
Page 3 of 5
The Town Meeting takes action either at public gatherings or by referendums. Each town is required to have
at least one session of the Town Meeting each year, but special Town Meetings may also be called. The
Annual Town Meeting in Harpswell customarily takes place the second Saturday in March. The Selectmen
may call for a referendum or such votes may be called by petition, used mainly when the Selectmen do not act.
Selectmen
The executive and administrative functions of the Town of Harpswell are the responsibility of the three
Selectmen, who are elected for three-year terms by a vote of the Town Meeting conducted by secret ballot.
The Selectmen usually meet every other Thursday evening, but may hold other meetings as needed.
The Selectmen have the responsibility for the expenditure of public funds and must vote in public on all
spending, which has been authorized by the Town Meeting. They also have responsibilities authorized by laws
and ordinances. They adopt ordinances concerning parking, cable television and general public assistance.
They adopt policies relating to the exercise of their responsibilities or matters under their supervision. They
conduct public hearings. All decisions of the Selectmen must be made at a public meeting.
Harpswell has more shoreline than any other municipality in Maine, so many municipal activities relate to the
shore and adjoining waters including shellfish management, harbors, the placement of moorings, and water
quality. The Selectmen also supervise codes enforcement, especially relating to land use matters and are
assisted by a professionally qualified staff. They also are assisted by a planning staff. The Town operates
recycling and waste transfer facilities under the supervision of the Selectmen. In addition, with the help of
staff, they are responsible for public recreation activities.
The Selectmen prepare the Warrant for the Town Meeting, and it is customary in Harpswell that they make
recommendations on the various articles.
With the approval of the Town Meeting, the Selectmen contract with the Cumberland County Sheriff for law
enforcement services. Fire and rescue protection is provided by three separate volunteer companies –
Harpswell Neck, Cundy’s Harbor and Orr’s-Bailey Islands – which are partially taxpayer supported. The
Town has 911 service. Paramedic service provided through a contract with Midcoast Hospital was instituted in
2012.
Assessors
The Selectmen also serve as Harpswell’s Assessors. Because taxation is exclusively a State matter, levying
property taxes is a delegated State function and the Assessors must follow State guidelines and are not subject
to the Town Meeting in these matters. The Assessors determine the value of land and buildings within the
Town. The day-to-day work is carried out by Assessors’ Agents, professional qualified staff members. The
Assessors set the tax rate and order the collection of taxes through the Tax Commitment, consider requests for
abatement and may allow hardship abatements. Appeals from decisions of the Assessors are heard by the
Cumberland County Commissioners.
Page 4 of 5
Overseers of the Poor
Dealing with public assistance matters is also a responsibility of the Selectmen. The trained staff reviews
requests for assistance or identifies situations where assistance might be warranted. The Overseers of the Poor
may direct specific measures or act as a review body for staff decisions.
Town Administrator
The Selectmen have decided that the day-to-day administration on Town affairs and the supervision of the
staff should be carried out by the Town Administrator. The Town Meeting has approved this arrangement
through its appropriations. The Town Administrator acts on behalf of the Town on many administrative
matters and maintains liaison with the Town Attorney, Town Engineer, and Town Auditor, outside entities
chosen from time to time by the Selectmen.
Committees, Commission, Boards
Harpswell has a number of bodies which play their roles in town government. The Planning Board and Board
of Appeals are required by State law and serve as quasi-judicial bodies to make decisions concerning certain
matters prescribed by law or ordinance, mostly relating to land use. They are independent of other town
institutions and their decisions may be appealed to the Maine Superior Court.
Two other bodies are also provided for under the law. The Town has decided to have a Conservation
Commission, which is responsible for keeping an index of all open areas and recommending programs for the
protection, development or use of these areas. The Comprehensive Plan Committee produces a draft plan
every 10 years for consideration by the Town Meeting and an Implementation Committee follows up on the
plan adopted.
The Harbor and Waterfront and Marine Resources Committees are established by ordinance. Other
committees include Budget Advisory, Fire and Rescue, Recreation, Solid Waste and Town Lands.
These committees are advisory to the Selectmen and Town Meeting. The Selectmen make appointments to all
committees annually and townspeople are encouraged to volunteer.
Road Commissioner
The Road Commissioner is appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The job description is described in State
law: “The road commissioner, under the direction of a majority of the selectmen, shall have charge of the
repairs of all highways and bridges within the towns and shall have authority to employ the necessary
personnel and equipment and purchase material for the repair of highways and bridges. The road
commissioner shall give bond to the satisfaction of the selectmen and be responsible to them for the
expenditure of money and discharge of his duties generally.”
Treasurer
The Treasurer, whose duties are prescribed by law, is appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a three-year
term. The Treasurer disburses funds when authorized by the Selectmen, maintains a bank account and keeps
the municipal financial records. In Harpswell, the Treasurer carries out other functions including handling the
issuance of debt and oversight over many financial operations.
Page 5 of 5
Town Clerk
The Town Clerk, also elected by the Town Meeting for a three-year term, carries out duties set by State law.
The Town Clerk manages Town Meetings and elections, issues permits and local and State licenses. The
Town Clerk is also assigned specific duties under four of the Town’s ordinances, most notably the Shellfish
Ordinance. The Town Clerk issues annual mooring permits. The Selectmen also customarily appoint the
Town Clerk to be Registrar of Voters.
Tax Collector
The Tax Collector is elected by the Town Meeting for a three-year term. The job description is contained in
Maine law. Just as the Assessors exercise delegated State responsibilities in levying taxes, the Tax Collector
also carries out delegated responsibilities in collecting taxes both property and excise. The Tax Collector is
assigned the duty of executing the Tax Commitment and obtaining the required revenues for the Town. The
Tax Collector also issues motor vehicle and boat registrations.
Maine Freedom of Access Law
Maine has a strong “sunshine” law, which guarantees any person access to meetings of boards of public
officials (Selectmen, Board of Appeals, Planning Board, committees) for their deliberations and decisions as
well as to almost all documents. Harpswell has its own Freedom of Access Policy with some more specific
requirements. When dealing with administrative matters, the Selectmen hold informal meetings, which are
open to the public. Executive sessions are limited and no decision can be made in such a session.
Definitions Addendum
to the
Basic Land Use Ordinance
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
Subdivision Ordinance
Site Plan Review Ordinance
As Approved March 11, 2000
As Amended March 10, 2001
As Amended March 9, 2002
As Amended March 8, 2003
As Amended March 10, 2007
As Amended March 14, 2009
As Amended March 20, 2010
As Amended March 12, 2011
As Amended June 12, 2012
As Amended March 9, 2013
As Amended March 15, 2014
As Amended March 14, 2015
As Amended March 12, 2016
As Amended March 11, 2017
1
DEFINITIONS ADDENDUM
Citizen's Note: The Definitions Addendum provides a common set of definitions for the Basic
Land Use Ordinance, the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, the Site Plan Review Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance.
All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual meanings. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and vice
versa. The word "lot" shall include "parcel" and "plot." The words "shall" or "must" are used to
indicate the mandatory and the word "may" is used to indicate the permissive. The words
"occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
Abutters – the owners of property listed on the Town’s most recent assessing records who may
be entitled to receive notice of applications before the Planning Board or the Board of Appeals.
Abutting Property – any lot which is physically contiguous with the parcel of land, even if only
at a point and any lot which is located directly across a public or private way from the parcel of
land such that the extension of the side lot lines of the parcel would touch or enclose the abutting
property.
Accessory Residential Unit – A second dwelling unit contained within a single family detached
dwelling or an accessory building on the same lot as a single family detached dwelling for use as
a complete, independent living quarters, with provision for living, sleeping, bathing, and
cooking.
1. The accessory residential unit shall not be greater than seven hundred fifty (750) square
feet or fifty percent (50%) of the total square footage of the primary dwelling, whichever
is more restrictive.
2. The accessory apartment shall be secondary, incidental and subordinate to the single
family residential or commercial use.
Accessory Structure or use – a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not subordinate the principal
use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Active Building Permit – a building permit that has not expired or been revoked
Aggrieved Party – an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this ordinance; a person whose land abuts land
for which a permit or variance is under consideration or has been granted; or any other person or
group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of
such permit or variance.
2
Agriculture – the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to: forage and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
green house products. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting
activities.
Applicant – the assessed owner or owners of land for which a permit, variance or appeal is
sought or person with documented title, right, or interest in the land for which a permit, variance
or appeal is sought.
Aquaculture – the growing or propagation of harvestable fresh water, estuarine, or marine plant
or animal species.
Basal Area – the area of a cross section of a tree stem at four and one half (4½) feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.
Basement – any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six (6) feet or more and
having more than fifty percent (50%) of its volume below the existing ground level.
Bed and Breakfast Home Occupations – bed and breakfast means any establishment where the
general public can stay overnight for a fee in the home occupied by the owner and are provided
with a breakfast meal but shall not serve other meals or have dining facilities open to the public.
For the purpose of this ordinance, Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be considered as home
occupations if they provide no more than four bedrooms for overnight guests. Such usage as a
Bed and Breakfast is subject to adequate sewage disposal as certified by the plumbing inspector.
Boat Launching Facility – a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles
and trailers.
Boat Repair and Construction Facility – a facility whose primary or sole use is the
construction or repair of commercial and/or pleasure vessels and which may also supply three (3)
or less moorings as an accessory use.
Brunswick Labor Market Area – the median family income most recently published by the
Maine State Housing Authority for the Brunswick region.
Buffer, Buffer Area, Buffer Strip – land area used to visibly separate and screen one (1) use
from another or to shield or block noise, light, or other nuisances, and thus, minimize the effects
to adjacent properties or sensitive natural resources. A buffer may include one or a combination
of the following: plantings of sufficient mass to effectively block the view or that shall block the
view after thirty-six (36) months, walls, fences, or natural growth.
Bureau – State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry.
3
Campground – any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary
living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Campsite – any plot of ground within a campground intended for use by a tent, trailer, recreation
vehicle or similar shelter under the control of an individual camper.
Change from one category of non-residential use to another category of non-residential use
– a change in the type of occupancy of a non-residential structure, or a portion thereof, such that
the basic type of use is changed, such as from retail to office or storage to a restaurant, but not
including a change in the occupants.
Chemical Fertilizer – a chemical fertilizer is defined as any inorganic material of wholly or
partially synthetic origin that is added to the soil to sustain plant growth.
Code Enforcement Officer – the person appointed as Code Enforcement Office or Alternate
Code Enforcement Officer by the Board of Selectmen.
Commercial Use – the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation",
defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the
buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or
dwelling units, and may also include the processing of marine life and the sale thereof in any
form.
Community Dock – a single wharf, pier, dock and/or float located: on a lot in a subdivision
approved by the Planning Board and having a common right of use by the association of
homeowners having common rights of interest in the lot and which is used by the property
owners for loading and unloading of passengers and/or cargo and the tying of dinghies; or on
town owned land having the common right of use by the general public.
Community Shoreland Access – a point of access to the coastal wetland including associated
structures such as raised boardwalks, stairs, access roads, paths and parking lots located: on a lot
in a subdivision approved by the Planning Board and having a common right of use by the
association of homeowners having common rights of interest in the lot containing the point of
access; or on town owned land having the common right of use by the general public.
Composted Manure – a mixture of decaying organic matter, as from animal bedding or leaves
and excrement, typically barnyard or stable dung, used as a soil amendment to improve soil
structure and provide nutrients. Composted manure must be, at a minimum, aged for a period of
not less than ninety (90) days to allow high levels of nitrogen to leach from the material before
application.
Comprehensive Plan – the “2005 Update of the Harpswell Comprehensive Plan” adopted
March 2005, and any amendments to the plan that have been subsequently adopted by the voters
of the Town. Map No. 5 of the 1987 Comprehensive Plan is also included.
4
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Contiguous Property; Contiguous Lots – lots that adjoin at any line or point
Cross-sectional Area – the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average stream or
tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight line
distance from the maximum high-water line on one side of the channel to the maximum highwater
line on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or tributary stream channel
depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line between the maximum highwater
lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.
Curb Cut – any new vehicular entrance (driveway) on to an established road
Cut-Off Fixture – a lighting fixture or luminaire that controls glare by directing light well below
the horizontal. A cut-off fixture must limit the direction of light so that a maximum of 2.5% of
the total lamp lumens shine above ninety (90) degrees or a line parallel to the surface of the
ground and a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the lamp limens shine above eighty (80) degrees.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional Requirements – numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but
not limited to setback, lot area, road frontage, shore frontage and height.
5
Disruption of shoreline integrity – the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or condition
of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where
shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an
abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing waters, a profile and
character altered from natural conditions.
Drinking Water Standards – the standards for primary and secondary drinking water as set
forth in Title 22, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 601, Subchapter 11 and as further
defined in the State of Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water, Chapter 7.
Driveway – a private vehicular access way connecting a house, garage or other structure on a
single lot to a road.
Dwelling – a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units, including single-unit,
two (2) unit, and multi-unit residential uses, and manufactured housing but not recreational
vehicles.
Dwelling Unit – a room or group of rooms designed and equipped for use as a separate living
space by a household containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities with free and open
circulation between these areas by members of the household. A dwelling unit is intended for
occupancy by one household living independently in which the members of the household share
the use of common areas and have regular interaction in the course of their day-to-day activities.
The term shall include mobile homes, and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet
facilities regardless of the time-period rented but not recreational vehicles.
Emergency Operations – operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare,
such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and
operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or
injury.
Equity Recapture – a resale formula included in a Workforce Housing Covenant that controls
the sale price of a Workforce Housing Lot or Workforce Housing Unit. The purpose of a resale
formula is to maintain long-term affordability, discourage speculation, assure the continued
availability of workforce housing, and ensure moderate long term equity gain to the owner of any
Workforce Housing Lot and Unit approved under the Workforce Housing provisions of the Basic
Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
Essential Services – the construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical or
communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers and related equipment; telephone cable or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil,
water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems;
and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
6
accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a Structure – an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to, attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use – the addition of weeks or months to a use's operating season; additional
hours or operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Fisheries, Significant Fisheries – areas identified by a government agency such as the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) or Maine Department of Marine Resources
(DMR) as having significant value as fisheries and any areas so identified in the Town’s
comprehensive plan.
Flexible Lot Size Subdivision – a subdivision approved in accordance with Section 9.4.3 of the
Subdivision Ordinance in which the lots may be less than 80,000 square feet and at least fifty
percent (50%) of the parcel is set aside as protected or common open space.
Floodway – the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the one hundred (100) - year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot in height.
Floor Area – the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) or a structure enclosed by exterior
walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and
decks.
Food Products – a raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, non-alcoholic beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
Forest Management Activities – timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement,
pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of
timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads.
Forest Stand – a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
distinguishable unit.
Foundation – the supporting substructure of a building or other structure including but not
limited to basements, slabs, sills, posts, frost walls or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
7
Frontage -
Road Frontage – the linear distance between the sidelines of a lot, measured along the
lot line that borders upon whatever road serves as legal access to the lot. For the purposes
of these ordinances, the following ways may be used to measure road frontage provided
that they are no less than thirty-three (33) feet in width throughout their length:
1. A deeded private right of way.
2. An existing town way, public easement or State or State Aid Highway, provided
access is not specifically prohibited.
3. An existing deeded right of way, whether dedicated to public use or not, on a road
shown on an approved subdivision plan.
4. An existing private road for which no deed can be located but where the applicant
can establish at least twenty (20) years of uncontested usage, and can establish the
physical characteristics of the road, including but not limited to, its width.
5. A public or private right of way that provides passage to pedestrians and vehicles
and which is the legal access to a lot.
Shore Frontage – the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses – those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland
waters and which cannot be located away from these waters. The uses may include, but are not
limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities excluding recreational boat
storage buildings, fin fish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities,
marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne
transportation, and uses which primarily provide general public access to marine or tidal waters.
Citizen's Note: Boathouses and boat building may not qualify as functionally water-dependent
uses.
Glare – excessive brightness that makes it difficult to see or that causes discomfort including the
following:
• Direct Glare or glare from insufficiently shielded light sources or areas of excessive
luminance within the field of view,
• Disability Glare or the effect of stray light in the eye whereby visibility and visual
performance are reduced, and
8
• Discomfort Glare or glare that produces discomfort even if it does not interfere with
visual performance or visibility.
Great Pond – any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of
ten acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area
in excess of thirty (30) acres.
Green Infrastructure – an approach to water management that protects, restores, or mimics the
natural water cycle. Examples are rain gardens, permeable pavements, green roofs, infiltration
planters, trees and tree boxes, rainwater harvesting systems (rain barrels), bioswales as well as
preservation and restoration of natural landscapes (such as forests, floodplains and wetlands).
Gross Income – the income from all sources of all household members who reside in a
Workforce Housing Lot or Unit.
Gross Leasable Lot Area – for the purpose of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District only,
the gross leasable lot area is the total of the area of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District
excluding any road rights-of-way, utility easements, easements for public access, or land that
will not be available for lease for development including the pier and the causeway leading to the
pier.
Ground Cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles, and twigs, and the partially decayed
organic matter on the forest floor.
Ground Water – all waters found beneath the surface of the earth.
Harvest Area – the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting of
trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area affected by a
harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting
unharvested areas greater than ten (10) acres within the area affected by a harvest.
Hazardous Waste – any material(s) included within the definition of hazardous waste contained
in Chapter 850 of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Rules adopted
pursuant to 38 MRSA Section 1319-O (1), as such rules may be amended from time to time.
Height – the vertical distance as measured from halfway between the mean original grade at the
downhill side of the structure and the mean original grade at the uphill side of the structure to the
highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas and similar appurtenances
which have no floor area.
Highest Annual Tide (HAT) – the jurisdictional limit for all coastal wetlands. The HAT occurs
in association with the new moon. It may be obtained from Maine Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) Highest Annual Tide Level chart.
9
Historic or Archaeological Resources – areas identified by the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission or the National Park Service as having significant value as an historic or
archaeological resources and any such areas identified in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
Home Occupation – an occupation or profession carried out for gain by a resident or occupant
and conducted as an accessory use in or about such resident’s or occupant’s dwelling or
accessory structure. All home occupations are subject to the provisions of Section 15.20 of the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance regardless of whether they are located within the Shoreland Zone.
Homeowners/Landowners Association – a community association that is organized in a
development in which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities in
protecting and/or maintaining facilities including but not limited to roads, community water or
septic systems, open space, and recreation facilities. Homeowners/landowners associations
include road associations.
Household – one or more individuals living as a unit in which they share the use of a dwelling
unit and its facilities.
Hydric Soils – a soil that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding, or ponding long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
Impermeable Surface – land area covered by structures and associated constructed facilities;
land areas that have been or will be covered by a low-permeability material, such as asphalt or
concrete; and land areas such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas that have been or will
be compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability. Common impermeable surfaces
include roof tops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt
paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled macadam, or other surfaces that
similarly impede the natural infiltration of water.
Impermeable Surface Coverage – the portion of a lot covered by impermeable surface.
Increase in Nonconformity of a Structure – any change in a structure or property that causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not
limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in
impermeable surface coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure
expansions that either meets the dimensional standard or that cause no further increase in the
linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to increase
nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement
for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the
required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions that in-fill
irregularly shaped structures.
10
Individual Private Campsite – an area of land that:
1. is not associated with a campground,
2. is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals
and
3. involves site improvements that may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking
areas, fireplaces, or tent platforms. This does not include rudimentary campsites that are
used on an occasional basis for camping by private individuals and which does not
include clearing of vegetation.
Industrial – the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, or processing of
goods, or the extraction of minerals. This shall in no case include the processing of fish or
marine life. Processing of such goods shall be considered an acceptable commercial fish use.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for
public purposes.
Land Management Road – a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and
used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.
Land Use Ordinances – the Town's ordinances governing land use including the Basic Land
Use Ordinance, the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance, the Town Road
Ordinance, the Sign Ordinance, the Site Plan Review Ordinance, the State Junkyard Ordinance,
the Solid Waste Ordinance, the Floodplain Management Ordinance, and other ordinances that
may be adopted by the Town from time to time.
Licensed Forester – a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter 76, as may be amended from
time to time.
Liquidation Harvesting – the purchase of timberland followed by a harvest that removes most
or all commercial value in standing timber, without regard for long-term forest management
principles, and the subsequent sale or attempted resale of the harvested land within five (5) years.
Lot area – The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below
maximum high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads
serving more than two lots.
Low Impact Development (LID) – an approach to land development (or re-development) that
works with nature to manage stormwater as close to its source as possible. LID employs
principles such as preserving and recreating natural landscape features, minimizing impermeable
surfaces to treat stormwater as a resource rather than a waste product, and include bioretention
facilities, rain gardens, vegetated rooftops, rain barrels, and permeable pavements.
11
Maine DEP – the Maine Department of Environmental Protection or any successor agency of
Maine government.
Marina – a business establishment that has frontage on navigable water and, that provides, as its
principal use, for hire moorings or docking facilities for boats, and that may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and
outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, boat and tackle shops and marine fuel service
facilities. A marina does not include facilities that provide boat repair or construction as their
primary or sole use and that may provide three (3) or less moorings as an accessory use.
Citizen's Note: See definition of boat repair facility.
Marine-Related Business – For the purposes of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District
only, a marine-related business is a commercial or industrial activity that does not meet the
definition of a functionally water-dependent use and that:
1. primarily catches or harvests fin fish, shellfish, or other material from the ocean;
2. builds boats;
3. operates marinas;
4. makes or provides goods or services to support recreation, commercial or recreational
fishing or boating, boatbuilding or other marine-related uses;
5. stores, sells, raises, processes, and/or distributes materials that are caught or harvested
from the ocean; or
6. that conducts research or educational activities related to the ocean or marine
environments and/or marine plants and animals.
Market Value – the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both
conversant with the property and with the prevailing general price levels.
Maximum High Water Line (non-tidal waters) – that line which is apparent from visible
markings changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and that distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great
pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Mineral Exploration – hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature
or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition. This does not include soil
analysis for subsurface waste disposal.
Mineral Extraction – any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more
than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other
12
like material from its natural location and transports the product removed, away from the
extraction site. This is in no way meant to construe excavation for permitted uses or structures.
Minimum Lot Width – the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
Mobile Food Handlers – any person selling or offering for sale, food products within the Town
from a mobile unit, and where delivery is made at the time of sale.
Mobile Unit – a mobile, temporary or non-permanent vending unit that is capable of being
moved from place to place.
Multi-Unit Residential Use – a residential dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
The placement of three (3) or more dwelling units on a lot or the division of an existing structure
into three (3) or more dwelling units requires subdivision review under state and local law.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Natural Areas and Natural Communities, Unique Natural Areas and Natural Communities
– areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Conservation
Natural Areas Program as having significant value as a natural area and any areas identified in
the Town’s comprehensive plan.
Noise Control Plan – a document that demonstrates how the noise impacts from a development
will be minimized including:
1. A description of the proposed development including the identification of major sound
sources, including tonal sound sources (rumbles, hums, whines, whistles, squeals),
associated with the construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed
development and the proposed hours of operation;
2. The location of the sound sources shown on the site plan for the development;
3. Maps and descriptions of the land uses, zoning districts and existing sources of sound for
the area potentially affected by sounds from the development. These maps and
descriptions shall be adequate to describe the potentially affected area around the
development and shall have a minimum coverage of 1,000 feet in all directions from the
boundary of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District;
4. A description of day and night equivalent sound levels expected to be produced at the
boundary of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District both as individual and combined
sound sources.
5. Manufacturers’ specifications for machinery that has potential to be heard beyond the
boundary of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District.
6. A description of any proposed noise control measures including their location and
expected performance.
Noise Reducing Site Design – a site design for development in the Mitchell Field Marine
Business District that controls noise impacts through the design and placement of structures and
13
other improvements on the site including, but not limited to, the use of buffers including walls
and fences, and/or the location of service areas and loading docks, exhaust fans, machinery and
equipment, overhead doors, areas where trucks back-up, and other noise generating area so they
do not face the ocean or the nearest point on the boundary of the Mitchell Field Marine Business
District.
Nonconforming Condition – nonconforming lot, structure or use that is allowed solely because
it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Nonconforming Lot – a single lot(s) of record which, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the
district in which it is located, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence and
was recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds at the time that this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming Structure – a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or impermeable surface coverage, but which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments took effect.
Nonconforming Use – use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof that is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but that is allowed solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nuisance – any violation of this ordinance.
Odor Control Plan – a document that demonstrates how the odor impacts from a development
will be minimized including:
1. A description of the proposed development including the identification of major odor
sources associated with the construction, operation, and maintenance of the proposed
development and the proposed hours of operation;
2. The location of the odor sources shown on the site plan for the development;
3. Maps and descriptions of the land uses, zoning districts and existing sources of odors for
the area potentially affected by odors from the development. These maps and descriptions
shall be adequate to describe the potentially affected area around the development and
shall have a minimum coverage of 1,000 feet in all directions from the boundary of the
Mitchell Field Marine Business District;
4. A description of any proposed odor control measures including their location and
expected performance.
Offshore Island – islands not connected to any other land by road and/or are accessible only by
water or air at mean high tide.
One-Unit Residential Use – a residential dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
14
Open Fence – a fence through which water, wind and sand can easily move, for example, a split
rail.
Open Space – an area of land in a predominately undeveloped condition.
Open Space, Common – conservation and/or recreation land within a subdivision that is owned
by the residents of the subdivision in common or by a homeowners association and that is
protected from future development by a conservation easement or similar legally binding
restriction.
Open Space, Protected – conservation and/or recreation land within a subdivision that is owned
by the Town, state or federal agency, conservation organization or land trust, or private owner
and that is protected from future development by a conservation easement or similar legally
binding restriction.
Organic Fertilizer – a product that is derived from the remains or by products of animals or
vegetables which contain the essential nutrients for plant growth.
Perennial Stream – a free-flowing body of water which contains water at all times except
during extreme drought.
Permanent Marker – a marker that, if left undisturbed, will remain in place for a period of at
least twenty-five (25) years.
Person – an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having joint or common interest, or other legal
entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the
maximum high-water line or within a wetland.
Temporary – structures that remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in
any period of twelve (l2) consecutive months.
Permanent – structures that remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in
any period of twelve (l2) consecutive months.
Pond – any inland body of water that in a natural state has a surface area less than ten (10) acres,
or a body of water artificially formed or increased with a surface area less than thirty (30) acres
excluding farm ponds, fire ponds, stormwater retention ponds, or landscape ponds and similar
small man-made areas.
Primary Conservation Area – land within a subdivision that is not suitable for development or
intensive use due to the presence of natural resource constraints. This includes coastal and
15
freshwater wetlands, significant vernal pools, undeveloped land within the 100-year floodplain,
land within one hundred (100) feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland, and contiguous
areas of one acre or more with a slope of more than twenty-five percent (25%).
Principal Structure – a building other than one that is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal Use – a use other than one that is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same premises.
Public Facility – any facility, including but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas,
and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or
public entity.
Qualified Buyers – persons who meet the income requirements of a very low, low or moderate
income household and who purchase Workforce Housing Lots or Units.
Recent Flood Plain Soils – the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondava
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational Facility – a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching
facilities.
Recreational Vehicle – a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and
designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may
include a pick-up camper, travel, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground,
and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement System – a system intended to replace:
1. an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant
change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2. any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential – a land use that is predominated by a dwelling or dwelling units.
Residual Basal Area – the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
16
Residual Stand – a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and related
activities.
Re-Subdivision – the division of an existing subdivision previously approved by the Town or
any change of lot size therein or the relocation of any road or lot in a subdivision previously
approved by the Town.
Riprap – rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion
control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one
(1) unit vertical or less.
River – a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point
at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road – any one of the following vehicular access ways:
Arterial Road – a road that is functionally classified by the Maine Department of
Transportation (DOT) as an arterial, with controlled access, traffic signals at important
intersections and/or stop signs on side roads.
Collector Road – a road that is functionally classified as a collector by the Maine
Department of Transportation (DOT), and that collects traffic from local roads and
connects with arterial roads.
Local Road – a public road or private road, other than arterial or collector roads.
Private Road – a road that is privately owned, built, and maintained, but not including a
driveway.
Citizen’s Note: The town may not, under Maine law, spend public funds to construct,
repair, maintain or plow privately owned roads.
Public Road – a public easement or town way.
Public Easement – an easement held by the municipality for purposes of public access to
land or water not otherwise connected to a public way, and includes the rights enjoyed by
the public with respect to private ways created by statute prior to July 29, 1976, pursuant
to 23 M.R.S.A. § 3012(2).
Town Way – an area of land designated and held by a municipality for passage and use
of the general public by motor vehicle; all town or county ways not discontinued or
abandoned before July 29, 1976; and all state or state aid highways, or both, which are
classified town ways as of July 1, 1982, or thereafter, pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 53.
17
Road Association – see homeowners/landowners association.
Salt Marsh – areas along coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays) that support salt
tolerant species, and where at average high tide during the growing season, the soil is irregularly
inundated by tidal waters. The predominant species is saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora).
More open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago pondweed.
Salt Meadow – areas which support salt tolerant plant species bordering the landward side of
salt marshes or open coastal water, where the soil is saturated during the growing season but
which is inundated by tidal water during the highest annual tide (HAT) as identified in tide tables
by the National Ocean Service. Indigenous plant species include salt meadow cordgrass
(Spartina patens) and black rush; common threesquare occurs in fresher areas.
Secondary Conservation Area – land within a subdivision that has natural resource, open
space, scenic, or cultural value but that is potentially developable. These areas should be
considered for protection in the design and layout of the subdivision including being part of the
common or protected open space in a Flexible Lot Size subdivision. These areas include land
that has been identified for protection or special treatment in the comprehensive plan, open space
plan or other official Town document.
Service Drop – any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a
water body provided that:
1. in the case of electric service
a) the placement of wires and/or installation of utility poles is located entirely upon
the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way:
and
b) the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. in the case of telecommunication service
a) the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telecommunication wires and cables to existing utility poles, or
b) the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement
underground is less than one thousand (l,000) feet in length.
Setback –
Property, Side, Rear or Lot Line Setback – the minimum horizontal distance from a lot
line or edge of the traveled way, whichever is more restrictive, to the nearest part of a
structure.
Road Setback – the minimum horizontal distance from the edge of the traveled way to
the nearest part of a structure.
18
Water Body, Shorefront or Wetland Setback – the nearest horizontal distance from the
maximum high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shoreland Zone – the land area located within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the maximum high water line of any great pond or salt water body; within two hundred fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, of the highest annual tidal (HAT) elevation of any coastal
wetland, within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal
wetland, or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland of ten (l0) or more contiguous acres, or the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland of less then ten (l0) contiguous acres and adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any tributary stream, such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of ten (l0) acres; and within seventy five (75) feet horizontal distance of
the maximum high water line of a stream. The Shoreland Zone also includes the portion of the
Mitchell Field Marine Business District as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map that is
more than two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, from the HAT of the coastal wetland.
Skid Road or Skid Trail – a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul
or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires
minimal excavation.
Slash – the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Sludge – a solid, semisolid, or liquid residue that results after sewage (human and other waste
from households and industries) is treated at a sewage plant.
Sound Insulated Structure – a building, structure, or equipment enclosure that limits the
exterior sound level of machinery, equipment or activities located therein to not more than fifty
five (55) dBA based on a one-minute equivalent sound level L-Aeq 1-minute when measured at a
distance of ten (10) feet from the exterior walls or roof of the structure or enclosure.
Special Waste – any material(s) included within the definition of special waste contained in
Chapter 400, Section 1, subsection (Nnn) of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) Rules, adopted pursuant to 38 MRSA Sections 341-D, 1304, 1310-N(9) and 1301 et Seq.,
as such rules may be amended from time to time.
Stream – a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of great pond or the confluence of two (2)
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey
(USGS) 7.5 minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15 minute series topographic
map to the point where the body of water becomes a river.
Stormwater – the part of precipitation, including runoff from rain or melting snow, that flows
across the surface as sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow, or in drainage ways.
19
Structure – anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or
property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in
the ground, exclusive of tree houses with no roof, not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet;
picnic tables; lawn chairs; flag poles; temporary party tents not to exceed three (3) days; ninetysix
(96) square feet camping tents that are accessory to a legally existing house and that are
erected on the property not more than ten (10) days per calendar year; dog houses not to exceed
ten (10) square feet; swimming pools not to exceed ten (10) square feet; fences and poles, wiring,
and other equipment normally associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors.
The term includes, but is not limited to, structures temporarily or permanently located, such as
decks, satellite dishes, portable prefab structures, terraces, patios and other construction
involving impermeable and/or non-vegetated surfaces.
Structure Footprint – the area covered by a structure measured from the exterior surface of the
exterior walls at grade level plus the area covered by any portion of the structure not enclosed by
walls, except for eaves which do not extend more than two feet from the exterior walls. Where
the structure is elevated above grade level on posts or similar devices, the structure footprint is
the area the structure would cover if it were located at ground level.
Subdivision – the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five
(5) year period in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401[4] and as that Subsection may be
amended from time to time.
Major subdivision – is the division of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots
within any five (5) year period or any subdivision that triggers State Site Location of
Development review.
Minor subdivision – is the division of a tract or parcel of land into four (4) or fewer lots
within any five (5) year period and which does not trigger State Site Location of
Development review.
Substantial/Substantial Start of/Construction – substantial construction of an individual
structure means completion of the foundation and capping over for water tightness. Where there
will be no foundation or no structure is proposed, substantial start means completion of at least
thirty percent (30%) of the value of the work for which a building or other permit has been
secured. In the case of a subdivision, substantial start means the completion of no less than thirty
percent (30%) of the costs of proposed improvements within a subdivision. If the subdivision is
to consist of individual lots to be sold or leased, the cost of construction of buildings on those
lots shall not be included. When the construction involves use of a slab as the foundation, the
slab must be completed within one year of the date on which the permit or approval was granted
and a permanent roof completed within two years of the date on which the permit or approval
was granted.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water
on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
20
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system
licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. § 414, as may be amended from time to time, any surface waste
water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment
system.
Sustained Slope – a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide (HAT).
Timber Harvesting – the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees on a lot that has less than two (2)
acres shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be
regulated pursuant to Section 15 (P), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other
Than Timber Harvesting.
Timber Harvesting and Related Activities – timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted to
facilitate timber
harvesting.
Tributary Stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed,
devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock;
and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not
include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural
vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.
Two-Acre Lot Size Subdivision – a subdivision approved in accordance with Section 9.4.1 of
the Subdivision Ordinance in which the size of all lots is a minimum of eighty thousand (80,000)
square feet.
Two-Unit Residential Use – a residential dwelling containing two dwelling units.
Upland Edge of a Wetland – the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a
coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the maximum spring tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For
purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for
a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters
(approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.
Vegetation – all live trees, shrubs and ground cover.
21
Vernal Pool – a natural, temporary to semi-permanent body of water occurring in a shallow
depression that typically fills during the spring or fall and may dry during the summer. Vernal
pools have no permanent inlet or outlet and no viable populations of predatory fish. A vernal
pool may provide the primary breeding habitat for wood frogs (Rana sylvatica), spotted
salamanders (Ambystoma maculatum), blue-spotted salamanders (Ambystoma laterale), and fairy
shrimp as well as valuable habitat for other plants and wildlife, including several rare,
threatened, and endangered species. A vernal pool intentionally created for the purposes of
compensatory mitigation is included in this definition.
Vernal Pool, Significant – a vernal pool that is determined to be significant under the standards
of the Maine Natural Resources Protection Act based on the number and type of pool-breeding
amphibian egg masses in a pool, or the presence of fairy shrimp (Eubranchipusspp.) or use by
threatened or endangered species.
Volume of a Structure – the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body – any river, stream, great pond, tidal or open salt water area.
Water Crossing – any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
or tributary stream or wetland, whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such
projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines,
and cables as well as maintained work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for
timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wastewater – water carrying wastes from homes, businesses, and industries that is a mixture of
water and other liquids and dissolved or suspended solids, or excess irrigation water that is
runoff to adjacent land. Wastewater includes septage as well as "gray water."
Wetland –
Coastal Wetland – all tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is
tolerant of salt water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; any salt
swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat, meadow or other contiguous low land that is subject to
tidal action during the highest annual tide (HAT) level as identified in tide tables
published by the National Ocean Service.
Forested Wetland – a fresh water wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6)
meters (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
Fresh Water Wetlands – freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other
than forested wetlands which are:
22
Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not conform to the criteria of this definition.
The following three (3) criteria shall be met for classification as a freshwater wetland:
1. a predominance of hydric soils,
2. a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soils, and
3. anaerobic conditions in the soil usually created by inundation or saturation by
surface or groundwater for at least one (1) week of the growing season.
The absence of any one (1) of these three (3) criteria shall preclude classification as
freshwater wetland.
Moderate or high value wetlands means wetlands that are defined as moderate or high
value for wildlife as defined by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife or as determined by the Town.
Citizen's Note: This Ordinance defines fresh water wetlands in conformance with the
Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, an
Interagency Cooperative Publication of the Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental
Protection Agency, Department of the Army, and Soil Conservation Service, to which
all applicants are referred for additional information.
Wildlife Habitat, Significant Wildlife Habitat – areas identified by a government agency such
as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) as having significant value as
habitat for animals and any areas identified in the Town’s comprehensive plan.
Windfirm – the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist wind throw, wind
rocking, and major breakage.
Woody Vegetation – live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Workforce Housing – housing designed with the express intent of providing owner-occupied
decent, safe, and sanitary living accommodations that are affordable to lower income households
and moderate income households, in accordance with the following definitions:
Very low income household – a household with a gross income less than or equal to
fifty percent (50%) of the Brunswick Labor Market Area.
23
Low income household – a household with a gross income over fifty percent (50%), but
less than or equal to eighty percent (80%), of the Brunswick Labor Market Area.
Moderate income household – a household with a gross income more than eighty
percent (80%), but less than or equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%), of the
Brunswick Labor Market Area.
Workforce Housing Covenant – an agreement for the development of a Workforce Housing
Lot or Workforce Housing Unit which legally and permanently restricts the ownership and use of
such Workforce Housing Lot or Workforce Housing Unit. Such agreement shall be between the
Town and the applicant and shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds prior
to the issuance of a building permit, if for a single Workforce Housing Lot or Unit, or
concurrently with the recording of any approved subdivision plan that includes a Workforce
Housing Lot or Unit, if for a subdivision.
Workforce Housing Fund – a separate dedicated reserve account established by Town Meeting
to be managed at the direction of the Board of Selectmen (BOS) for the receipt and management,
in accordance with the provisions of the Basic Land Use Ordinance (BLUO) on Workforce
Housing, of the following: gifts of land, housing, and other property useful in the administration
of Section 11.18 of the Basic Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time;
grants; and monetary donations. The Workforce Housing Fund shall be utilized solely for the
construction, acquisition, and maintenance of Workforce Housing as defined herein and for the
cost of administering workforce housing programs consistent with the Workforce Housing
provisions of the Basic Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time.
Workforce Housing Lot – a residential lot of land for owner-occupied single family residential
use that has been permanently protected for long term affordability by means of a covenant or
other mechanism that includes an Equity Recapture formula which is recorded in the
Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
Workforce Housing Unit – a residential structure on a lot of land for owner-occupied single
family residential use that has been permanently protected for long term affordability by means
of a covenant or other mechanism that includes an Equity Recapture formula which is recorded
in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
Yard Sale – the sale of goods from a residential premises, whether advertised in local media, by
signs, or otherwise, as a yard sale, barn sale, garage sale, household sale, moving sale, or other
sale, whether accomplished by direct sale or auction; or the sale, at the seller’s place of
residence, of all or part of the household goods, whether accomplished by direct sale or auction;
or sales conducted by civic groups, school groups, church groups, charitable or fraternal
organizations and other non-profit organizations if such sale is held on the organization’s
premises.
1. Purp
The pur
Harpsw
nuisance
2. Defi
A. F
m
B. A
w
o
C. R
e
D. T
en
E. S
o
F. B
§4
3. Disc
A. T
ty
R
th
B. T
G
w
pose
rpose of th
well to assur
e for the res
nitions
Firearm: An
may be ame
Automatic F
which is cap
ne mechan
Rimfire Arm
dge of the b
Target Pract
nhancing th
port Shoot
ther similar
Black Powd
42-A as it m
harge of Fi
To the exten
ypes of fire
Rimfire Arm
his ordinan
The discharg
Guns shall b
with the Tow
T
Use o
his ordinanc
re that they
sidents of th
ny weapon t
nded from
Firearm: A
pable of disc
nical action
ms: Firearms
base of the
tice: The di
he user’s sk
ting Range:
r shooting s
der Guns: F
may be ame
irearms
nt permitted
arms may b
ms and Blac
nce.
ge of firearm
be limited to
wn of Harp
Town o
of Firea
Re-enacte
ce is to reg
y are used
he commun
that is defin
time to tim
weapon of
charging a
on the trigg
s which use
cartridge ca
ischarge of
kill or “sigh
An area de
sports and
Firearms tha
ended from
d by and su
be discharg
ck Powder G
ms other th
o indoor sp
pswell’s Spo
f Harp
arms O
ed March 9
gulate the
safely and
nity.
ned as a fire
me.
any descrip
number of
ger or firing
e cartridges
ase.
a firearm fo
hting-in” a f
esigned and
the shootin
at are defin
m time to tim
ubject to Ma
ged within t
Guns unles
han shotgun
port shootin
ort Shooting
pswell
Ordinan
, 2019
use of fire
d in a mann
earm in 17-
ption, by w
projectiles
g mechanis
s that have
or the purp
firearm.
d used for s
ng of rifles,
ned as muzz
me.
aine and U.
the Town o
ss otherwise
ns, Rimfire
ng ranges re
g Range Or
nce
earms withi
ner that do
-A M.R.S. §
whatever na
in rapid su
sm.
the primer
pose of recr
skeet and tr
shotguns a
zleloaders i
.S. law, only
of Harpswe
e specificall
Arms and
egistered in
rdinance.
in the Tow
oes not cre
2 (12-A) as
ame known
uccession by
r around the
eation,
rap shootin
and pistols.
in 12 MRSA
y the follow
ell: shotgun
ly allowed
Black Powd
n accordanc
1
wn of
ate a
it
n,
y
e
ng or
A
wing
s,
by
der
ce
2
C. Automatic Firearms of any type shall not be discharged within the Town of
Harpswell.
D. Any person may undertake Target Practice on their own property or on property
which they have the written permission of the owner to use for such purpose
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The discharge of firearms is limited to shotguns, Rimfire Arms and Black
Powder Guns;
2. The area used for target practice conforms to generally accepted gun
safety practices;
3. A person shall not discharge firearms for Target Practice purposes within
three hundred (300) feet of any building or residential dwelling without
the prior permission of the owner of the building or residential dwelling
or a person authorized to act on the behalf of the owner, and
4. Firearms shall be discharged for target practice only between 8:00 A.M.
and 8:00 P.M. or sunset whichever occurs earlier.
E. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the use of firearms when
justified for the protection of persons under 17-A M.R.S. §101 through 108, which
includes the self-defense of persons and property, the suppression or termination
of wild animals attacking domestic animals or destroying property under 12
M.R.S. §12401, or by any duly authorized law enforcement officer or agent in the
proper exercise of their duties.
4. Geographic Limits on the Discharge of Permitted Firearms
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within three hundred
(300) feet of any dwelling without the permission of the owner or, in his/her
absence, of an adult occupying the dwelling.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within three hundred
(300) feet, or any greater distance required by state or federal regulations, of any
public building or facility, any commercial or industrial building, or any
playground, church or other community building without the permission of the
owner or a person authorized to act on the behalf of the owner. NOTE: Federal
law regulates the use of firearms within one thousand (1000) feet of schools.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm on or within three
hundred (300) feet of any of the following properties:
1. The fenced area of Mitchell Field located on the west side of the Harpswell
Neck Road and identified as Lot 4 on Tax Map 13 (see attached map)
3
2. The fenced baseball fields, parking lot, and access drive at Trufant
Summerton Athletic Field located on the west side of the Harpswell
Islands Road and identified as Lot 4 on Tax Map 46 (see attached map)
3. The area on the north side of Mountain Road containing the Town office,
TV station building, recycling center, transfer station, and emergency
services building and identified as the westerly portion of Lot 70 on Tax
Map 42 (see attached map)
5. Registered Sport Shooting Ranges
The restrictions and limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to the discharge of
firearms at a Sport Shooting Range registered with the Town of Harpswell in
accordance with the Sport Shooting Range Ordinance.
6. Enforcement
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department or
any successor local law enforcement agency.
7. Penalties
Any person violating any part of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine as determined
by the Board of Selectmen of not less than $250.00 per violation or such greater penalty
as may be provided by state law, which may include costs and reasonable attorney fees.
Such fine(s) shall be recovered for the use of the Town of Harpswell.
4
Municipal Complex – Mountain Road
5
Town of Harpswell
Ordinance to Prohibit the Sale and Restrict the Use of Consumer Fireworks
Section 1. Purpose
This ordinance governs the sale and use of consumer fireworks within the limits of Harpswell to
ensure the safety of residents, taxpayers and visitors of the Town of Harpswell.
Section 2. Title and Authority
This ordinance shall be known as the “Town of Harpswell Ordinance to Prohibit the Sale and
Restrict the Use of Consumer Fireworks.” It is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and 8
M.R.S.A. § 223-A(2), both as may be amended from time to time.
Section 3. Definitions
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively
ascribed to them:
Consumer Fireworks shall have the same meaning as the term set forth in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11, as may be amended from time to time, but includes only products
that are tested and certified by a third party testing laboratory as conforming with United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code,
Chapter 47. “Consumer fireworks” does not including the following products:
(1) Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule:
(2) Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule; and
(3) Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this paragraph, “sky rockets and
bottle rockets” means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of
chemical composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden
stick attached for guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that
may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of flight.
Display shall have the same meaning as that term is defined under State law, 8 M.R.S.A § 221-
A(3), as may be amended from time to time.
Fireworks shall have the same meaning as that term is defined under State law, 8 M.R.S.A. §
221-A(4), as may be amended from time to time.
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
governmental entity, association, or public or private organization of any character.
Town shall mean the Town of Harpswell.
Section 4. Prohibitions
No person shall sell, possess with the intent to sell or offer for sale consumer fireworks in the
Town. No person shall use consumer fireworks in the Town except in accordance with Section 5
below.
Section 5. Limitation on the Use of Consumer Fireworks.
(a) Consumer fireworks may be used on the following dates and during the following
times:
(1) July 3, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 10:00 p.m.;
(2) July 4, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 12:30 a.m. on July 5;
(3) July 5, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 10:00 p.m.;
(4) December 31, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 12:30 a.m. on January 1;
(5) January 1, beginning at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 10:00 p.m.; and
(6) The weekends immediately before and after July 4 and December 31, beginning
at 9:00 a.m. and ending at 10:00 p.m.
(b) A person may use consumer fireworks only on that person’s property or on the
property of a person who has consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that
property.
(c) Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to apply to a person issued a fireworks
display permit by the State of Maine pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. § 227-A, as may be
amended from time to time.
(d) Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to allow the use of any fireworks or
consumer fireworks that are prohibited by State law.
Section 6. Penalties
Any person who sells consumer fireworks, possesses consumer fireworks with the intent to sell,
or offers consumer fireworks for sale shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation plus costs shall be imposed. Any person who uses
consumer fireworks in violation of Section 5 above in the Town shall be punished by a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a
fine of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) per violation plus costs shall be
imposed.
Section 7. Seizure and Disposal
The Town may seize consumer fireworks that the Town has probable cause to believe are sold or
used in violation of this Ordinance or in violation of State law and shall forfeit the seized
consumer fireworks to the State of Maine for disposal.
Section 8. Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Town’s duly authorized law enforcement provider or
any other duly authorized agent of the Town approved by the Selectmen to enforce this
Ordinance.
Section 9. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
Section 10. Effective Date
Adopted March 10, 2012.
1
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
Enacted July, 27, 1997
Amended March 8, 2003
Amended March 8, 2008
Amended March 11, 2017
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT .................................................................................3
II. PERMIT REQUIRED ..........................................................................................................3
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT ..........................................................................................3
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE ......................................................................5
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................5
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ......................................................................................7
VII. CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW ......................................................................................15
VIII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE ................................................................................16
IX. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS .........................16
X. APPEALS AND VARIANCES ........................................................................................17
XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES .............................................................................19
XII. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY .................................................................................20
XIII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ...................................................................20
XIV. DEFINITIONS ..................................................................................................................20
XV. ABROGATION ................................................................................................................26
3
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Harpswell, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious
damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Harpswell, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the
National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as may be amended from time to time) as delineated
in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Harpswell, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of
flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special
flood hazards.
The Town of Harpswell has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce
future flood losses pursuant to 30-A MRSA, § 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38
MRSA, Section 440, as may be amended from time to time.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of
the Town of Harpswell having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard
areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review
procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of
Harpswell, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A1-30, AO, and V1-30 are identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Harpswell, Maine, Cumberland County," dated January 3, 1985 with accompanying "Flood
Insurance Rate Map" dated July 20, 1998, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIV), including the
placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in
Article I, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer, except as provided in Article VII. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits
which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Harpswell, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
4
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not
limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and
filled, and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only,
of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures,
which is determined in Zones A1-30, AO, and V1-30 from data contained in the
"Flood Insurance Study – Town of Harpswell, Maine," as described in Article I;
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed
building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a
basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be
floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments
for which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer
or architect that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application
are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer
or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 03/09, as may be amended from
time to time), to verify that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.;
and other applicable standards in Article VI;
5
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas,
Zones V1-30, will meet the criteria of Article VI.P.; and other applicable
standards in Article VI;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article
VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a
result of the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development
standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town Treasurer and a copy of a
receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals
needs the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in
full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay
the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop
work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until
the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be
heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance
may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT
PERMIT APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent
requirements of Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, the base
flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Harpswell,
Maine," as described in Article I; in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
and floodway data are not provided, the Town of Harpswell shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other
6
technical sources, including information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1; Article
VI.K.; and Article IX.D., in order to administer Article VI of this Ordinance.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on
the maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government
agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not
limited to Section § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344, as may be amended from time to time;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the
Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any
alteration or relocation of a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one
of the following Flood Hazard Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall
authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal
floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the
Code Enforcement Officer with a second Elevation Certificate completed by a
Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect based on
the Part I permit construction, “as built”, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review
of the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt
of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood
Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the
construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential
Structures that are new construction or substantially improved non-residential
structures that are not being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this permit shall include a
Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development
that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs,
maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the
market value of the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited
to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural
projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
7
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for
in this Ordinance, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon
by the Planning Board as required in Article VII.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports
of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article X of this
Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates
of Compliance and certifications of design standards required under the provisions of
Articles III, VI, and VIII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding
piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
and discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or
relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner
that no reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure
located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least
one foot above the base flood elevation.
8
2. Zones AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to
guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified.
4. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least
one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that
below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.
Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood
Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall include
a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
2. Zones AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to
guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; or,
9
c. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be floodproofed to
meet the elevation requirements of this section and floodproofing
standards of Article VI.G.1.
4. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located
within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or
foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or
block supports, any of which support the manufactured home so that no
weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the
manufactured home, plus two additional ties per side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long
require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties
along each side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI
H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zones AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to
guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured
home elevated above the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
4. Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
10
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A1- 30 shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements
for "manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
2. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of either Article VI.I.1.a. or b., or
Article VI.P.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIV, located within
Zones A1-30 and AO, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F.
& G. above, if all other requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are
met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different
walls of the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the
source of flooding than is the primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect
shall be located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zones A1-30 riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a
regulatory floodway which is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is
11
provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30 riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and
other development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article
VI.K.3. unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated
development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled
"Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and
Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/ January 1995, as may be
amended from time to time).
3. In Zones A1-30 riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the
regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water
course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the
floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30 and AO, that meets the development
standards of Article VI, including the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F,
G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawl spaces may be
enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided all the following criteria
are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIV;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation
and no higher than one foot above the lowest grade; and,
12
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of
flood waters automatically without any external influence or
control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or
storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge located within
Zones A1-30, AO, and V1-30 shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns)
is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation
requirements of this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.;
and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and
water loads acting simultaneously on all structural components. Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment
wall located within:
1. Zones A1-30 and V1-30 shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such
certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
13
2. Zones AO shall have adequate drainage paths around containment walls on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed walls.
3. Zone AO shall have the top of the containment wall elevated above the highest
adjacent grade:
a. at least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. shall meet the requirements of Article VI.N.1.b. & c.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves,
piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A1-30, AO, and V1-30, in and over water and
seaward of the mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall
develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction.
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones A1-30 and V1-30 shall be located
landward of the reach of mean high tide except as provided in Article VI.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located within
Zones V1-30 shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
(1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest
floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to one foot
above the base flood elevation;
(2) the pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of the
structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components; and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state and local building standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
14
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind and water without causing
collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or,
(3) constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls which have a
design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20
pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans
for the construction, which must meet or exceed the technical
criteria contained in the Coastal Construction Manual, (FEMA-
55/June, 2000); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
criteria of Article VI.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zones V1-30 is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zones V1-30 is prohibited unless it can be
demonstrated that such alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The areas below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking vehicles,
building access, and storage.
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward of
mean high tide and shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Article
VI.G. only if permitted as a Conditional Use following review and approval by the
Planning Board, as provided in Article VII, and if all the following requirements
and those of Article VI.A., VI.K., and VI.L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value structures such as metal
or wood sheds 200 square feet or less and shall not exceed more than one
story.
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and
water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris impact forces
affecting nearby buildings.
15
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be used for
human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must be
anchored and either elevated or floodproofed to one foot above the base
flood elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The electrical
service disconnect shall be located on shore above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
ARTICLE VII - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional uses provided for in
this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove all applications for conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Codes
Enforcement Office that a Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the
permit with the Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with additional
information attached addressing how each of the conditional use criteria
specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied, may serve as the permit
application for the Conditional Use Permit.
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing on the application within thirty days of their receipt of the
application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant
requirements of the ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the
application or approve with conditions within 45 days of the date of the
public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance
shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within 180
days of the issuance of the permit by the Planning Board.
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over the
signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is
not available for structures located entirely over water or seaward of mean
high tide.
16
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged
without a permit issued under this section if that building or use was
established or constructed under a previously issued Conditional Use
Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use
Permit if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is
constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant
shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered
professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F,
G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zones V1-30, certification by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
compliance with Article VI.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the
development is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this
ordinance, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE IX - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that
require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all
projects on 5 or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into
two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
17
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine
floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices
recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special
Flood hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance.
Such requirement(s) will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or
document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or
structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly
articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement
and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or
plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the
approval process.
ARTICLE X - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Harpswell may, upon written application of an aggrieved
party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. The
Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with
state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state,
federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship,"
which in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance
is granted; and,
18
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article X and Article VI.K are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
Historic Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A through D above;
and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through E. shall be
notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the
Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as
high as $25 Per $100 of insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property;
and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks
inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to
indemnify and defend the municipality against any claims filed against it that are
related to the applicant's decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the
applicant individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant may
19
have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located in a
floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers
constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five
days of its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all
variance actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an
authorization for the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the
Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State
laws within forty-five days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
Appeals and variances shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Basic Land Use
Ordinance, Section 14.
ARTICLE XI - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 4452, as may be amended from time to time.
B. The penalties contained in 30-A MRSA § 4452, as may be amended from time to time
shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a
violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist
of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property
sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
20
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State
or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do
so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the
prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316
of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as may be amended from time to
time.
ARTICLE XII - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall control.
ARTICLE XIV - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same
meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and
not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Shallow Flooding - means a designated AO zone on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
21
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited
in Article I of this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
Breakaway Wall - means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces,
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer – A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451
(including exceptions in Section 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce
all applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Conditional Use - means a use that because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and
structures, is permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article
VII.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, AO, or AH, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, or VE, to have the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A1-30 or AO, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L. In the case of Zones V1-
30, Elevated Building also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated
building, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway
walls meet the standards of Article VI.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 03/09, as may be amended from
time to time) that:
22
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a
result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of
nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this
definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance,
grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
23
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal,
state, and local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes
of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such
as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed,
that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it
is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities,
port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for
a specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally
not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data
is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements described in Article VI.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built
on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured
home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
24
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than
50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures;
and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose
standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean
Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) – Means the national datum whose standard was
established in 1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) for all new Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum
used by other North American countries such as Canada and Mexico and was established to
replace NGVD because of constant movement of the earth’s crust, glacial rebound, and
subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including
slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
25
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of onehalf
the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the
upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
26
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from
the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's
floodplain management regulations.
ARTICLE XV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as may be amended from time to time).
1
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
HARBOR AND WATERFRONT ORDINANCE
ENACTED MARCH 9, 1991
AMENDED MARCH 14, 1992
AMENDED MARCH 12, 1994 EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 1995 ART. 18
AMENDED MARCH 11, 1995 ART. 26
AMENDED MARCH 16, 1996 ART. 30
AMENDED MARCH 6, 1999 ART. 19
AMENDED MARCH 8, 2003 ART. 78
AMENDED MARCH 11, 2006 ART. 20
AMENDED MARCH 8, 2008 ART. 7
AMENDED MARCH 12, 2011 ART. 18
AMENDED MARCH 9, 2013 ART. 9
AMENDED MARCH 14, 2015 ART. 14
AMENDED MARCH 12, 2016 ART. 9
AMENDED MARCH 11, 2017 ART. 10
AMENDED MARCH 10, 2018 ART. 7
AMENDED MARCH 09, 2019 ART. 6
Section 1 PURPOSE
The Town of Harpswell Harbor and Waterfront Ordinance is hereby established to regulate marine
activities within the Town, to ensure the safety of its property, its inhabitants and the general public,
to guarantee the availability and use of a valuable public resource, and to create a fair and equitable
framework for administration of these goals.
Section 2 AUTHORITY AND ADMINSTRATION
2.1 Authority
2.1.1 This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in
Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and M.R.S. 30-A §3001, as the same may
be amended from time to time.
2.1.2 This Ordinance is also adopted pursuant to Title 38 M.R.S Chapter 1, Subchapter
1, as the same may be amended from time to time. All provisions of Title 38
M.R.S. Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, as may be amended from time to time, are
adopted as part of this Ordinance, except to the extent its provisions are
inconsistent with the expressed terms herein.
2.1.3 This Ordinance shall be known as the Town of Harpswell Harbor and Waterfront
Ordinance, and shall govern specified activities within the limits of the Town of
Harpswell.
2.2 Administration
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Harbormaster and Selectmen of the Town of
Harpswell, who may be assisted by a Harbor and Waterfront Committee (“the
Committee”).
2.3 Severability and Separability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance for any reason be held void and invalid
it shall not affect the validity of any other section or provision.
2
2.4 Designations of Gender, Singular and Plural
2.4.1 Wherever the masculine gender is used herein, it shall be construed to include the
feminine.
2.4.2 Wherever the singular is used herein, it shall be construed to include the plural.
Section 3 CLASSIFICATION OF WATERS
3.1 Classification
All the waters of Harpswell shall be classified by affirmative vote at a Town Meeting as
either Harbors, Anchorages, or Open Coastline.
3.2 Classifications Plan
3.2.1 The classification of areas shall be recorded on a map of the Town, herein after
referred to as the Waters Classification Plan, prepared for that purpose and
maintained by the Committee. Copies of the Plan may be made from time to time
and may be distributed, but the official copy shall be that maintained by the
Committee. A copy of the current Plan shall be filed at the Town office and made
available for viewing by the Public upon request.
3.2.2 The Classifications of Harpswell waters shall be placed on the Waters
Classification Plan and adopted at a Town Meeting.
3.3 Change in Classifications
3.3.1 Requests for changes in classifications shall be presented in writing to the
Committee, and the Committee shall transmit the requested change to a Town
Meeting with its recommendation either for approval or rejection by those voting
at such Town Meeting.
3.3.2 All classification changes must be approved by affirmative action of a Town
Meeting, either at the Annual Meeting or at a Special Meeting called for that
purpose.
3.3.3 A record of all adopted modifications to the Waters Classification Plan indicating
the date of the change(s), the reason for the recommended change(s), and the
specifics of the change(s) shall be maintained by the Committee.
Section 4 DEFINITIONS
4.1 Abandoned Moorings
A mooring in Harpswell waters shall be considered abandoned unless it is currently
registered with the Town and a valid permit number is clearly painted or burned on the
mooring buoy. In addition, any registered mooring that is installed but unused for 365
days by the owner or his family or any registered mooring that is not installed within 365
days of the date of registration shall also be considered abandoned.
3
4.2 Abandoned Vessel
Any vessel which is determined by the Harbormaster to constitute a hazard to
navigation, or which is sinking or already sunk, or which is stranded on any
property without the permission of the owner of the property.
4.3 Anchorage
All areas within the waters of Harpswell specifically designated as Anchorage or Special
Anchorage on the Waters Classification Plan. (For use as mooring areas but have no
clear Zones or buffer zones specifically designated).
4.4 Aquaculture
Aquaculture means the culture or husbandry of marine organisms by any person. All
applications are regulated by the Maine Department of Marine Resources.
4.5 Closed Harbor
A mooring area determined by the Harbormaster to have reached or is reaching capacity.
4.6 Commercial Fishing Vessel
Any vessel used primarily to generate income through fishing.
4.7 Commercial Vessel
Any vessel used primarily to generate income.
4.8 Float Moorings
Floats that are used for business or recreation, not secured to the shore but held in place
by an anchoring device not carried aboard a vessel as regular equipment. (Army Corp of
Engineers permit required).
4.9 Guest Mooring
A temporary mooring that may be permitted yearly in a non-congested area, as
determined by the Harbormaster, to a Resident or Non Resident Taxpayer shorefront
property owner, solely for use by that permit holder’s guests on a non-rental basis.
The mooring shall not be occupied by the same vessel for more than seven days.
(Army Corps of Engineers permit required)
4.10 Harbor
All areas within the waters of Harpswell which have been classified as Harbors on the
Waters Classification Plan and which have clear zones, buffer zones, mooring locations,
etc. specifically established.
4.11 Harbormaster
The person appointed to serve as such by the Board of Selectmen.
4.12 Marine Related Business
A business establishment that must have direct access to navigable water in order to
function, such as marinas, water-borne transportation facilities, and finfish and shellfish
processing facilities, but excluding commercial fishing vessels. This definition is
provided only for the purpose of this Ordinance and is not a definition of the term for the
purposes of any other ordinance or plan approved by the Town.
4.13 Mooring
An anchoring device not carried aboard a vessel as regular equipment.
4
4.14 Mooring Buoy
A floating device designed to mark a mooring location.
4.15 Non-Resident
Any individual who does not maintain a legal residence within the Town of Harpswell.
4.16 Non-Resident Taxpayer
A non-resident who pays real estate taxes to the Town of Harpswell.
4.17 Open Coastline
All areas within waters of Harpswell not defined as Anchorage or Harbor pursuant to
Sections 4.3 and 4.8.
4.18 Point of Access
The upland area in Harpswell that is used to access a mooring.
4.19 Rental Mooring
A mooring that is leased or rented to a person other than the holder of the mooring
registration. (Army Corps of Engineers permit required)
4.20 Resident
An individual who maintains a legal residence in the Town of Harpswell.
4.21 Service Mooring
Any mooring owned by a commercial entity used in the daily operations of that business
that is not intended for rental purposes. (Army Corps of Engineers Permit required)
4.22 Shorefront Owner
An owner of a parcel of land, as that term is defined in Title 38 M.R.S. § 11(2), as may
be amended from time to time, contiguous to waters of Harpswell.
4.23 Subtidal Waters
The waters below the extreme low water mark.
4.24 Town Wharf, Dock or Float
A wharf, dock or float owned and maintained by the Town of Harpswell.
4.25 Town Landing
An area of land contiguous to waters of Harpswell which is owned by the town of which
is impressed with a public right of access.
4.26 Vessel
A vessel shall include boats of all sizes powered by sail, machinery or by hand; scows;
dredges, and craft of any kind.
4.27 Waters of Harpswell
All waters below the highest annual tide and extending seaward three miles from the
shoreline of property located within the boundaries of the Town of Harpswell.
5
Section 5 MOORING REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
5.1.1 Registration
All moorings located below the lowest annual tide in waters of Harpswell shall be
registered with the Town Clerk. For renewal moorings re-registered after May 1, a late
fee will be added. Late fees are determined by the Board of Selectmen, as may be
amended from time to time.
5.1.2 Requirements for New and Renewal Mooring Registration
Applicants for a new mooring registration must submit a completed application form to
the Town Clerk on forms available in the Town Clerk’s Office. Applicants for a renewal
mooring registration need only submit a new completed form to the Town Clerk if there
are any changes to the registration from the prior year, including change of vessel, change
of contact information, change of resident status or upon the Harbormaster’s request.
5.1.3 Requirements for New and Renewal Waiting List Registration
Applicants for a new waiting list registration must submit a completed application form
to the Town Clerk on forms available in the Town Clerk’s Office. Applicants for a
renewal waiting list registration need only submit a new completed form to the Town
Clerk if there are any changes to the registration from the prior year, including change of
vessel, change of contact information, change of resident status or upon the
Harbormaster’s request. Failure to renew a position on the waiting list shall result in
losing seniority on the waiting list.
5.1.4 Categories of Mooring Registration
5.1.4.1 Resident /Non-Resident Taxpayer
5.1.4.2 Non Resident
5.1.4.3 Rental Mooring
5.1.4.4 Float Mooring
5.1.4.5 Service Mooring
5.1.4.6 Guest Mooring
5.1.5 Registration Fees
The registration fee shall be in the amount determined by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with Title 38 M.R.S. § 7-A(2), as may be amended from time to time. The
registration fee schedule shall be available at the Town Office.
5.1.6 Waiting List Fee
All waiting list fees are due by May 1, annually. The Waiting List Fee shall be in the
amount determined by the Board of Selectmen as may be amended from time to time.
5.1.7 Unregistered Moorings
If any mooring that has not been previously registered is placed in Harpswell waters, the
Harbormaster may have the mooring removed immediately at the expense of the person
or persons responsible. If any renewal moorings in the waters of Harpswell are
unregistered after May 1, the Town Clerk shall notify the owner. If registration is not
completed within thirty (30) days of the date of notice, the Harbormaster may have the
mooring removed at the expense of the mooring owner.
5.1.8 Permit Stickers
Upon successful registration, the Town Clerk shall issue a mooring sticker showing the
year and permit number. The sticker is to be placed on the mooring ball in a visible
location above the watermark. In addition, the permit number must be painted or burned
onto the mooring buoy in a legible manner with numbers at least 3 inches tall. Mooring
6
buoys without the mooring permit number properly displayed shall be considered
abandoned.
5.2 Assignment of Mooring Space
5.2.1 A permitted mooring shall be assigned a location in Harpswell waters by the
Harbormaster on a first-come first served basis as space permits with due regard
to navigation and the safety of persons and property, and, where feasible, the
prior year’s location. New mooring permits will not be issued for a mooring that
is located more than one-half statute mile from the applicant’s point of land
access in Harpswell.
5.2.2 If there is insufficient space to assign allocations for all registered moorings in
the location requested, the harbor will be considered closed. The applications not
assigned mooring locations shall be placed on a waiting list which will be
maintained by the Town Clerk, posted and available for inspection in the Town
Office.
5.2.3 Any applicant who completes re-registration by May 1, of any year shall be given
preference for the location occupied by the registrant’s mooring the prior year,
unless the Harbormaster determines that a demonstrated need for that location
has been shown by someone higher on the list of priorities in Section 5.2.4
below. In such an event, after consultation with the original registrant, the
Harbormaster will provide a new location and relocate the mooring, in the same
condition it was in at its original location, at the expense of the new mooring
owner being assigned the original registrant’s location.
5.2.4 As space in closed Harbors and Anchorages of the waters of Harpswell becomes
available, assignments of mooring locations shall be made from the waiting list
in accordance with the terms of Title 38 M.R.S. § 7-A(2), as may be amended
from time to time, on the basis of the date of the applicant’s request and with the
following priorities:
5.2.4.1 Shorefront Owner with respect to an initial location adjacent to the owner’s shore
frontage, including owners of lawfully created lots who, prior to January 1, 1987,
owned shore rights of at least 100 feet of frontage regardless of the size of the lot;
5.2.4.2 Resident Commercial Fisherman;
5.2.4.3 Resident Marine Related Business
5.2.4.4 Resident Recreational;
5.2.4.5 Non-Resident Taxpayer;
5.2.4.6 Non-Resident Commercial Fishermen
5.2.4.7 Non-Resident Marine Related Business
5.2.4.8 Non-Resident Recreational.
5.2.5 Mooring Inspection
Annually, each registered mooring should be inspected by the mooring owner at
the mooring owner's expense and must be determined by the mooring owner to
be in a safe condition. The mooring owner is responsible for the adequacy and
performance of all mooring gear, tackle, and maintenance thereof. The
Harbormaster has the authority to inspect at any time any mooring and to require
any necessary maintenance or replacement of parts or the whole mooring, tackle
and/or gear, for which the mooring owner shall be responsible for all costs
incurred.
7
The Town of Harpswell assumes no liability whatsoever for the actual
performance or adequacy of any mooring system employed by a mooring owner.
5.2.6 Rental Moorings
No mooring shall be used as a rental mooring without first registering it with the
Town and obtaining a permit from the Army Corps of Engineers. An alternate
numbering system may be used by the rental mooring owner if approved by the
Harbormaster.
5.2.7 Float Moorings
Float moorings shall be registered with the Town and be permitted by the Army
Corps of Engineers. Float moorings shall only be used for their permitted
purposes.
5.2.8 Guest Moorings
Guest moorings shall be registered with the Town and be permitted by the Army
Corp of Engineers. Guest moorings shall only be used for their permitted
purposes.
5.2.9 Transfer of Moorings
Mooring gear may be sold or transferred at the discretion of the owner.
However, the mooring location or assignment may not be bought, sold, or
otherwise transferred unless it is a transfer of a mooring assignment used for
commercial fishing purposes. A mooring assignment used for commercial
fishing purposes may be only be transferred as follows:
 at the request or death of the assignee;
 to a member of the assignee’s family; and
 if the mooring assignment will be continued to be used for
commercial fishing purposes.
For the purposes of this subsection, “member of the assignee’s family” means an
assignee’s parent, child, or sibling by birth or by adoption, including a relation of
half-blood or an assignee’s spouse. The Harbormaster shall be notified of
transfers for commercial fishing purposes within thirty (30) days of the transfer.
5.2.10 Relocation of Moorings
When any mooring within the waters of Harpswell is located such that hazard to
other property is inherent due to its position, the Harbormaster shall arrange for
the relocation of the mooring or moorings involved whenever he is notified of the
hazard. Any expense to the Town relating to the relocation of moorings shall be
reimbursed by the owners.
5.3 Removal of Abandoned Moorings
When the Harbormaster has determined that a mooring is abandoned, he shall so tag the
mooring buoy. He shall record the date of the determination, location of the mooring and,
if possible, the name of the owner in his records. He shall notify the owner of the
abandonment and order the owner to remove the mooring within fifteen (15) days of the
date of the notice. If the mooring is not removed, the mooring buoy appropriately
marked or re-registered within the applicable fifteen (15) day period, it may be removed
or dropped by the Harbormaster at the expense or the owner in accordance with the
provisions of Title 38 M.R.S. § 4, as may be amended from time to time. Nothing in this
Section shall impede enforcement (Section 8.1.7) or collection of penalties (Section 8.2).
5.4 Removal of Abandoned Vessels
Except where the vessel constitutes an immediate hazard to public health or safety or
welfare, the Board of Selectmen shall notify the owner of an abandoned vessel of his duty
8
to remove the abandoned vessel within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice. If the
vessel is not removed within the applicable fifteen (15) day period, it may be removed by
the Harbormaster at the expense of the owner in accordance with the procedures of Title
38 M.R.S. § 5, as may be amended from time to time. Where the Board of Selectmen
determines that the abandoned vessel constitutes a threat to public health or safety or
welfare, it may authorize the Harbormaster to remove the vessel immediately and without
notice at the expense of the owner. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the Town from
enforcing Section 8.1.5 or from collecting penalties (Section 8.2).
Section 6 HARBOR AND WATERFRONT COMMITTEE
6.1 Committee Make-up
The Harbor and Waterfront Committee shall be comprised of a certain number of
members, as determined and appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
6.2 Terms of Office and Positions
6.2.1 At the time of adoption of this Ordinance, the Board of Selectmen shall designate
two members of the Committee to have terms of office expiring at the end of one
year, two members to have terms of office expiring at the end of two years, and
three members to have terms of office expiring at the end of three years.
6.2.2 Thereafter, as normal terms of office expire, appointments to the Committee shall
be for three year terms, thus guaranteeing continuity of the Committee and its
work.
6.2.3 The committee shall annually, at the first meeting after the Board of Selectmen
has appointed the members, elect a Chairman, a vice-chairman, and a secretary
from among its own members. Those so elected shall take office at the close of
the meeting and shall continue in office until the next annual election. Should the
chairman’s position become vacant, the vice-chairman shall succeed to that
position. Should other duly elected positions become vacant, the chairman will
fill them by appointment.
6.2.4 Should any Committee Member’s position become vacated, a replacement shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve out the remainder of the term of
the member being replaced.
6.2.5 Upon the written recommendation of the Committee, the Board of Selectmen
may request the resignation of an inactive or disruptive Committee member and
take the necessary steps for replacement.
6.2.6 Should a vacancy occur within three months of a normal term expiration the
Board of Selectmen, at its discretion, may either leave the position vacant for the
remainder of the unexpired term, or appoint a new member whose term will run
for three years plus the unexpired remainder.
6.3 Duties and Responsibilities
6.3.1 The Committee shall act as an advisory Board to Harbormaster and the Board of
Selectmen on all matters pertaining to Harbors, Anchorages and the Waterfront.
9
6.3.2 The Committee shall monitor the activities of the Harbormaster and his care,
custody and management of Town Landings, harbors, Anchorages and their
facilities and, from time to time, make recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen.
6.3.3 The Committee shall work closely with the Harbormaster to ensure that his duties
are carried out as intended by this Ordinance, Title 38 M.R.S. Chapter I and other
applicable statutes. Suggestions for improvements or other change (s) in
Committee responsibilities shall be discussed with and approved by vote of the
Board of Selectmen before being adopted.
6.3.4 The Committee shall serve as a Board of Appeals for decisions made by the
Harbormaster under this Ordinance.
6.3.5 The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all of the Committee’s
proceedings and shall provide the Board of Selectmen with copies of the minutes
of all meetings, and also with an Annual Report prepared in time for inclusion in
the Annual Town Report.
6.3.6 The Committee may assist the Harbormaster in review, upon request, of any
subtidal Aquaculture applications submitted to the Town for Harbormaster
consideration. The Harbormaster has the final authority to decide on the
application in regards to fishing, navigation and other uses of the area.
6.4 Compensation
6.4.1 Committee Members shall serve without compensation.
6.4.2 Committee Members shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred with the
prior approval of the Board of Selectmen.
Section 7 THE HARBORMASTER, DEPUTY HARBORMASTER(S) AND ASSISTANT
HARBORMASTERS – QUALIFICATIONS AND SALARY
7.1 Harbormaster Appointment
The Harbormaster shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and shall be subject to
their control and supervision. The Harbormaster shall serve in that capacity until
discharged by the Board of Selectmen or until resignation.
7.1.1 Deputy Harbormaster(s)
Deputy Harbormasters will serve only in certain designated areas of the Town’s waters,
and will report directly to the Harbormaster who will define and limit his responsibilities.
Where the term “Harbormaster” is used throughout the remainder of this Section 7, it
shall also include “Deputy Harbormaster” except as may be limited or restricted by the
Harbormaster himself, and also excluding Section 7.6 – Meetings. Deputy Harbormasters
are not required to attend meetings of the Harbor and Waterfront Committee since their
activities are regularly reported to the Harbormaster.
7.2 Training
Within eighteen months of his/her employment, the Harbormaster shall successfully
complete the State Harbormaster Association’s Training course at the expense of the
10
Town. Failure to pass the course for any reason shall result in his/her termination and
discharge by the Board of Selectmen, after notice and hearing.
7.3 Carrying a Weapon
Even though the Harbormaster may hold a valid permit to carry a weapon, he/she shall
not do so in carrying out his/her duties until he/she has completed the Criminal Justice
Academy training course (providing for power of arrest as well as permit for carrying a
weapon) and unless he or she shall have received written approval from the Board of
Selectmen to make arrests and to carry a weapon.
7.4 The salary of the Harbormaster and Deputy Harbormaster(s) shall be determined by the
Board of Selectmen.
7.5 Management
The Harbormaster shall manage the Floats, Docks, Ramps, Moorings and Landings that
are owned by the Town and shall make recommendations regarding their operation, use
and maintenance to the Committee.
7.6 Meetings
The Harbormaster shall regularly attend meetings of the Harbor and Waterfront
Committee, but shall not be a member of the Committee. He shall keep the Committee
fully informed of all his activities, problems encountered, solutions affected, and
activities which have required his special attention. He shall also provide information on
matters pertaining to the committee’s duties and responsibilities.
7.7 Records
The Harbormaster shall maintain a record for five years in which he shall record all
complaints received (both written and oral), the date and time received, the response
made to the complaint, and the date and time of such response.
Section 8 RULES AND REGULATIONS
8.1 Operation of Vessels/Rules and Regulations
8.1.1 It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in the waters of Harpswell so as to
endanger persons or property.
8.1.2 It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in a manner which creates excessive wake
or wake-wash.
8.1.3 It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain an unregistered mooring.
8.1.4 It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle so as to block or restrict access to a
Town Landing.
8.1.5 It shall be unlawful to abandon a vessel within the waters or upon the shoreline
of Harpswell.
8.1.6 It shall be unlawful to abandon lobster, crab and shellfish cars or crates within
the waters of Harpswell.
11
8.1.7 It shall be unlawful to abandon a mooring within the waters of Harpswell.
8.1.8 It shall be unlawful to refuse to obey any lawful Order of the Harbormaster.
8.1.9 It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to establish or maintain a residence
on any type of vessel within waters of Harpswell unless the vessel has
established access to property with shoreline on the waters of Harpswell which is
equipped with waste pump-out facilities and the vessel contains sewage holding
tankage attached to each marine toilet and the vessel’s sewage system is not
equipped with “Y” valves to permit overboard discharge.
8.1.10 It shall be unlawful to leave a vessel at a Town Wharf, Dock or Float for a period
exceeding thirty (30) minutes without the permission of the Harbormaster;
provided, however, that the Board of Selectmen may, after notice and hearing,
adopt rules and regulations governing the use of a Town Wharf, Dock or Float,
including, without limitation, rules and regulations that establish a systematic
approach for the Harbormaster to grant permission for vessels to exceed the
thirty (30) minute tie-up limit and a fee schedule related to the same.
8.1.11 The Harbormaster may remove, or cause to be removed, to the Transfer Station
or other location designated in writing by the Board of Selectmen any unattended
dinghy/skiff/vessel obstructing use of a Town Wharf, Dock or Float after due
effort has been made by the Harbormaster to notify the owner or operator of said
dinghy/skiff/vessel of the violation. Any dinghy/skiff/vessel filled with water to
the seat level shall be considered unattended. The vessel owner shall be
responsible for all associated costs of removal.
8.1.12 The Harbormaster shall have the general authority to supervise use of the Town
Wharf, Dock or Float and shall be responsible for the neat and orderly use of the
Town Wharf, Dock or Float and for the assignment of any float space.
8.2 Violation of Ordinance
Except as provided in Title 38 M.R.S. § 13, as may be amended from time to time, a
violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil violation and may be prosecuted and relief,
fees, fines and penalties granted and assessed pursuant to the provisions of Title 30-A
M.R.S. § 4452, as may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this Section, each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
8.3 Enforcement of Ordinance
The Harbormaster shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce this Ordinance
and the provisions of Title 38, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, as may be amended from time to
time. All law enforcement officers of the State of Maine, including Harbormasters and
their deputies, shall have the authority to enforce this Ordinance and, in the exercise
thereof, shall have the authority to stop and board any vessel found in violation of this
Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any operator of such vessel to fail to stop upon
request of such officer and violation shall be punishable as provided in Title 38 M.R.S. §
282, as may be amended from time to time.
12
8.4 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Harbormaster may appeal the decision to the
Committee within thirty (30) days of the Harbormaster’s decision. Decisions of the
Committee, when acting as a Board of Appeals, may be appealed to the Board of
Selectmen within thirty (30) days of the Committee’s decision. Decisions of the Board of
Selectmen may be appealed to Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the Board of
Selectmen’s written decision.
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
MOBILE FOOD HANDLERS ORDINANCE
Adopted June 12, 2012
2
TOWN OF HARPSWELL MOBILE FOOD HANDLERS ORDINANCE
Section 1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Harpswell Mobile
Food Handlers Ordinance.”
Section 2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate those establishments that operate as mobile
food handlers in the Town of Harpswell. The regulations are essential to ensure that
these establishments are selling food products in compliance with the Maine Food Code
and are operating in appropriate locations within the Town.
Section 3. Authority.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, as may be amended from
time to time.
Section 4. Definitions.
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this Section.
Food Code shall mean the State of Maine Food Code 2001 adopted by the Maine
Department of Human Services and the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Resources, as may be amended from time to time.
Food products means a raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, non-alcoholic
beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
Menu board shall mean a surface on which food products for sale are listed.
Mobile food handler shall mean any person selling, or offering for sale, food products
within the Town from a mobile unit, and where delivery is made at the time of sale.
Mobile unit shall mean a mobile, temporary or non-permanent vending unit that is
capable of being moved from place to place.
Nonprofit corporation or organization shall mean a corporation or organization whose
income or profit generated thereby is not distributable to its members, directors or
officers.
Operator shall mean the person operating as a mobile food handler.
3
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
governmental entity, other legal entity, association, or public or private organization of
any character.
Town shall mean the Town of Harpswell.
Section 5. License Required.
A person shall not operate as a mobile food handler in the Town without first obtaining
a license to do so from the Board of Selectmen; provided, however, that this Ordinance
does not apply to the following: (a) nonprofit corporations or organizations that are
exempt from obtaining a State of Maine eating establishment license under 12 M.R.S.A.
§ 2501, as may be amended from time to time, and that do not cause unreasonable
highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of
highways or public roads as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer; (b) any
person who holds a valid site plan approval issued by the Planning Board; and (c)
mobile food vendors located at Mitchell Field, who shall be reviewed and approved
under Mitchell Field use policies instead of this Ordinance. A license may only be
granted upon a showing by the applicant of compliance with all requirements of this
Ordinance.
Section 6. Application Process.
(a) Authorized Applicants and Required Information. Applications for licenses under
this Ordinance must be made by the person who will operate as a mobile food
handler. The applicant shall file with the Town Planner an application in writing
on a form to be furnished by the Town Planner, which shall include the following
information:
(i) Name of the applicant and mobile unit owner, including the names of the
principals of any limited liability company or corporate applicant.
(ii) Address – local and legal address for receipt of notices. In the event of a
change of either address prior to action on the application, the applicant
shall notify the Town Planner so that the application may be revised.
(iii) Phone numbers – home and cell phone numbers as well as emergency
phone numbers. In the event of a change of any phone number prior to
action on the application, the applicant shall notify the Town Planner so
that the application may be revised.
(iv) Name, address and telephone numbers (home, cell and emergency) of the
operator, if operator is different from the applicant.
(v) A brief description of the food products to be sold.
(vi) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense, the punishment or penalty assessed therefore, and the date of
occurrence.
(vii) Hours and dates of proposed mobile food handler operations.
4
(viii) A sketch or photograph of the mobile unit with its measurements and all
associated parts listed.
(ix) A sketch plan showing the proposed location(s) of operation of the mobile
unit and parking spaces as required herein, including the relationship of the
same to all site features in the immediate area.
(x) A copy of the written agreement or other instrument under which the land
and parking space(s) for the mobile unit and customers will be available to
the applicant.
(xi) A copy of any State permit that may be required, including a valid license
issued by the State of Maine Department of Health and Human Services for
food service. Mobile food handlers may operate only while such a valid
license is in effect.
(xii) A copy of the required certificate of insurance.
(b) Fees. The following non-refundable fees shall be as established from time to time
by Board of Selectmen order:
(i) Application processing fee, which shall accompany each application.
(ii) License for a season fee. The season shall run from May 1st to
October 31st. The license fee shall be paid by the time the license is issued.
(iii) License for one day fee. The license fee shall be paid by the time the
license is issued.
(iv) License for an event fee. An event license shall be valid for no more than
seven (7) consecutive days. The license fee shall be paid by the time the
license is issued.
(c) When to File Applications. Applicants shall file completed applications with the
Town Planner and should allow at least fourteen (14) business days for review and
investigation prior to action by the Board of Selectmen. No application shall be
deemed complete and ready for Board of Selectmen action until the applicant has
paid the application processing fee.
Section 7. Investigation of the Applicant.
Upon receipt of each completed application for a mobile food handler license, the
following shall occur:
(a) The Code Enforcement Officer, or his designee, shall verify that the proposed
location(s) comply with all applicable land use and parking ordinances of the
Town and shall report such findings in writing to the Town Planner; and
(b) The Town Planner shall review the application and other documents and
determine whether such documents comply with all of the requirements of this
Ordinance and shall report such findings in writing to the Board of Selectmen.
Section 8. Prerequisites to Issuance of a License.
Prior to the issuance of any license under this Ordinance, the applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with the requirements set forth herein. If a license is granted by the Board of
5
Selectmen, continued compliance with these requirements shall constitute a condition of
the license.
(a) Insurance. The applicant shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect a policy
of comprehensive general liability insurance with limits of not less than $400,000,
naming the Town as additional insured. The certificate of insurance shall provide
no less than a ten (10) day notice to the Town prior to cancellation of insurance.
(b) Location. The mobile unit shall not be operated in a way that will restrict or
interfere with access to and from any building, abutting parcel or public place. No
mobile unit may remain on a public road overnight.
(c) Traffic safety. The proposed location(s) of operation of the mobile unit shall not
cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of highways or public roads.
(d) Parking. There shall be at least one parking space for the mobile unit while it is
being used to sell, or offer for sale, food products. The applicant shall provide
evidence, by written agreement or other legal instrument, of control and
possession of the parking space while the mobile unit is being used to sell, or offer
for sale, food products. Adequate customer parking shall be provided, which shall
be located outside of the traveled way of any road.
(e) Utilities. All utility connections shall be secure and safe.
(f) Waste. The mobile food handler’s operations area shall be kept clean and free of
litter. At least one recycling receptacle and one trash receptacle shall be provided
for customer use.
(g) Mobile Unit Design. The mobile unit design shall conform to the following:
(i) Materials: All mobile units shall be made of durable materials.
(ii) Size: Maximum size of a mobile unit shall be 150 square feet.
(iii) A trailer hitch shall be visually identified for safety purposes with a
wrapper, bicycle type flag or other similar identifying device which does
not obstruct the clear area.
(iv) Items used in association with the mobile unit, including, without
limitation, any generator, propane tank, cooler, table or chair, shall be
located within, or immediately adjacent to, the mobile unit.
(h) Signage. Any signage shall conform to the following:
(i) No more than two (2) display signs, excluding lettering on an umbrella or
awning, are permitted on each mobile unit. In addition, one menu board is
permitted and shall be no larger than six (6) square feet. A menu board is
not considered a sign.
(ii) The maximum size of each display sign shall be four (4) square feet.
(iii) Each sign face shall be counted as one sign.
(iv) Permanent signs are prohibited.
(v) Flashing, rotating, animated or changing lighting or signage is prohibited.
(i) Lighting. Lighting shall not create undue hazards to motorists, shall be adequate
for the operators of the mobile unit, and shall not result in undue light shining on
6
nearby properties.
(j) Generators. The use of a generator may be allowed only with the advance
approval of the Board of Selectmen.
(l) Prohibitions. The applicant shall comply with the following:
(i) No animals shall be attached to the mobile unit except for guide animals.
(ii) No amplified sound shall be allowed, and no licensee shall make noise so
loud as to distract passing motorists.
(iii) No open flame or heating unit in association with a mobile unit shall be
available for non-licensee use.
(iv) No seating area for customers shall be allowed unless Planning Board site
plan review and approval is obtained, in which case the exemption from
licensure under Section 5(b) of this Ordinance applies.
Section 9. License Issuance.
The Board of Selectmen may grant a license for a season, a single day or a single event
as described in Section 6(b) above. After a license has been granted by the Board of
Selectmen, the Town Planner shall issue the necessary paperwork to the licensee. Issued
licenses shall contain the name and address of the licensee, the date of issuance, the
length of time the license shall be operative (i.e., the date of expiration), the approved
location(s) of operation of the mobile unit and associated parking, and an identifying
description of any vehicle used in such mobile food handling. The Town Planner shall
keep a record of all licenses issued for the prior five (5) years.
Section 10. Standards for Denial, Suspension or Revocation.
In addition to any other specific provision of this Ordinance authorizing action, a license
may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Board of Selectmen upon a determination of
the existence of one or more of the following grounds:
(a) There has been a failure to fully complete the application forms or to pay any fee
required hereunder; an incorrect statement of material fact has been made
knowingly on such form; or there has been a knowing omission of material fact or
additional documentation required or reasonably necessary to determine whether
such license should be issued;
(b) Failure to notify the Town Planner of any change of material fact set forth in the
license application;
(c) The applicant’s or the licensee’s business or professional conduct hereunder has
been the source of one or more complaints of record that have been found to be
valid and the conduct relates directly to the public health, safety or welfare;
(d) The applicant/licensee has violated one of more provisions of this Ordinance or
other Town ordinances, including, without limitation, the Town’s land use and
licensing ordinances;
(e) The licensee has violated any provision of this Ordinance in the course of the
conduct of the activity for which the license has been applied for, or has been
issued;
7
(f) The licensee has violated any condition of the license as set forth in Section 8 above
in the course of the conduct of the activity for which the license has been issued; or
(g) The occurrence of any event subsequent to issuance of the license which event
would have been a basis for denial of the license shall be grounds for revocation
thereof.
Section 11. Emergency Contact Information Required.
All license holders shall provide emergency contact information to the Town Planner
upon issuance of the license on a form provided by the Town.
Section 12. Posting of License.
Licenses must be posted in a conspicuous place on the mobile unit.
Section 13. Transferability of License.
No licenses shall be transferred.
Section 14. Enforcement; Violations.
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, for whom the
Town’s duly authorized law enforcement provider shall provide investigative and
enforcement assistance. In addition to any action that may be taken by the Board of
Selectmen with respect to the suspension or revocation of a license, violation of this
Ordinance shall be a civil violation subject to a fine. The fine for a violation of this
Ordinance shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500) for each offense. Each act of violation and every day that any such
violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the fines provided
herein, the Town may enjoin or abate any violation of this Ordinance by appropriate
action.
Section 15. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
Section 16. Conflicts with Other Ordinances.
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall control.
8
Section 17. Amendments.
Amendments to this Ordinance may be made by a majority vote of the Town at any
Harpswell Town Meeting and shall take effect upon enactment unless otherwise
specified.
Section 18. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption.
1
MUNICIPAL FIREFIGHTER ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE OF HARPSWELL, MAINE
Enacted March 11, 2017, Article 40
WHEREAS, since at least the 1980s the Town of Harpswell (the “Town”) has provided for
firefighting, fire protection and emergency medical services to the Town through emergency
services agreements reached with the following three volunteer fire associations: (1) the
Cundy’s Harbor Volunteer Fire Department Inc.; (2) Harpswell Neck Fire and Rescue, Inc.; and
(3) the Orr’s & Bailey Islands Fire Department Inc.;
WHEREAS, the emergency services agreements referenced above describe the specific areas
within the Town (“fire protection zones”) which are served by each of the three volunteer fire
associations;
WHEREAS, the Town has identified a need to supplement the current fire and rescue service
coverage provided by the volunteer fire associations in the three fire protection zones in order
to prevent gaps in coverage that may occur at particular times of the day or week;
WHEREAS, the Town desires to provide assistance to the volunteer fire associations through
the provision of municipal firefighters employed by the Town;
NOW THEREFORE, the Town of Harpswell hereby adopts this ordinance.
Section 1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the Municipal Firefighter Assistance Ordinance of Harpswell,
Maine.
Section 2. Purpose.
The purposes of this ordinance are to establish a mechanism for providing personnel employed
by the Town to assist the three volunteer fire associations, each organized as a corporation and
with its own fire chief, in their mission of providing firefighting, fire protection and emergency
medical services to the Town of Harpswell in each of three fire protection zones; to establish
the boundaries of each fire protection zone; and to define the respective powers and duties of
each fire chief and the Town in relation to the municipal firefighters employed by the Town, as
well as the powers and duties of the municipal firefighters.
2
Section 3. Enactment.
Pursuant to Art. VIII, pt. 2 § 1 of the Maine Constitution, 30-M.R.S. § 3001 and § 3151 et seq.,
the municipality of Harpswell, Maine hereby enacts a Municipal Firefighter Assistance
Ordinance.
Section 4. Definitions.
Fire protection zone: an administrative area established within the Town for firefighting, fire
protection and rescues purposes, to be served by one fire department or volunteer fire
association as provided under 30-A M.R.S. § 3152(2).
Municipal firefighter: An individual employed by and receiving compensation from the Town
of Harpswell for aiding in the extinguishment of fires and/or providing emergency medical care.
Volunteer fire association: An organized firefighting unit incorporated under Title 13 or Title
13-B of the Maine Revised Statutes, and which is officially recognized by the Town.
Volunteer firefighter: an active member of a volunteer fire association who receives no
compensation from the municipality other than injury or death benefits.
Section 5. Fire Protection Zones.
The following fire protection zones are established by this Ordinance:
A. The Cundy’s Harbor Fire Protection Zone: the area consisting of the portion of Great
Island from the Brunswick Town Line south to the area near Steven’s Corner Road,
including offshore islands. The Cundy’s Harbor Fire Protection Zone shall be served by
the Cundy’s Harbor Volunteer Fire Department Inc.
B. The Harpswell Neck Fire Protection Zone: the area consisting of all of Harpswell Neck
from the Brunswick Town Line south to the end of the peninsula, and those other
peninsulas that extend from Harpswell Neck, including offshore islands. The Harpswell
Neck Fire Protection Zone shall be served by Harpswell Neck Fire and Rescue, Inc.
C. The Orr’s & Bailey Islands Fire Protection Zone: the area consisting of Orr’s Island,
Bailey Island and the portion of Great Island that is south and west of the Nazarene
Church at 806 Harpswell Islands Road, including the church itself and offshore islands.
The Orr’s & Bailey Islands Fire Protection Zone shall be served by the Orr’s & Bailey
Islands Fire Department Inc.
Notwithstanding the geographic descriptions of the fire protection zones established above, the
geographic scope of each fire protection zone may be amended from time to time by
regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen without the need for further town meeting
approval and with mutual agreement of the Town and the affected volunteer fire associations.
3
Section 6. Powers and Duties of the Fire Chiefs.
A. Appointment. The Fire Chiefs for the Town’s three fire protection zones shall be
appointed/elected according to the bylaws for each of the three volunteer fire
associations above. Once appointed/elected Fire Chief by their volunteer fire
association membership, each Fire Chief shall be appointed by vote of the Board of
Selectmen as Fire Chief for their respective fire protection zones.
B. Powers and duties. The Fire Chiefs for the three volunteer fire associations shall
exercise the powers and duties set forth in 30-A M.R.S. § 3153 in the Fire Chief’s fire
protection zone. These powers and duties include but are not limited to the following:
1. Each Fire Chief shall control and direct all municipal and volunteer firefighters in
the performance of firefighting operations within the Fire Chief’s fire protection
zone, except as provided otherwise herein.
2. Each Fire Chief shall have the authority to issue rules, regulations, standard
operating guidelines (collectively “Operating Documents”) necessary to operate
their respective fire protection zones consistent with this Ordinance, Maine
State law, and other applicable laws and regulations. The Board of Selectmen
may review and amend such Operating Documents as it deems necessary.
3. Each Fire Chief may establish rules and regulations concerning the provision of
emergency services within their respective fire protection zones, including
services to respond to public safety emergencies, medical emergencies,
hazardous materials incidents or natural or man-made disasters. The Board of
Selectmen may review and amend such regulations as it deems necessary.
4. Each Fire Chief shall provide a training program for firefighters within their
volunteer fire association, which training program may be held in cooperation
with other volunteer fire associations, the Town and other appropriate
governmental agencies. Such training programs held by each Fire Chief shall be
open and available to municipal firefighters at the request of the Town
Administrator or designee.
5. Each Fire Chief shall prepare and submit annually to the Town Administrator or
designee a budget relating to fire protection and rescue activities for and within
their fire protection zone.
C. Reports. The Fire Chiefs shall submit reports, as deemed necessary by the Board of
Selectmen, on the activities of their volunteer fire association and shall discharge such
other duties as may be required by the Board of Selectmen.
Section 7. Powers and Duties of the Town.
A. Employment of municipal firefighters. The Town may hire one or more municipal
firefighters to assist the voluntary fire associations in their firefighting and rescue
operations. The Town shall be responsible for all decisions related to hiring, discipline
and termination, in accordance with Town personnel policies and all other applicable
policies, laws and rules applicable to municipal employees.
4
B. Management Structure. All municipal firefighters shall serve at the direction of the
Board of Selectmen at all times except as provided herein. The powers and duties of the
Town under this Ordinance shall include but are not limited to the following:
1. General supervision. All municipal firefighters shall report to the Town
Administrator or designee, who has general day to day supervisory responsibility
over and shall serve as a department head for each municipal firefighter
employed by the Town.
2. Liaison between municipal firefighters and Fire Chiefs. The Town Administrator
or designee shall serve as a liaison between the municipal firefighters and the
Fire Chiefs for coordination and communication of work schedules, calendars,
monthly call reports and other firefighting and rescue operations information.
3. Regulatory compliance. The Town Administrator or designee, in consultation
with each Fire Chief, shall ensure that all municipal firefighters are in compliance
with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations and that all necessary
documentation is provided to state and federal regulatory agencies of
compliance by municipal firefighters with same.
4. Training. The Town Administrator or designee shall make arrangements for all
municipal firefighters to receive the training required by law. Such training may
take place by way of a request by the Town Administrator or designee to include
municipal firefighters in training sessions held by a volunteer fire association.
Section 8. Powers and Duties of Municipal Firefighters.
A. Town employee. Municipal firefighters shall be employed by the Town, shall receive
compensation from the Town, and shall serve at the direction of the Board of Selectmen
or designee at all times except as provided herein. Municipal firefighters shall be
subject to the Town’s personnel policy and all other applicable policies, laws and rules
applicable to municipal employees.
B. Powers and duties. Municipal firefighters employed by the Town shall have the powers
and duties set forth in 30-A M.R.S. § 3151 et seq., and as set forth in any administrative
rules and regulations adopted by the Municipal Officers. These powers and duties
include but are not limited to the following:
1. Once a municipal firefighter has responded to a call, and while performing
firefighting and/or rescue operations within a particular fire protection zone, a
municipal firefighter shall serve under the direction, command and control of the
Fire Chief, or the Fire Chief’s designee, or as provided by the Operating
Documents for the fire protection zone to which the municipal firefighter has
been called.
5
2. The Town, in consultation with the Fire Chiefs, may establish administrative rules
and regulations consistent with this section addressing chain of command and
other issues such as mutual aid and non-emergency activities performed by
municipal firefighters, as approved by the Board of Selectmen.
3. All municipal firefighters shall attend training sessions as directed by the Town
Administrator or designee unless excused.
4. Municipal firefighters shall be authorized to provide such other services as
directed by the Town Administrator or designee, including emergency services
within the Town, by responding to and managing other public safety
emergencies, including, but not limited to, medical emergencies, hazardous
materials incidents or natural or man-made disasters.
5. Municipal firefighters are responsible for complying with all applicable local,
state and federal laws and regulations.
Section 9. Privileges and Immunities.
Municipal firefighters employed by the Town shall enjoy the privileges and immunities and
benefits provided by the Maine Tort Claims Act and the Workers’ Compensation Act when
acting in their capacity as firefighters and/or emergency rescue personnel.
Section 10. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other part thereof.
Section 11. Effective Date.
The ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption by the Municipal Legislative Body.
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
Outdoor Pesticides Control and
Fertilizer Use Ordinance
Enacted May 20, 2004
Amended March 12, 2016
Amended March 11, 2017
Amended March 10, 2018
1
Section 1. Purpose
Scientific studies have shown that certain Insect Growth Regulators (IGR), neonicotinoids and
insecticides adversely affect aquatic invertebrates, especially molting shellfish such as lobsters
and crabs. In addition to harming shellfish, these chemicals may interfere with beneficial insect
species such as bees and lepidopteran pollinators (moths and butterflies). The Town of
Harpswell is comprised of approximately 216 miles of coastline, numerous islands and narrow
peninsulas such that discharges and runoff from inland areas are extremely close to coastal
waters. The application of water soluble fertilizers is apt to runoff into the sea and overload it
with nitrogen that causes algal blooms and coastal acidification which affect shellfish by
inhibiting their shell formation. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish regulations that
will aid the Town in protecting and maintaining the health of its shellfish resources, marine
environment, and pollinators.
Section 2. Definitions
Aerial Spraying – spraying by airplane.
Insect Growth Regulator – a substance or mixture of substances including, but not limited to,
azadirachtin, diflubenzuron, and tebufenozide, that act to disrupt the action of insect hormones
thereby interrupting or inhibiting the life cycle of insects.
Insecticide – a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel or mitigate
insects.
Licensed Applicator – a person who applies pesticides, has passed certification exams and is
licensed by the Maine Board of Pesticides Control.
Neonicotinoid – a class of neuro-active insecticides including, but not limited to, acetamiprid,
clothianidin, imidacloprid, nitenpyram, nithiazine, thiacloprid, and thiamethoxam.
Pesticide – any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing, destroying, repelling
or mitigating any pest; any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant
regulator, defoliant or desiccant; and any nitrogen stabilizer. Herbicides, fungicides,
insecticides, and rodenticides are considered pesticides. Multicellular biological controls, such
as mites, nematodes, parasitic wasps, snails or other biological agents not regulated as pesticides
by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, are not considered pesticides.
Weed and Feed Fertilizer – a mixture of fertilizer and pesticide.
Section 3. Prohibition and Restrictions on the Outdoor Use of Pesticides
a) The outdoor use of the following pesticides is prohibited in the Town of Harpswell
except for use in conjunction with commercial agriculture, nurseries, or golf courses:
2
i. the use and/or application by any person by any method whatsoever of any Insect
Growth Regulator (IGR) as defined, or;
ii. the aerial spraying of any Insecticide whose product label indicates that it is
harmful to aquatic invertebrates.
b) No outdoor use of a pesticide shall be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of the
maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the highest annual
tide (HAT) of a coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; except in
conjunction with commercial agriculture, nurseries, or golf courses.
c) The outdoor use and/or application of any neonicotinoid insecticide whose product label
indicates that it is harmful to bees or aquatic invertebrates is subject to the following
restrictions except in conjunction with commercial agriculture, nurseries, or golf course.
i. Between twenty-five (25) and two hundred fifty (250) feet of the maximum high
water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the highest annual tide (HAT)
of a coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland, the use of a
neonicotinoid insecticide regulated by this ordinance must be done by a licensed
applicator. Uses permitted by licensed applicators are limited to applications by
stem injection or painting on wind pollinated trees or plants.
ii. Outside of the two hundred fifty (250) foot shoreland zone, neonicotinoid
insecticides may be applied by:
a) stem injection or tree painting to wind pollinated trees plants, or
b) other application methods if applied by a licensed applicator.
Section 4. Use of Licensed Pesticide Applicators
Any application, for which compensation is paid, of general use pesticides, restricted pesticides,
or weed and feed fertilizers, shall be done by a licensed applicator.
Section 5. Fertilizer Use Limitation
The outdoor use of fertilizers, except in conjunction with commercial agriculture, nurseries, or
golf courses, is subject to the following limitations:
a) Within the shoreland zone:
i. No fertilizer shall be applied within twenty-five (25) feet of the maximum high
water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the highest annual tide (HAT)
of a coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
ii. Between twenty-five (25) and two hundred fifty (250) feet of the maximum high
water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the highest annual tide (HAT)
of a coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland, only non-water
soluble fertilizer, compost, or composted manure may be applied.
3
b) Outside of the two hundred fifty (250) foot shoreland zone, water soluble chemical
fertilizer, sludge or non-composted manure may be applied in addition to those allowed
in Section 5(a)(ii).
Section 6. Exemptions
a) The following materials are not regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance:
i. Pet supplies such as shampoos, tick and flea collars, and dusts;
ii. Insect repellents;
iii. Aerosol products; and
iv. Application of materials or substances mandated by state or federal law.
b) The provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to the following uses:
i. Commercial agriculture;
ii. Nurseries;
iii. Golf courses; and
iv. Indoor uses
Section 7. Waiver
The Conservation Commission is authorized to grant waivers from the provisions of this
ordinance when a pest presents: a) an immediate threat to human health, or b) an immediate
threat of substantial property damage or loss. A waiver may only be granted to a licensed
applicator for a specific use of a specific pesticide. The initial approval of a waiver shall be for a
period of not more than thirty (30) days. The commission may grant a renewal of a waiver for a
period of not more than three (3) years if it finds that the licensed applicator has performed
satisfactorily, that the location of the treatment and the pesticide and method of application will
be the same as the initial waiver, and that the need for the continuing waiver is the result of the
same ongoing infestation or problem.
The licensed applicator who seeks a waiver shall apply to the Code Enforcement Officer. The
application shall specify the specific nature of the situation requiring a waiver including an
analysis of why other approaches for control of the pest cannot be utilized or will create greater
risk to the marine environment and/or pollinators, the pesticide use for which the waiver is
sought, the proposed method of application, and measures that will be taken to limit any adverse
impacts on the marine environment or pollinators.
Upon receipt of an application for a pesticide use waiver or the renewal of an existing waiver, the
CEO shall forward the application to the Conservation Commission which shall consider the
application within fifteen (15) days. The Commission may obtain outside assistance in its
review of the application.
4
The Commission shall approve the application only if it finds:
1. That there is an immediate threat to human health or an immediate threat of substantial
property damage or loss,
2. That control methods allowed by the ordinance are not adequate to address the threat,
3. That the approach for controlling the pest for which the waiver is requested presents the
least risk to the marine environment and/or pollinators, and
4. The licensed applicator will undertake measures to limit the potential adverse impacts on
the marine environment.
A decision of the Conservation Commission with respect to the granting of a waiver may be
appealed to the Board of Selectmen within fifteen (15) days of the Commission’s decision. The
Board shall act on an appellate basis in reviewing the decision and may affirm or modify the
Commission’s decision.
Section 8. Enforcement
When a violation of the provisions of this ordinance is suspected, the Code Enforcement Officer
may require that the person, firm, or corporation that is the owner of or having control or use of
the property, provide the Town with soil or leaf samples from a location on the property
specified by the Code Enforcement Officer in sufficient quantity to permit laboratory testing of
the soil or leaf in order to check for the presence of any Insect Growth Regulator (IGR) that
prevents molting or inhibits exoskeletal formation or any Neonicotinoid or Insecticide whose
product label indicates that it is harmful to aquatic invertebrates or bees.
a) This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to institute or cause to be instituted, in the
name of the town, any and all actions, legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or
necessary for enforcement of this Ordinance.
The following procedure is available to the Code Enforcement Officer when he/she becomes
aware of a possible violation of this ordinance and wishes to investigate it:
1) If there has been a complaint, the complainant shall document the nature of the complaint
using a form provided by the Town and submit the completed form to the Code
Enforcement Officer who may, in his/her discretion, choose to meet with the
complainant.
2) Based on the information available, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a
preliminary determination as to whether there is a possible violation of this ordinance.
3) If there is a possible violation of the ordinance involving the use of fertilizers, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall attempt to meet with the property owner and/or the applicator
of the fertilizer to obtain information on the type of fertilizer applied.
4) If there is a possible violation of this ordinance involving the use of pesticides, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain information from the applicator of the material on the
type and concentration of pesticide applied, the location and method of application, the
conditions at the time of application, and any mitigation activities undertaken using a
form provided by the Town.
5
5) If the Code Enforcement Officer believes that there could be a violation of the Maine
Pesticide Control Board regulations, the Code Enforcement Officer shall contact the
enforcement staff of the Board.
6) If there is agreement between the Code Enforcement Officer and the property owner
and/or applicator that a violation has occurred, and that the violation was not a willful or
repeat violation, the Code Enforcement Officer together with a representative of the
Conservation Commission shall meet with the property owner and/or applicator to
explain the requirements of this ordinance.
7) If the Code Enforcement Officer determines, based on this information, that there is an
unresolved possible violation of this ordinance, he/she shall refer the case to the Board of
Selectmen for further action.
b) The Board of Selectmen shall review any cases of possible violation of this ordinance
referred to it by the Code Enforcement Officer to determine if a violation has occurred in
accordance with the following:
1) The Board of Selectmen shall determine if a violation of the ordinance has occurred.
In making this determination, the Board may retain outside expertise to evaluate the
information collected and/or obtained by the Code Enforcement Officer, undertake
sampling and testing for pesticides, and to provide professional guidance as to
whether a violation has occurred. The Board may require the owner of the property
subject to the review or the applicator to pay for the collection and testing of
appropriate samples if a violation is found. If the Board determines that a violation
has occurred, it shall pursue the legal remedies set forth in Section 9.
Section 9. Legal Remedies
When the Board of Selectmen determines that a violation of this ordinance has occurred in
accordance with 8.b)1), the Board may enter into a consent agreement with the property owner
and/or pesticides applicator setting forth appropriate remedies and remedial actions if necessary,
or undertake any and all actions, legal or equitable against the property owner and/or applicator
for violation of the ordinance. In the latter case, a person, firm, or corporation who uses or
applies or causes to be used or applied any Insect Growth Regulator or Insecticide in violation of
the Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 for the first
violation of this Ordinance. A fine of not less than $2,501 nor more than $5,000 shall be levied
against any person, firm, or corporation violating this Ordinance for the second and each
subsequent violation. Refusal to comply with the Code Enforcement Officer’s request for
information on pesticide use or the collection of samples from the property shall result in a fine
of not less than $1,000 and may result in further action by the Town in seeking an administrative
inspection warrant for the property.
Section 10. Severability
To the extent any provision of this Ordinance is deemed invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the balance of the Ordinance shall remain valid.
6
Section 12. Table of Prohibitions and Restrictions
The following table provides an overview of the prohibitions and restrictions on the outdoor use
of pesticides and fertilizers except for applications in conjunction with commercial agriculture,
nurseries, and golf courses. Where there is conflict between the table and the descriptions in the
preceding sections, the language of Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall apply.
HARPSWELL PESTICIDE/FERTILIZER PROHIBITIONS
AND DISTANCE FROM WATER
SHORELAND ZONE
OUTSIDE
SHORELAND
ZONE
CLASS OF PESTICIDE/
FERTILIZER
25’ BUFFER
25’ – 250’
OVER 250’
Insect Growth Regulator (IGR)
X
X
X
Neonicotinoids: Label indicates
harmful to pollinators or aquatic
invertebrates
X
Use only
permitted by
Licensed
Applicator on
wind
pollinated
trees or plants
using stem
injection or
painting
Use only permitted
on wind pollinated
trees or plants
using stem
injection or
painting. Other
application
methods will not
be restricted if
applied by a
Licensed
Applicator.
All other pesticides
X
No restriction
No restriction
Fertilizer
X
Compost
Non water No restriction
soluble
nitrogen
fertilizer
X = Use prohibited
Outdoor Pesticides Control and Fertilizer Use Ordinance 3/11/2017
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
Enacted November 2, 2010
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, “An
Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known
as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying
property can access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the
Town, financed by funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds available for
this purpose, and to enter into a contract with the Trust to administer functions of its PACE
program; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Harpswell (the “Town”) wishes to establish a PACE program;
and
NOW, THEREFORE, the Town hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
Section 1 - Purpose.
By and through this Ordinance, the Town declares as its public purpose the establishment of a
municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed Clean Energy
(“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for energy saving
improvements to their properties located in the Town. The Town declares its purpose and the
provisions of this Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and State laws.
Section 2 - Enabling Legislation.
The Town enacts this Ordinance pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 3 - Title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Harpswell Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).
Section 4 - Definitions.
2
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an
improvement to qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property
and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or similar
energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements
of residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the
Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that
meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the Town of Harpswell.
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of
qualifying property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on
qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying
property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against
qualifying property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality
establishes a PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s
boundaries.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to
the owner(s) of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made
pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying
property.
3
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State
statute by the Trust and a municipality under which property owners can finance energy
savings improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the
PACE district of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a
fixture, product, system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter
at a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy
systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems
eligible for funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean
Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
Section 5 - Establishment; funding.
The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing owners of qualifying property
located in the PACE district who so choose to access financing for energy saving improvements
to their property through PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds
are available from the Trust in municipalities that: (1) adopt a PACE Ordinance; (2) adopt and
implement a local public outreach and education plan; (3) enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the
municipality’s PACE program; and (4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the municipality’s PACE program.
Section 6 - Amendment to PACE program.
In addition, the Municipality may from time to time amend this Ordinance to use any other
funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE
program, and the Municipality shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those
other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
Section 7 - Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents.
4
If the Trust or other State or federal agency adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes
model documents subsequent to the Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those
standards, rules or model documents substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality
shall take necessary steps to conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards,
rules, or model documents.
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Section 8 - Program Administration.
1. PACE Administration. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. §10154(2)(A)(2) and (B),
the Municipality may enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to
administer the functions of the PACE program for the Municipality. The PACE
administration contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE
program including, without limitation, that:
A. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of qualifying property in
the Municipality’s PACE district;
B. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE agreement in
the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE mortgage;
C. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property owner;
D. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with payment
deadlines to the property owner;
E. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the PACE assessments;
F. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to nonpayment of the
PACE assessment;
G. the Trust or its agent on behalf of the Municipality, promptly shall record the
discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE loan.
2. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate with
the Trust in its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
3. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but may be
assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and consistent
with applicable law.
Section 9 - Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality.
5
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal officers
and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are
not personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or
nature, under or related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE assessments.
2. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE administration
contract with the Trust entered into under Article VI, Sec. 8(1) above, a municipality has
no liability to a property owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed
under a PACE program.
March 29, 2017
Instructions for Applying for a Pesticide Use Waiver
The Outdoor Pesticides Control and Fertilizer Use Ordinance allows the Conservation
Commission to grant a waiver from the restrictions on the use of pesticides under
certain conditions. If a property owner wants to apply for a waiver, a state licensed
pesticides applicator must apply for the waiver on the owner’s behalf. The applicator
must complete either the Application for a Pesticide Use Waiver if the request is for a
single property or the Multi-Site Application for Pesticide Use Waivers. The multi-site
application form may only be used if all of the following conditions are met:
• The pesticide and concentration proposed to be used is the same for all
properties
• The method of application will be the same for all properties
• The primary reason for requesting the waivers is the same for all properties –
either an immediate threat to human health OR an immediate threat of
substantial property damage
The applicator must submit the completed waiver application to the Code Enforcement
Office. After the application is received, the waiver will be scheduled for consideration
by the Conservation Commission.
BASIS FOR THE WAIVER REQUEST
The Conservation Commission can grant a waiver to use an otherwise restricted
pesticide only if it finds that there is either an immediate threat to human health or an
immediate threat of substantial property loss or damage. The waiver application
should clearly why the waiver is necessary to address one or both of these situations.
MULTI-SITE APPLICATIONS
A licensed applicator may apply for waivers for a number of properties at the same
time using the Multi-Site Application if the three conditions listed above are met. The
Multi-Site Application consists of two parts, an application form to provide information
on the pesticide, the application method, and risk mitigation measures and a
spreadsheet providing information about each property for which a waiver is
requested. Any number of properties can be included on a single application as long as
the three criteria are met – same pesticide, same method of application, and same
reason for the waiver request. The application form and the related spreadsheet should
both be submitted to the CEO.
1 of 3
Pesticide Waiver Multi-Site Application 031517
Date Received: ___________________ Waiver No.______________
Town of Harpswell
Multi-Site Application for Pesticide Use Waivers
The Outdoor Pesticides Control and Fertilizer Use Ordinance provides that the Conservation
Commission may grant a waiver for the use of pesticides that are otherwise restricted if certain
conditions are met. An application for a pesticide use waiver must be completed by an
applicator licensed by the Maine Pesticide Control Board. A licensed applicator may use this
form to apply for waivers for multiple properties if all of the following conditions are met:
• The pesticide and concentration proposed to be used is the same for all properties
• The method of application will be the same for all properties
• The primary reason for requesting the waivers is the same for all properties – either an
immediate threat to human health OR an immediate threat of substantial property damage
If those conditions are all met, complete the following information on this application form and
provide the requested information for each property or site on the attached spreadsheet.
1. Applicator requesting the waivers: _______________________________________________
2. Pesticide and concentration proposed to be used: ____________________________________
3. Provide the following information about the pesticide(s) proposed to be used:
A. How long does it take for the pesticide to break down in the soil and in the ocean? ______
___________________________________________________________________________
B. How toxic is the pesticide to marine crustaceans, marine creatures, and land creatures?
___________________________________________________________________________
C. If the pesticide is applied via injection, will residual levels be present in leaves or needles
when they drop? ____________________________________________________________
4. Proposed application method: ___________________________________________________
5. The Conservation Commission must find that the following criteria are met to approve a
pesticide use waiver. Please complete the following:
A. Describe why the control methods allowed in the ordinance are not adequate to address
the threat – be specific: _______________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
2 of 3
Pesticide Waiver Multi-Site Application 031517
B. Describe why the proposed approach for controlling the pest presents the least risk to the
marine environment: _________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
3. Describe the measures that will be undertaken to limit the potential adverse impacts on the
marine environment: _________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
Applicant: Date:
______________________________________________________ __________________
Name (Print) ___________________________________________
Applicant’s Board of Pesticides Control License Number: _______
Email: ________________________________________________
Mailing Address: _______________________________________
__________________________________________
Phone: ________________________________________________
3 of 3
Pesticide Waiver Multi-Site Application 031517
Date Received: ___________________ Waiver No.______________
Multi-Site Application for Pesticide Use Waivers
Complete for Each Property for Which a Waiver is Requested
Name of Licensed Applicator: _____________________________________ PCB License #: __________
Property Owner
Map & Lot
Number
Street Address
Describe The Area Or
Vegetation To Be Treated
(see note)
Pest or situation to be
treated
Describe The Basis For
the Waiver -
Immediate Threat to
Human Health or
Property Damage
Note: Describe the area or vegetation to be treated (area in square feet, number, location and species, distance from the closest waterbody)
Date Received: Waiver No:
Multi-Site Application for Pesticide Use Waivers
Complete for Each Property for Which a Waiver is Requested
Name of Licesed Applicator: PCB License #:
Property Owner
Map & Lot
Number
Street Address
Describe the Area or
Vegetation to be
Treated (see note)
Pest or Situation to be
Treated
Describe the Basis for
the Waiver - Immediate
Threat to Human Health
or Property Damage
Note: Describe the area or vegetation to be treated (area in square feet, number, location
and species of plants, distance from closest waterbody, etc.
TOWN OF
HARPSWELL
POLICY
MANUAL
GENERAL Pgs Pgs
• Preamble 1 • Freedom of Access Procedures 24
• Severability 1 • Placement of Items on Secret Ballot 28
• Affirmative Action 1 • Public Participation - Selectmen's Mtgs 29
• Hiring 1 • Roads/Road Commissioner Policies 30
• Physicals 1
• Personnel File 1 FISCAL
• Confidentiality 1 • Advanced Payment of Mooring Reg Fees 32
• Performance Evaluations 1 • Advance Shellfish License Fees 32
• Conflict of Interest 1 • Board of Appeals Fee Waiver 33
• Gift 2 • Budgetary Policies 33
• Town Property & Equipment 2 • Cash Receipts 34
• Employee Classification 2 • Cell Phone Use Allowance Policy 35
• Probationary 2 • Contingency Policy 36
• Hours of Work 3 • Competitive Bid Policy 36
• Overtime/Compensatory Time 3 • Credit Card Fee Refund Policy 37
• Wages 3 • Debt Management Policy 37
• Appointed Officials Policy 3 • Disposition of Tax Acquired Property 39
• Fee and Charges Policy 42
BENEFITS • Fixed Asset Policy 43
• Health Insurance 4 • Funding for Non-Profit Organization 44
• Life Insurance 4 • Interest on Transfer Station Charges 45
• Dental Insurance 5 • Investment Policy 45
• Worker's Compensation 4 • Material Removal Recycling Ctr/Transfer 48
• Social Security 4 • Mileage Reimbursement 48
• Maine State Retirement System 5 • Order of Municipal Officers 49
• Deferred Compensation Plan 5 • Petty Cash Policy 50
• Holidays 5 • Post Issuance Compliance Policy 51
• Vacation 6 • Purchasing Policy 53
• Sick Leave 7 • Purchase Order Requisition Form 54
• Short-Term Disability 7 • Special Revenue Fund for Recreation 55
• Leaves of Absence 8 • Town Development Fees Waiver 55
• Jury Duty 8 • Disbursement Warrants Wages & Benefits 56
• Hazardous Weather Policy 8 • Disbursement Warrants State Fees 57
• Family and Medical Leave Act 9 • Use of MBNA Credit Card 58
PROCEDURAL TOWN PROPERTY / FACILITIES
• Discipline 10 • Abandoned/Recovered Property 59
• Grievance Procedure 10 • Boat Operation Qualification 60
• Employment Separation 10 • Boat Maintenance Policy 61
• Sexual Harassment Policy 11 • Facility Closure Policy for Emergencies 61
• Annual Written Notificaton of Harassment 12 • Future Acquisition of Land Policy 62
• Policy of Workplace Threats/Violence 14 • Lease of Town Property at Orr's Is Bridge 64
• Threat Incident Report 15 • Mitchell Field/Bandstand Group Use Policy 65
• Use of Information Technology Rscs 18 • Mitchell Field Rules 68
• Inspection Policy for Field Workers 21 • Mitchell Field - Request for Use of 69
• Significant Development Proposals 22 • Mitchell Field Food Sale Policy 70
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOWN PROPERTY / FACILITIES (con't) Pgs
• Political Signs on Town Property 70
• Potts Point Town Dock 71
• Rules For Town Trails 73
• Management of Trails on Town lands 74
• Stewards Policy & Form 77
• Tobacco-Free Resolution 79
• Towing of Disabled Vessels 80
• Trufant-Summerton Athletic Field Use Policy 81
• Use & Operation of Mower 84
• Use of Town Office Meeting Facilities 84
• Vehicle Use Policy 85
MISCELLANEOUS
• Boston Post Cane Policy 86
• Committee Guidelines 88
• Enhanced 911 Road Name Policy 89
• Street Light Policy 90
• Sponsorship Policy 91
• Town Administration Designee Policy 91
• Volunteer Background Check Policy 92
• Website Links Policy 93
1
PREAMBLE
The Harpswell Board of Selectmen hereby adopts the following policy for the administration of
personnel activities of the employees of the Town of Harpswell. These rules shall supersede any policy(s)
previously adopted by the Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen may delete, modify or add to this policy at any time.
The provisions of this policy are not contractual, but rather, are general guidelines for the Town in its
relationship with its employees.
This policy does not apply to elected Town officials.
SEVERABIILTY
If any article, section or provision of this policy should be found to be invalid or unenforceable by
decision of the courts, only that article, section or provision specified shall be of no force and effect, and such
decision shall not invalidate any other article, section or provision.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
As an Equal Opportunity Employer, The Town of Harpswell shall employ and promote employees
without discrimination as to religion, race, age, sex, disability, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
national origin, political affiliation or sexual orientation except as a bona fide occupational qualification.
HIRING
The Town shall employ the best qualified persons who are available at the salary levels established for
the position. All other consideration being equal, preference will be given first to present employees, and then
to residents of Harpswell. Final decisions for hiring will be the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen. As
part of the hiring process for all positions, such positions shall be advertised.
PHYSICALS
As a condition of employment, the Town may require a physical exam, appropriate to the position, at the
expense of the Town by a physician of the Town’s choice.
PERSONNEL FILE
Personnel record files are maintained for each employee of the Town. Any employee may, upon
reasonable notice, review his/her file during normal working hours.
CONFIDENTIALITY
During the course of their duties, employees of the Town are privy to information which is sensitive,
confidential and/or personal in nature. Employees are required to respect the confidential nature of such
information. [See “Freedom of Access Policy”].
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
All employees will receive an annual performance review, in writing, by their supervisor and will have
an opportunity to discuss their evaluation with their reviewer.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No Town employee who is authorized to make purchases shall have any interest directly or indirectly in
any contract with the Town.
GIFT
No Town employee shall accept a gift exceeding $10.00 in value of any type from any person or
organization with whom the Town deals.
2
TOWN PROPERTY & EQUIPMENT
Employees must not, directly or indirectly, use or allow the use of Town property or equipment of any
kind for other than official activities, except as authorized by the Board of Selectmen or their designee.
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION (as assigned by Board of Selectmen)
A. Regular Full-time - Regular full-time employees work an annual average of 37.5 hours per week.
Regular full-time employees are entitled to the benefits provided to Town employees as described in
this policy manual, subject to eligibility requirements and any applicable waiting periods.
*Hrs. Worked Benefit (Holiday, Sick & **Vacation)
37.5 or more 8 hours
B. Regular Part-time – A regular part-time employee works an annual average of fewer than 37.5
hours per week.
Regular part-time employees who work an annual average of twenty (20) hours or more per week
are entitled to the benefits provided to part-time Town employees as described in this policy manual.
Any such benefits are subject to eligibility requirements and any applicable waiting periods.
Regular part-time employees who work an annual average of less than twenty (20) hours per week
are not entitled to benefits except as required by law.
Vacation, sick leave and holidays shall be determined on a pro rata basis.
*Hrs. Worked Benefit (Holiday, Sick & **Vacation)
30.00 – 37.49 6 hours
20.00 – 29.99 4 hours
C. Temporary/Seasonal – All other employees are considered temporary/seasonal. Typically
temporary/seasonal employees are employees hired for special projects, to fill-in for an absent
employee, or for a limited duration of time. Temporary/seasonal employees are not entitled to
benefits except as required by law.
*Hours worked must be determined using average hours worked during the preceding calendar year. Benefits
eligibility will only be adjusted annually unless an employee’s classification status changes. Health insurance
benefits will not be affected if a regular full-time employee’s annual average is less than 37.5 hours per week
but not less than 35 hours per week.
**Vacation benefit is adjusted depending upon number of years of employment (See page 8)
Revised by the Board of Selectmen March 28, 2013 and September 28, 2017
PROBATIONARY
All new hires are considered probationary for the first six (6) months of employment. The employee
may be dismissed at any time during the probationary period without cause and without appeal.
HOURS OF WORK
The Town’s normal work week will be Sunday through Saturday. Hours of work start and quitting time,
and break periods will be established by the Department Head. The normal, maximum work week will be forty
(40) hours per week. The Town will pay time and a half for hours actually worked in excess of forty (40) in a
3
given week for non-exempt employees. Overtime hours must be approved by the employee’s supervisor and
should be approved in advance insofar as possible.
Salaried employees, exempt from overtime, will accomplish the work assigned to their position
regardless of hours, within reasonable limits.
It is the employee’s, and his/her supervisor’s, responsibility to verify and sign their time sheets weekly.
OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME
Occasionally, it may be necessary to ask employees to work beyond the maximum hourly work week. If
employees are asked by an appropriately authorized individual to work in excess of 40 hours regardless of the
day or time, then compensation will be at the rate of time and one-half for those hours worked over 40 in the
work week (Sunday through Saturday).
Overtime will be kept at a minimum and will only be requested after careful analysis of overall Town
workload and priorities and with written approval by the Administrative Assistant and the respective
Department Head. Hours related to any type of leave are not time worked, and these hours will not be used in
computing overtime. Overtime is paid only to hourly employees such as secretarial, clerical, and research
assistant staff.
Salaried staff members are expected to work extra hours as necessary to accomplish the overall
objectives of their areas of responsibility which may exceed 40 hours per week.
Compensatory time may be granted in lieu of overtime pay with the written approval of the Department
Head and the Administrative Assistant. Compensatory time only applies to hourly-paid employees. Salaried
employees are not eligible except in unusual circumstances which must be approved in advance with the
Selectmen.
WAGES
Wage adjustments shall be effective January 1 of each year, but shall not be paid to an employee until
(1) annual budgets have been approved by Town meeting and (2) the Board of Selectmen votes to authorize the
increase. A wage or salary adjustment may occur during the year, upon approval of the Board of Selectmen, for
reasons such as a significant change in job responsibilities or successful completion of a probationary period.
Adopted April 15, 2004 by the Board of Selectmen as an Addition to the Personnel Policy
APPOINTED OFFICIALS POLICY
Adopted March 2, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
Amended May 11, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
The Selectmen annually appoint officials to carry out various tasks and responsibilities for the Town of
Harpswell on an occasional basis. Each appointment carries with it duties to be performed, some year-round
and some for a specific part of the year.
At the time of appointment, Town must provide appointees with written job descriptions setting forth
specific tasks to be accomplished, anticipated number of hours to be worked, if payment is to be made on an
hourly basis, or stipend to be paid. Stipends and/or hourly wages are set by the Selectmen, and Town
contributes appropriate taxes as required by law. Under established Town policies, part-time appointed officials
are not eligible for other benefits such as medical coverage, retirement, disability or leave of any kind unless
such coverage existed prior to January 1, 2000.
4
Each appointed official shall maintain a daily record showing any travel expenses incurred for which
reimbursement is requested. Each appointed official shall provide Town with a written progress report
quarterly outlining progress and problems to date. Appointed officials shall be paid monthly, the last pay period
of each month, unless otherwise arranged.
Appointed officials are directly accountable to the Town Administrator for day-to-day supervision and
must cooperate fully with him/her and the Selectmen in the conduct of Town business. Appointed officials
shall be evaluated at least semi-annually, the second evaluation must be at least ninety days prior to expiration
of appointment.
Annual appointment carries no implied contract for continuation beyond a one-year appointment
regardless of evaluation. All positions will be advertised prior to new appointments being made.
This policy is effective beginning with appointment of May 1, 2000 and thereafter.
HEALTH INSURANCE
All elected officials, regular full-time employees and regular part-time employees, shall be eligible at the
first day of the next month after hire for health, hospitalization and basic life insurance under the Maine
Municipal Employees Health Trust (MMEHT) or other insurer providing comparable coverage. An employee
who does not elect to enroll in medical insurance, remains eligible for basic life insurance (equal to one time
annual salary) at his/her own expense. Effective March 28, 2013, the Town will pay 80% of the single premium
only for regular part-time employees. Employee contribution will be by payroll deduction. Effective January 1,
2007, the Town will offer health insurance on a pre-tax basis. With respect to the elected positions of
Selectmen and Road Commissioner and the appointed position of Treasurer, the Town will pay 80% of the
Single premium only. Effective May 1, 2016, the Town will offer a health reimbursement account as an option.
Available Premium Levels:
• Single: The Town will pay 80% and the employee will pay the remainder.
• Single with Child(ren): The Town will pay 80% of the Single premium and 65% of the
remaining Children premium, and the employee will pay the remainder.
• Family (including Spouse; Domestic Partner; Spouse and children): The Town will pay 80% of
the Single premium and 65% of the remaining Family premium, and the employee will pay the
remainder.
SUPPLEMENTAL LIFE INSURANCE
All elected officials, regular full-time employees and regular part-time employees, shall be eligible on
the first day of the next month after hire for supplemental life insurance through MMEHT or other insurer
providing comparable coverage. Supplemental Life Insurance allows any employee enrolled in the Basic Life
Insurance to increase that coverage by an additional 1X, 2X or 3X. (Note any employee electing to increase the
coverage by 2X or 3X will be subjected to an Evidence of Insurability review for that coverage). The cost of
the Supplemental Life Insurance will be 100% at the employee’s expense.
DENTAL INSURANCE
Employees and/or their family may participate on a voluntary basis at their own expense if dental is
offered as an option under the Town’s Health Insurance.
WORKER’S COMPENSATION
The Town provides Worker’s Compensation benefits to all employees, at no cost. Employees who
sustain work-related injuries or illnesses (no matter how minor) must inform their supervisor immediately.
5
SOCIAL SECURITY
The Town and the employee shall contribute to Social Security as required by law.
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 14, 2006 and February 22, 2007, effective date April 1, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 27, 2007, October 1 and 15, 2009, March 14 and 28, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 14, 2017
MAINE STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
The Town of Harpswell is a participant in the Maine State Retirement System (MSRS) and all
employees and elected officials are eligible for membership. Employee contribution (6.5%) is optional and
contribution will be made by payroll deduction. The Town’s contribution is set annually by the MSRS.
Effective 3/14/98, this benefit is no longer available to Town employees. Those already in the plan may
continue under the same terms or may terminate and join the Deferred Compensation Plan.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
A Deferred Compensation Plan (“Plan”) has been established by the Town of Harpswell (Town) to provide
retirement benefits for its employees. The implementation date of the Plan is April 1, 1998 and shall be the only
retirement Plan offered to newly-hired employees. All full-time and regular, part-time employees who work
twenty (20) hours or more a week on a regularly-scheduled basis are eligible for participation in the Plan.
Employee contributions may begin on the first day of employment, and employees may contribute up to the
Plan’s limits. Contributions to the Plan by the Town for eligible employees shall begin upon completion of six
months of service. The Town will then contribute an amount equal to employee’s contribution up to a maximum
of 6% per year of their annual salary. Contributions are not retroactive. Employees shall receive a contribution
from the Town for only one retirement plan. Travel stipends are not considered salary.
The Plan has been approved by the Internal Revenue Service. Amounts contributed to the Plan by the Town are
sheltered from tax so long as participants remain in the Plan. The Plan is fully vested meaning that employees
will not forfeit any portion of the total monies contributed by them or on their behalf in case of employment
termination. In case of termination, monies will be distributed in accordance with the Plan’s terms. The Plan is
administered by the International City Management Association (ICMA) as trustee and is monitored by an
Administrative Committee on behalf of the Town. Additional information on the Plan is provided to each
individual upon acceptance of employment including request to designate employee’s beneficiary. It is the
responsibility of the participant to see that this designation is kept current.
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017
HOLIDAYS
A. Subject to these rules, the following holidays shall be paid holidays for regular
Town employees:
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day Columbus Day
Presidents’ Day Veterans’ Day
Patriots’ Day Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Day After Thanksgiving
Independence Day Christmas Day
(½ days on Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve remain at the discretion
of the Board of Selectmen)
6
A. If a regular holiday falls on a Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday; holidays that fall
on Sunday will be observed on the following Monday.
B. A person on a leave of absence without pay shall not be entitled to holiday pay.
C. Holiday pay will be computed on the basis of an 8-hour day or pro rata share thereof for regular,
part-time employees as previously defined.
D. When occasion or call in warrants, employees may be required to work whole or part of a holiday.
Employee must receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay for same. Hourly wage employees working
a holiday shall receive their regular pay for time worked plus their applicable holiday pay.
VACATION
A. Vacation privileges are available to regular, full-time employees. Such privileges are also available,
pro rata, to regular, part-time employees working no less than 20 hours per week. Employees are
urged to schedule and use their vacation time to be away from their job for rest and relaxation.
Regular, full-time employees will accrue vacation eligibility at the following rates:
0 – Three months of employment None
After three months 1.00 day per month
After five years 1.25 days per month
After ten years 1.50 days per month
B. Vacation will be scheduled in advance with the employee’s supervisor and approved by the Board of
Selectmen, or their designee. Seniority and the needs of the Town will be given due regard.
Vacation of more than two weeks duration will not be granted other than under extraordinary
circumstances.
C. Employees may carry forward up to one-half of their annual vacation accrual.
This carry forward is not cumulative. Unused vacation time will be paid to
employees upon resignation or retirement up to the amount accrued.
D. Employees may receive vacation pay prior to the start of their vacation, but
must request payment from the Treasurer at least five (5) business days in advance of the pay day
preceding the start of their vacation.
SICK LEAVE
A. Sick leave will accrue at the rate of one (1) day per month effective with the employee’s date of hire.
Sick leave may be accrued up to a maximum of thirty (30) days. Sick leave may be taken in
increments of two hours or greater.
B. Sick leave may be used for personal illness or physical incapacity of such degree as to render the
employee unable to perform the duties of his/her position unless the employee is capable of other
work for the Town; for personal medical or dental appointments; or to care for members of his/her
immediate family and/or household affected by serious illness.
7
C. When all accrued sick leave is used, time off due to illness may be charged to vacation leave upon
request, otherwise time absent will be classified as leave without pay.
D. Employees will be expected to inform their supervisor of their absence as early as possible on the
first day of their absence. Employees will inform their supervisor no later than the start of their
scheduled shift for each succeeding day of their absence.
E. If requested by the employee’s supervisor, the employee shall furnish the Town with a certificate
from his/her physician for any absence of more than three (3) days duration.
F. Sick leave will not be used to extend a vacation period.
G. There is no compensation for accumulated sick leave upon termination of employment for any
reason.
SHORT-TERM DISABILITY
Effective July 1, 1998, short-term disability benefits will be available to all regular full-time and parttime
Town employees working 20 hours or more per week who have completed their six month probationary
period. Elected officials are not eligible.
Each eligible employee shall be covered for short-term disability benefits at the rate of 60% of
employee’s regular salary. This benefit is payable, up to a maximum of nine (9) weeks, as long as an employee
is under the care of a physician who certifies that employee is not able to return to work. The Town reserves
the right to request a second medical opinion. No sick leave or vacation credits accrue while an employee is
receiving extended short-term disability benefits.
Benefits begin the day after the elimination period is completed. The elimination period for short-term
disability benefits shall be the later of:
A. 30 days after the date disability occurs due to an injury or sickness.
An employee absent for illness or disability should notify the Administrative Assistant as early as
possible on the first day of absence and shall keep that office informed as to probable length of absence.
Benefits are payable only for actual illness or non-work related disability preventing attendance at work and not
resulting from misconduct. In every instance of extended disability (over three days), the attendance of a
physician and evidence thereof may be requested.
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Bereavement Leave. An employee may be excused from work for up to three
(3) work days because of death in his/her immediate family, as outlined below,
and shall be paid his/her regular rate of pay for the scheduled work hours
missed. It is intended that this time off be used for the purpose of handling
necessary arrangements and attendance at the funeral.
For purposes of this article only, immediate family is defined to mean spouse,
parents, children, brothers, sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandfather,
grandmother, grandchildren or other household members.
8
One (1) work day may be granted to employees at the sole discretion of the
Board of Selectmen or their designee for attendance at funerals of persons not
covered under the above definition.
B. Leave Without Pay. A full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence
without pay by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the employee’s
supervisor, for a period necessary for the purpose of the leave, but not to
exceed sixty (60) calendar days. The employee is expected to return to work
upon the expiration of a granted leave or to have arranged an extension of a
leave, not to exceed thirty (30) days, granted at the discretion of the Board of
Selectmen. Continued absence without having arranged for an extension of
leave may be deemed a resignation from the service. Employees may choose to
continue insurance benefits for the duration of the leave by assuming the
employer contribution. Vacation, sick leave and other benefits will not accrue
during the leave.
JURY DUTY
The Town shall pay to an employee called for jury duty the difference between his/her regular pay and
juror’s pay provided the employee presents an official statement of jury pay received.
HAZARDOUS WEATHER
Unless otherwise notified prior to the normal office hours, Town offices will be open for work. Any
employee choosing to be absent at his/her own discretion may use vacation time accrued or be on leave without
pay. Each employee bears the responsibility of where he/she lives in relation to the office location.
When the weather is judged to be too hazardous for travel, employees will be notified not to come in to
work or the office will be officially closed at the direction of the Selectmen or their delegate so employees may
go home early with no loss of salary and/or leave time. Only employees scheduled to work on such days shall
be eligible for pay. (Employees scheduled for leave—vacation, sick or other—or on leave status are not
eligible). Employees leaving before this time may use accrued vacation leave or be on leave without pay.
9
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OR 1993 YOUR RIGHTS
FMLA requires covered employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave to
"eligible" employees for certain family and medical reasons. Employees are eligible if they have worked for a
covered employer for at least one year, and for 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months, and if there are at least
50 employees within 75 miles.
REASONS FOR TAKING LEAVE: Unpaid leave must be granted for any of the following reasons:
• To care for the employee's child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care;
• To care for the employee's spouse, son or daughter, or parent, who has a serious health
condition;
• For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the employee's
job;
At the employee's or employer's option, certain kinds of paid leave maybe substituted for unpaid leave.
ADVANCE NOTICE AND MEDICAL CERTIFICATION: The employee may be required to provide advance
leave notice and medical certification. Taking leave may be denied if requirements are not met.
• The employee ordinarily must provide 30 days advance notice when the leave is
"foreseeable" .
• An employer, may require medical certification to support a request for leave because of a
serious health condition, and may require second or third opinions (at the employer's
expense) and a fitness for duty report to return to work.
JOB BENEFITS AND PROTECTION:
• For the duration of FMLA leave, the employer must maintain the employee's health coverage
under any "group health plan".
• Upon return from FMLA leave, most employees must be restored to their original or
equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits, and other employment terms.
• The use of FMLA leave cannot result in the loss of any employment benefit that accrued
prior to the start of an employee's leave.
UNLAWFUL ACTS BY EMPLOYERS: FMLA makes it unlawful for any employee to:
• Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under FMLA;
• Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice made unlawful by FMLA or for
involvement in any proceeding under or relating to FMLA.
ENFORCEMENT:
• The U.S. Department of Labor is authorized to investigate and resolve complaints of
violations.
• An eligible employee may bring a civil action against an employer for violations.
FMLA does not affect any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination, or supersede any State or local law
or collective bargaining agreement which provides greater family or medical leave rights.
FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: Contract the nearest office of the Wage and Hour Division listed in most telephones directories under U.s. Government, Department of Labor.
Revised 1993
10
DISCIPLINE
The Board of Selectmen may demote, suspend or dismiss any employee when it has been determined to
be in the best interest of the Town. The employee’s supervisor and/or the Town’s Administrative Assistant
will specify in writing to the employee the cause of any disciplinary action and the recommended action prior to
the discipline taking effect.
Disciplinary action may call for any of Four Steps – verbal warning, written warning, suspension (with
or without pay) or termination. Each of the steps will be documented and are appealable. There may be
circumstances when, due to the severity of the infraction, one or more of the above steps are bypassed.
The Town recognizes that by using progressive discipline most employee problems can be corrected at
an early stage, thereby benefiting both the employee and the Town. However, the Town also recognizes that
certain problems will be severe enough to justify suspension or termination without going through the usual
progressive steps.
The employee has the right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen, if requested in writing within three (3)
working days. The Board of Selectmen will hold a hearing no later than their next scheduled meeting and will
return a decision no later then the next regularly scheduled meeting following the appeal hearing.
The Town’s Administrative Assistant may suspend with pay, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
working days, any employee whose continued presence at work may be a threat to persons or property, whose
presence might hinder the investigation of misconduct or be a detriment to the conduct of Town business. This
action must be confirmed by the Selectmen within two (2) business days and a report must be placed in
employee’s file thereupon.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Should an employee feel aggrieved concerning the effect, interpretation, meaning or application by the
Board of Selectmen of any provision of the Town’s rules, regulations, policies and/or terms of employment, the
following steps will be utilized to resolve the dispute.
A. The employee will orally discuss the dispute with his/her supervisor.
B. If an agreement is not reached, the employee may, within three (3) working days of the initial oral
discussion, file a written complaint with the Town’s Administrative Assistant who must return a
formal, written decision within three (3) working days.
C. The decision of the Town’s Administrative Assistant may be appealed, within three (3) working
days, to the Board of Selectmen who will hold an appeal hearing at their next regularly scheduled
meeting, and will return a formal decision no later than their next regularly scheduled meeting
following the appeal hearing.
EMPLOYMENT SEPARATION
Separation is any action taken which ends the working relationship between an employee and the Town
of Harpswell (Town). Resignation is a separation initiated by the employee. Termination is separation initiated
by the Town and may result from, but is not limited to, any of the following:
A. Reduction in work volume and/or funding.
B. Failure to meet required work standards.
C. Inability to maintain proper working relationships.
D. Conduct prejudicial to the interests of the Town.
11
A decision to terminate the employment of a staff member is made by the Selectmen after discussion
with an employee’s immediate supervisor and the employee. The final decision relative to termination is,
however, the sole responsibility of the Selectmen, and they will authorize termination letters.
Any employee whose performance is judged unsatisfactory will be notified in writing of the nature of
the deficiency. If improvement is not forthcoming within a four-week period, employment may be terminated
without additional notice. In other instances when it is necessary to terminate employment, not for cause, staff
members will be given one month’s notice contingent on the availability of funds. In lieu of notice, pay may be
given at the Town’s option. Similar notice is expected from all Town employees in cases of resignation, unless
specifically waived by the Selectmen. If employment is less than six months, only two weeks’ notice will be
required.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is the policy of Harpswell that all employees have the right to work in an environment free of
discrimination, which includes freedom from sexual harassment. Harpswell will not accept any form of sexual
harassment by supervisors, co-workers, customers or suppliers. This policy is intended to prohibit offensive
conduct, either physical or verbal, that threatens human dignity and employee morale, and which interferes with
a positive and productive work environment.
Sexual harassment is illegal and, as outlined in the EEOC Sexual Discrimination Guidelines and the
Maine Human Rights Act, includes:
? Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature when (i) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual’s employment, (ii) submission to or rejection of such by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, (iii) such conduct has the
purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
The following examples are common types of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment:
? slurs, jokes or degrading comments of a sexual nature
? unwelcome sexual advances
? suggestive or lewd remarks
? unwelcome hugging, touching or kissing
? requests for sexual favors
? repeated offensive sexual flirtation or propositions
? the display of sexually suggestive pictures or objects
? repeated unwelcome physical contact or touching such as patting, pinching or constant brushing
against another’s body
12
Consistent with above guidelines, this policy prohibits any overt or subtle pressure for sexual favors
including implying or threatening that an applicant’s or employee’s cooperation of a sexual nature (or lack
thereof) will have any effect on the person’s employment, job assignment, wage, promotion, or any other
condition of employment or future job opportunities. This policy also prohibits any conduct which would tend
to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
Managers and supervisors are responsible for monitoring conduct which can be construed to be
harassment and for initiating necessary action to eliminate such behavior. Any employee who feels that he or
she is the victim of sexual harassment should immediately report the matter to his or her supervisor or, if the
employee would prefer, to Selectmen.
Selectmen will immediately investigate any complaint of sexual harassment and, where warranted, take
disciplinary action against any employee engaging in sexual harassment. Depending on the circumstance, such
disciplinary action may include suspension or termination of employment.
Any questions regarding this policy should be addressed to the Selectmen. Any employee who believes
that he or she has been a victim of sexual harassment, or who has knowledge of that kind of behavior, is urged
to report such conduct immediately. Employees will be requested, but not required, to put their complaints in
writing. No employee will be retaliated against for complaining about sexual harassment.
MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
624-6050
IF YOU FEEL YOU HAVE BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST, CONTACT THE COMMISSION
OFFICE, STATE HOUSE STATION 31, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333
OR CONTACT TOWN ADMINISTRATOR OR SELECTMEN, 833-5771.
ANNUAL WRlTTEN NOTIFICATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY SEXUAL
HARASSMENT IS ILLEGAL UNDERSTATE AND FEDERAL LAW
It is illegal for any employee to sexually harass another employee and for any supervisory employee to
permit any act of sexual harassment in the workplace by anyone whether or not an employee.
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT UNDEILSTATE LAW
Unwelcome sexual advances requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature constitute sexual harassment when:
A. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's
employment;
B. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions
affecting such individual; or
C. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with a individual's work performance
or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
DESCRIPTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The following type of conduct is considered to be sexual harassment and is not permitted:
13
A. Physical assaults of a sexual nature such as:
(1) rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these assaults; and
(2) intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching,
patting, grabbing, brushing against another employee's body, or poking another employee's body.
B. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as:
(1) sexually-oriented gestures; no remarks jokes, or comments about a person's sexuality or sexual
experience directed at or made in the presence of any employee who indicates or has indicated in
any way that such conduct in his or her presence is unwelcome;
(2) preferential treatment or promise or preferential treatment to an employee for submitting to sexual
conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any employee to engage in sexual activity for
compensation or reward; and
(3) subjecting or threats of subjecting an employee to unwelcome sexual attention or conduct or
intentionally making performance of that employee's job more difficult because of that employee's
sex.
C. Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the company by employees, such as: '
(1) displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, promotional materials, reading materials, or
other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic, or bringing into
the work environment or possessing any such material to read, display or view at work.
A picture will be presumed to be sexually suggestive if it depicts a person of either sex who is not
fully clothed or in clothes that are not suited to or ordinarily accepted for the accomplishment of
routine work in and around the company and who is posed for the obvious purpose of displaying or
drawing attention to private portions of ms or her body.
(2) reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that are. in any way sexually
revealing sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic; and
(3) displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by sex in any area of the
workplace (other than restrooms and similar semiprivate lockers/changing rooms).
INTERNAL COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
Any employee who believes he or she has been the subject of sexual harassment should report the
incident or act immediately to his or her supervisor or to one of the following individuals: (list at least two
individuals, preferably one of each sex). The company will promptly investigate all complaints. Each employee
alleging sexual harassment will be requested to put the specifics in writing. All information will be held in
confidence and will be discussed only with those who have a need to know in order to either investigate or
resolve the complaint. Any employee who the company determines has engaged in sexual harassment will be
promptly disciplined. Disciplinary measures may consist of suspension or termination depending upon the
severity of the offense.
LEGAL RECOURSE THROUGH THE MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
The Commission can be contacted at State House Station 51, Augusta, Maine 04333, telephone: 624-
6050. Any employee who believes he or she has b n subjected to sexual harassment may call or write the Maine
Human Rights Commission to register a complaint. Any complaint must be filed with the Commission within
180 days of the act of harassment. Once a signed charge form has been received by the Commission, an
investigation will be conducted and a determination will be made by the Commission of whether or not there
are reasonable grounds to believe sexual harassment occurred.
14
If the Commission determines that sexual harassment did occur, it will attempt to resolve the situation
between you and your employer through informal means. If informal means of resolution are unsuccessful, the
Commission counsel may file a civil action on your behalf in the Superior Court, seeking appropriate relief.
MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS ACT PROTECTION AGAINST RETALIATION FOR COMPLAINING ABOUT
SEXUAL HARRASSMENT
Under the law, you may not be punished or penalized in any way for reporting, complaining about or filing a
claim corning sexual harassment, or for testifying in any proceeding brought by anyone else.
This notice is provided to all employee s in compliance with 26 M.R.S.A. §807(2). If you have any questions
regarding this notification, please ask your supervisor, Selectperson or __Town Office Manager
(Insert names of individuals listed under the complaint procedure). SEMOOI
POLICY ON WORKPLACE THREATS AND VIOLENCE
The safety and security of employees of the Town of Harpswell (hereinafter referred to as
"the Town"), and also the public who conducts business in the various municipal buildings, is of paramount
importance to the Town. Therefore, threats, threatening behavior, or acts of violence against employees,
visitors, guests, or other individuals by anyone on Town property will not be tolerated. Violations of this policy
will lead to disciplinary action which may include dismissal, arrest, and prosecution.
Any person who makes substantial threats, exhibits threatening behavior, or engages in violent acts on
Town property shall be removed from the premises as quickly as safety permits, and shall remain off Town
premises pending the outcome of an investigation. The Town will initiate an appropriate response. This
response may include, but is not limited to, suspension and/or termination of employment, and/or criminal
prosecution of the person or persons involved. .
No existing Town policy, practice. or procedure should be interpreted to prohibit decisions designed to
prevent a threat from being carried out, a violent act from occurring or a life threatening situation from
developing.
All Town personnel are responsible for notifying the Town representative designated below of any
threats which they have witnessed, received, or have been told that another person has witnessed or received.
Even without an actual threat, personnel should also report any behavior they have witnessed which they regard
as threatening or violent, when that behavior is job related or might be carried out on a Town-owned site, or is
connected to Town employment.
Employees are responsible for making this report regardless of the relationship between the individual
who initiated the threat or threatening behavior and the person or persons who were threatened or were the
focus of the threatening behavior. If the designated Town Representative is not available, personnel should
report the threat to their supervisor or any Selectman. .
All individuals who apply for or obtain a protective or restraining order which list any Town location as
being a protected area, must provide to the designated Town Representative a copy of the petition and
declarations used to seek the order, a copy of any temporary protective or restraining order which is granted,
and a copy of any protective or restraining order which is made permanent.
The. Town of Harpswell understands the sensitivity of the information and has developed confidentiality
procedures which recognize and respect the privacy of the reporting employee(s).
The Designated Town Representative is: Selectperson 833-5772 Effective: 1-16-97
15
THREAT INCIDENT REPORT
To be completed by designated Town Reprehensive (Personnel Director) or Department Head if Personnel Director is not
available.
Employee Name: ______________________________________________ Date of Incident: _______________
1. Name of threat-maker: _______________________________________________________________________
Address of threat-maker: ____________________________________________________________________
Telephone #- of threat-maker: ________________________________________________________________
2. Relationship to organization/recipient: _________________________________________________________
3. Name{s) of victim(s) or potential victim(s): __________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
4. Briefly describe the incident:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
5. When and where incident occurred:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
6. What happened immediately prior to the incident:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
7. Language of the threat (be specific):
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
16
Threat Incident Report Page Two
8. Was there any physical conduct that would substantiate an intention to follow through on the
threat: ___YES ___NO
If yes, please explain: __________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9. Please indicate how the threat-maker appeared, physically and emotionally: °
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
10. List others who were directly involved and any actions they took:
_________________________ ______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
_________________________ ______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
11. Indicate how the incident ended:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
12. List names and telephone numbers of witnesses:
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
13. What happened to threat-maker after the incident?:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
17
Threat Incident Report Page Three
14. What happened to other employees directly involved after the incident?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
15. Names of supervisory staff involved, if any, and how they responded:
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
16. What event(s) triggered the incident:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
17. Is there any history leading up to the incident?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
18. What steps have been taken to ensure that the threat will not be carried out?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
19. Indicate any suggestions you may have for preventing this type of incident in the future:
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
Name of person completing form: ________________________________________________
Signature of person completing form: ____________________________________________
Date: ___________________________________
****If needed, additional comments may be attached.****
18
POLICY ON THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES
Adopted August 18, 2005
The Town of Harpswell provides its Town Employees with a variety of information technology
resources (hereinafter, "Information Resources"). Those Information Resources include computers, computer
programs, printers, facsimile machines, voice mail, and on-line capabilities such as electronic mail
(hereinafter, "e-mail") and the Internet. The Town of Harpswell provides those Information Resources in order
to permit the delivery of better and more efficient services to the Town and its residents. Town Employees are
encouraged to use those Information Resources to their fullest extent in connection with the official duties and
responsibilities of their employment. This Policy applies to all full- and part-time Town Employees, special
Employees, contract Employees and allelected, appointed and volunteer Town officials (hereinafter "Town
Employees.") It is intended to prevent the illegal and/or improper use or abuse of the Town's Information
Resources.
NOTICE: USE OF ANY OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES BY ANY TOWN EMPLOYEE
SHALL CONSTITUTE ACCEPTANCE OF THE TERMS OF THIS POLICY AND OF ANY FUTURE
AMENDMENTS THERETO.
I. TOWN EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES
It is the responsibility of all Town Employees to read, understand, and comply with the terms of this
Policy. Town Employees are expected to exercise reasonable judgment in interpreting this Policy and in making
decisions about the use of the Town's Information Resources. Any Town Employee with questions
about the application or interpretation of this Policy should seek clarification from the Town Administrator.
II. ACCEPTABLE USES OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION
RESOURCES
A. Town Employees may use the Town's Information Resources for the following purposes only:
1. Uses that (a) are directly related to a Town Employee's official duties and responsibilities, or
(b) directly further a particular Town goal in providing its citizens with better and more efficient
services.
B. It is a violation of this Policy for a Town Employee to use the Town's Information Resources
in any manner that interferes with the Town Employee's work performance, as determined by the
Town Administrator.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prohibitions set forth in Section III below apply at all times,
to all uses of the Town's Information Resources.
III. PROHIBITED USES OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES
Town Employees are strictly prohibited from using the Town's Information Resources for any of the
following activities:
A. Sending, receiving, downloading, displaying, forwarding, printing, or otherwise disseminating
material that is profane, obscene, harassing, fraudulent, offensive, discriminatory, or defamatory;
B. Disseminating or storing destructive programs (viruses or self-replicating codes) or other
unauthorized material;
C. Sending mass mailings or chain letters, spending excessive amounts of time on the Internet,
printing multiple copies of documents, or otherwise creating unnecessary network traffic. For the
purposes of this section, "excessive amounts of time" is time that interferes with the Town
Employee's official duties and responsibilities;
19
D. Using or copying software in violation of a license agreement or copyright;
E. Copying or distributing computer programs or information that is copyrighted without the
consent of the owner;
F. Intercepting communications intended for other persons, except for the limited purposes set
forth in Section VII, below;
G. Gaining or attempting to gain unauthorized access to any computer or network;
H. Violating any international, federal, state or local law; and/or
I. Conducting a private business.
J. Sending, receiving, transmitting or reviewing electronic information for any personal use.
"Personal use" is any use other than that described in Paragraph II(A)(1) of this Policy.
K. Violating state law by using a state computer system to prepare materials with the intent to
expressly advocate the election or defeat of any candidate for federal office, a state constitutional
office, or any elective municipal, county or state office, including leadership positions in the
Maine House or Senate, or with the intent to solicit political contributions that are reportable
under the state’s campaign finance laws.
IV. CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRESERVATION OF TOWN
INFORMATION
A. E-mail messages dealing with official Town business are generally considered to be "public
records" that are subject to public inspection and copying under Maine's Freedom of Access
Law, 5 M.R.S.A. Section 402. Moreover, e-mail messages can be stored, copied, printed, or
forwarded by any intended or unintended recipient. Therefore, Town Employees cannot expect
their e-mail messages to remain either private or confidential relative to the public.
B. Town Employees who, as part of their official duties, have access to confidential or proprietary
information (such as personal data about identifiable individuals or commercial information
about business organizations) are strictly prohibited from acquiring access to and/or
disseminating such confidential information unless access to and/or dissemination of such
confidential information is both authorized and required as part of their job descriptions.
C. Information and/or documents contained in or attached to e-mail sentor forwarded to the Town
by any attorney representing the Town shall not be disclosed by any Town Employee without the
prior express approval by the attorney who sent or forwarded the e-mail document to the Town.
D. Because e-mail is the equivalent of traditional correspondence dealing with official Town
business, e-mail messages must be preserved in accordance with the public record retention
standards set forth in 5 M.R.S.A. Section 95-B and the Maine State Archive Rules For
Disposition Of Local Government Records.
20
V. LANGUAGE STANDARDS
E-mail, like other forms of written communication, reflects upon the Town of Harpswell. Town
Employees shall communicate by e-mail only in a professional manner, and with proper spelling and grammar.
Any and all forms of profanity are prohibited. The Town Administrator may, in his/her discretion, require that
work-related e-mail messages be approved as to form and content prior to dissemination.
VI. NETWORK SECURITY AND COMPUTER VIRUSES
Town Employees are expected to take precautions to prevent the infection of Town computers with
computer viruses. Computer programs and files that originate outside of the Town's computer network shall not
be downloaded to Town computers without prior approval from the Town Administrator.
VII. PRIVACY OF TOWN INFORMATION RESOURCES
All Information Resources are the property of the Town of Harpswell and must be used in conformance
with this Policy. Because the Town owns those Information Resources, Town Employees are advised that they
should have no expectation of privacy when using the Town's Information Resources, whether their use of the
Town's Information Resources takes place during or outside of working hours. The Town reserves the right to
monitor use of the Town's e-mail and Internet systems for legitimate municipal business purposes, including,
but not limited to, the need for supervision and/or proper operation of the workplace.
NOTICE: A TOWN EMPLOYEE'S USE OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES FOR ANY
PURPOSE, AT ANY TIME, SHALL CONSTITUTE CONSENT BY THE TOWN EMPLOYEE TO THE
MONITORING AND INSPECTION OF THAT EMPLOYEE'S USE OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION
SYSTEMS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, INSPECTION OF E-MAIL RECEIVED, SENT, OR
STORED BY THE TOWN EMPLOYEE.
Except as provided in the preceding paragraph, no Town Employee shall access or attempt to access the e-mail
of any other Town Employee without the other Town Employee's consent. Town Employees are advised that
the interception of e-mail may, in certain situations, violate federal and/or state law.
VIII. DISCIPLINARY ACTION
It is the responsibility of all Department Heads to ensure that all Town Employees under their
supervision, and all special Town Employee and contractor Town Employees who are associated with their
Department, receive a copy of this Policy. Failure to observe this Policy will subject the Town Employee or
special Town Employee to disciplinary action ranging from curtailment of use of the Town's Information
Resources up to and including termination of employment. Failure to observe this Policy may subject contractor
Town Employees to sanctions ranging from curtailment of the use of Information Resources up to andincluding
termination of services.
21
INSPECTION POLICY FOR FIELD WORKERS
1) Vehicle should be marked as Assessor with magnetic signs to identify that this is a Town vehicle and to
alleviate calls from neighbor to Town Office or Police Department.
2) Photo Identification is to be displayed visibly when approaching any residence for inspection.
3) At time of inspection, if no one is present, leave a door hanger or other notice to inform the resident
that you are from the Assessing Department and what you have done during the visit. Do your normal
exterior inspection/measurement. This may alleviate some concern among neighbors.
4) If a person is present at time of inspection, identify yourself, why you are there, and ask them if you may
inspect their home for assessment purposes. If they refuse you entry ask them if they would mind
answering questions about the home or if they would rather schedule an appointment. If still refused,
thank them and leave your card. (Document date and time of the refused visitation). As a follow-up send a
letter to the owner/occupant requesting permission to do an inspection and also explaining that if they refuse
to grant entry, estimates will have to be made and they run the risk of not being able to apply for an
abatement at a later date. If you are not allowed on the property, do the best you can to obtain visual
information. Review Code Enforcement Office files for any additional information about the property.
5) If no adults are present or if homeowner is uncomfortable with your visit, leave your card and ask that
they have parents call or have the person reschedule for an appointment.
6) If you feel threatened or uneasy with a visit, leave your card if possible and ask to reschedule. Write
down time of visit after leaving, anything that made you uneasy and ask that your supervisor or another
inspector accompany you for any rescheduled appointment. Do usual estimate as before.
7) Never discuss town business or estimate current values of appraisal. Inform them that you are there only
in the role of Assessor’s Assistant and that they will later receive an estimate of valuation for any changes
noted as a result of your visit.
8) If you arrive and the person scheduling the appointment or an appropriate representative is not present,
wait 15 minutes and leave a door hanger or other notice. If two appointments are missed, a visual estimate
will be done and notice sent to owner.
________________________________
Agreed & Understood Date
Adopted by Board of Selectmen on April 15, 2004
22
POLICY REGARDING SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
1. Purpose.
1.1 Provision of information. To insure the timely and proper flow of information to Harpswell residents
concerning economic development proposals that involve the use of Town owned property and/or potential
changes to the Town’s Comprehensive Plan or ordinances.
1.2 Exclusions. This policy does not apply to proposals to use private land in conformity with the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan or ordinances.
2. General Procedures.
The Select Board shall follow the procedures contained in this policy. All procedures must be in conformity
with Maine laws and rules and with ordinances of the Town of Harpswell. No procedure shall be
interpreted in such a manner as to limit the lawful authority of the Select Board or any Town board,
committee, or commission. Failure to comply with these procedures shall not invalidate any development
proposal, otherwise lawful, as long as the Select Board has acted in good faith to keep the public informed
pursuant to this policy.
3. Definitions.
3.1 Entity. A person or organization making a formal proposal or an informal expression of interest.
3.2 Formal proposal. A document that provides a general description that will inform the Town
about the size, scope, and impact of a project, such as the size and location of buildings, number of
employees, parking, impervious surface coverage, and traffic patterns.
3.3 Informal expression of interest. Any document, or communication, that does not conform to the
description of a “formal proposal” in the opinion of the Select Board.
3.4 Project. For the purposes of this policy, “project” means any formal proposal from an entity, forprofit
or nonprofit, for economic development on Town owned property, or that would require a change
in a town ordinance, or both.
3.5 Town official. For the purposes of this policy, “Town official” means any person employed by the
Town or serving on any if its boards, committees, or commissions.
4. Response to a formal proposal.
4.1 When received by the Select Board or a Board member. Upon receipt of any formal proposal,
the Select Board shall, at its next meeting, disclose the receipt of the proposal, the identity of the person
or entity making the proposal, and all relevant information that is consistent with any lawful request for
confidentiality that may have been made by the person or entity and was accepted by the Select Board.
A proposal developed by the Select Board or any department of Town government will be handled in
the same manner.
4.2. When received by a Town official. Upon receipt by any Town official of any formal proposal, the
recipient shall promptly report that proposal to the Town Administrator who will inform the Select
Board so that it may take action pursuant to paragraph 4.1 and 4.3. Upon receipt of any formal proposal
by the Town Administrator, he or she shall inform the Select Board and it shall take action pursuant to
paragraphs 4.1 and 4.3.
4.3 Referral for advice. Before taking any action on a formal proposal, the Select Board shall seek the
advice of the bodies whose mandate from the Select Board covers the subject matter of the proposal,
23
provided taking such action is consistent with any lawful request for confidentiality that may have been
made by the entity and accepted by the Select Board. These bodies include but are not limited to the
Planning Board, Town Committees, and the Conservation Commission.
4.4 Action by the Select Board. The Board shall not be bound by any advice received or any lack of
action by a body to which it has referred a formal proposal.. Before taking any action to place a formal
proposal before a Town Meeting, the Board shall report any advice it has received to the public in a
public meeting or hearing, and/or by other means designed to inform Harpswell residents.
5. Response to an informal expressions of interest.
5.1. Oral informal expressions of interest. Upon receipt by a Town official of an oral informal
expression of interest, that official shall a) advise the person making the expression of interest to put that
expression in writing either as a written expression of interest or as a formal proposal, b) report the oral
expression of interest to the Town Administrator and c) not conduct negotiations regarding the matter
unless authorized by the Select Board.
5.2. Written informal expressions of interest. Upon receipt by a Town official of a written informal
expression of interest, that official shall refer it to the Town Administrator who shall inform the Select
Board so that it may take action pursuant to paragraph 4.1. The Board may, at its discretion, refer the
written expression of interest to other Town bodies for advice.
5.3. Provision of information regarding Town ordinances and policies. Nothing in this policy
should be construed to prevent Town officials from advising any person about the provisions of Town
ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, or policies that may be relevant to an informal expression of
interest.
6. Report of potential changes.
If, in the opinion of the Select Board or any Town body from which it has sought advice, a proposed project
will require a change in the Comprehensive Plan or Town ordinances, the Select Board will report at its
meetings, and at any public hearing that may be held regarding the proposal, such opinion or information
before taking any action to place the matter before the Town Meeting.
7. Select Board may conduct hearings.
Nothing in this policy limits the right of the Select Board to conduct public hearings at their discretion or as
provided by law.
8. Select Board rights and duties.
8.1. Negotiations. Nothing in this policy limits the right of the Select Board to conduct any lawful
negotiations with an entity proposing economic development in the Town, including the lawful use of
Executive Sessions when deemed appropriate by the Select Board, so long as such negotiations are in
conformity with the provisions of the Maine Freedom of Access Law.
8.2 Reports. The Select Board will attempt, to the fullest extent feasible, to provide at their meetings,
and at any public hearing that may be held, complete and timely information on the progress and content
of negotiations.
24
9. Proceedings by an advisory body.
9.1. Notice of confidentiality option. Before a proceeding held by the bodies mentioned in 4.3 above
may begin, the parties making formal proposals or expressing interest shall, at their first appearance,
sign a memorandum of understanding noting that they are aware that the proceeding and report will be
public and that they have a right to ask the Select Board to consider a request for confidentiality, which
may be granted in the Select Board’s discretion. The memorandum must be witnessed by the body’s
member presiding at the proceeding.
9.2. Purposes of the proceedings. The purposes of the proceeding are to enable the advisory body to:
1) understand the nature of potential uses of the land, 2) understand potential changes in ordinances and
the Comprehensive Plan, 3) advise the parties of relevant Town plans and current or anticipated
standards for development, and 4) summarize the parties’ development interest for the information of
the Select Board. The body may give informal advice about how the parties might improve their
proposal or expression of interest.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 29, 2009
FREEDOM OF ACCESS PROCEDURES
Amended April 17, 1997
Amended March 30, 1999
Amended October 14, 2004
Amended April 28, 2005
Amended November 7, 2013 – effective February 1, 2014
1 POLICY
Public proceedings and public records exist to aid in the conduct of the people’s business. Actions of
Town Government shall be conducted openly and records of Town Government shall be open to public
inspection. These procedures should be interpreted liberally to promote the underlying purpose stated
above. These procedures are intended to implement Title 1, Chapter 13, sub-chapter 1 of Maine Law.
2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 Public proceeding means the transaction of any functions affecting the people of Harpswell by:
2.1.1 Board of Selectmen, except that the exercise of purely administrative functions by the
Board of Selectmen or any one Selectman shall not be deemed to be a public proceeding,
2.1.2 Any board or commission of the Town, and
2.1.3 Committees and other bodies entirely advisory in nature to the extent required herein and
unless exempted by the Board of Selectmen.
2.2 Public records means any written, printed or graphic matter or any mechanical or electronic data
compilation from which information can be obtained, directly or after translation into a form
susceptible of visual or oral comprehension, that is in the possession or custody of an agency or
public official of the Town, and has been received or prepared for use in connection with the
transaction of public or governmental business, except as provided in 1 M.R.S.A § 402 sub-§3 A,
B, D, H, I, and J:
2.2.1 Records which are confidential by law,
25
2.2.2 Records within the scope of legal privilege against discovery or use as evidence,
2.2.3 Materials prepared for and used specifically and exclusively in preparation for
negotiations,
2.2.4 Materials related to the adoption of positions on legislation or related to insurance or
insurance-like protection or services,
2.2.5 Medical records and reports of ambulance and rescue units,
2.2.6 Juvenile records,
2.2.7 Working papers of bodies included under 2.1.3 unless distributed by a member or
distributed in a public meeting, and
2.2.8 Records used in proceedings authorized to be conducted in executive session.
3 MEETINGS
3.1 Open to the public
Except as provided by statue and by Section 4, all public proceedings shall be open to the public, any
person shall be permitted to attend any record or minutes of such proceedings shall be make promptly and shall
be open to public inspections.
3.2 Recording or live broadcasts authorized
All persons are entitled to make written taped or filmed records of public proceedings or to live
broadcast them, provided that the writing, taping, filming or broadcasting does not interfere with the orderly
conduct of proceedings. The body holding the public proceeding may make reasonable rules governing these
activities, so long as these rules do not prevent the actions authorized. These rules may require that a person
making a recording make a reasonable effort to record all participation in the public proceeding.
4 EXECUTIVE SESSION
Those bodies cited in 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 may hold executive sessions subject to the following conditions:
4.1 These sessions shall not be used to defeat the purposes of these procedures
4.2 No official action may be finally approved at executive session.
4.3 Executive sessions may be called only by a public, recorded vote of 60 per cent of the members
present and voting.
4.4 A motion to go into executive session shall indicate the precise nature of the business of the
executive session.
4.5 No other matters may be considered in that particular executive session.
4.6 Deliberations may be conducted in executive sessions pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A §405 sub-§ 6.as may
be amended from time to time:
26
5 PUBLIC NOTICE
5.1 Notice required. Public notice shall be given of all public proceedings.
5.2 Posting of notices. Notice of public proceedings will be given no less than 3 days before the
meeting except that standing notice may be given of meetings occurring at regular times and places.
Notices of meetings of the Board of Selectmen must be posted at no less than two places designated
by the Board. Notices of meetings of other bodies must be posted in the Town building or as
otherwise provided. All notices must be provided to the local media.
5.3 Agendas. Each public proceeding will have an agenda which will be adopted at the start of the
proceeding. The agenda of meetings of the Board of Selectmen will be posted 24 hours before the
meeting
5.4 Emergency meetings. When emergency meetings are held, the local news media shall be notified in
advance by telephone in order to allow their representation at the meeting.
6 DECISIONS
Conditional approval or denial of an application, license, certificate of other type of permit and dismissal or
refusal to renew an employment contract shall be the subject of a written record as provided in 1 M.R.S.A
§407.
7 PUBLIC RECORDS
7.1 Open for public inspection. Except as otherwise provided by law, every person shall have the right
to inspect and copy any public record during regular business hours of the Town, including
electronic data, provided that the cost of copying any public record to comply with this section shall
be paid by the person requesting the copy. Requests for copies shall not be permitted to interfere
with the regular activities of the Town office; provided, however, that this provision may not be
used to defeat the purposes of this open access procedure. Unless a request is denied, any request
not requiring research, as defined herein, will be met within 5 working days. Requests may be
made orally or in writing.
7.2 Fees
7.2.1 Paper copies
7.2.1.1 Made by Town. 8 ½” x 11”@ $0.25 per copy. $0.30 per double-sided copy.
11” x 17” @ $.50 per copy. $0.55 per double-sided copy. 8 ½” x 14” @ .35 per
copy.
7.2.1.2 Mailing. Actual cost of postage unless self-addressed, stamped envelope is
provided.
7.2.1.3 Each faxed page received, proof of insurance excluded: $0.50.
7.2.1.4 Deed copies. $1.55 per copy.
7.2.1.5 Ordinances. The first copy of an ordinance, each year, is free; thereafter, the charges
are: $2.00 up to 10 pages; $5.00 above 10 pages.
7.2.1.6 Comprehensive Plan. No charge for single copy. $10.00
Tax Map: 8 ½” x 11” @ .25/copy Complete set: $20.00
11” x 17” @ .50/copy Complete set: $40.00
27
GIS Maps: 8 ½” x 11” $3.00/copy
11” x 17” $5.00/copy
24” x 36” $15.00/copy
7.2.1.7 Commitment book. $150.00 (14 7/8” x 11”, continuous form paper) $50.00 (8 ½” x
11”, single sheet on laser printer)
7.2.1.8 Partial Printout of the valuation book by map; $25.00 for 8 ½” x 11”. $50.00 for 14
7/8” x 11”
7.2.1.9 Voting list
Complete alphabetical list for all 3 districts: $25.00
Complete list one district 10.00
Complete list Democrats only 10.00
Complete list Republicans only 10.00
Complete list Unenrolled Voters only 10.00
Research. If the Town must research public records according to selection criteria set by the
requester (other than for records of a specific type): $10.00 per hour after the first hour;
provided, however, that the requester may conduct such research without charge and that
there shall be no research charge for standing orders other than for research required at the
time the standing order is initiated. If the total cost will be more than $20, the Town must
inform the requester before the proceeding. If the total cost will be more than $100, or if the
requester has previously failed to pay costs in a timely manner, the Town may require
payment in advance. The Town may waive part or all of the costs if the requester is indigent.
7.2.1.10 Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the Town to distribute copies free of
charge in connection with the conduct of a public proceeding.
7.2.2 Electronic copies
7.2.2.1 Media provided by Town. $5.00 per 3.5 inch disk or CD.
7.2.2.2 When printed copies are made from electronic form: (See copy charges). Requests for
such copies shall not be permitted to interfere with the regular activities of the Town office;
provided, however, that this provision may not be used to defeat the purposes of this open
access procedure.
7.3 Payment may be required in advance, subject to prompt refund of any excess amount received. If
advance payment is inadequate, final payment shall be made before delivery of copies.
7.4 Denial of access shall be made in writing, within 5 working days of the date of the request for
inspection by any person.
7.5 Destruction, removal, mutilation, theft of public documents may be referred by the Selectmen to law
enforcement authorities in accordance with 1 M.R.S.A §452.
8 APPEALS
Appeals of denial of public access or of actions taken in executive sessions are governed by 1 M.R.S.A
§409.
28
POLICY REGRDING PLACEMENT OF ITEMS ON A SECRET BALLOT
Purpose.
1.1 Preservation of the Town Meeting. To insure the maximum in-person participation of Harpswell
voters at the annual town meeting, an important aspect of the town’s historical tradition.
1.2 Allow Maximum Voter Participation. To present opportunities for all voters to cast their ballots for
certain items that are appropriate for placement on a secret ballot, including items that should be decided
before the next annual town meeting.
Context.
The town meeting form of government allows voters to debate and decide policies that will guide the
community for the following year. However, certain factors inhibit participation by some voters:
confinement to home, temporary absence from town, employment obligations, child care responsibilities,
and sometimes the length of the meetings – a special hardship on older and infirm voters. The Select Board
wishes to encourage in-person participation at the annual town meeting by insuring that its length does not
discourage that participation. It also wishes to provide voting opportunities for those who cannot attend the
annual town meeting.
Limitations
Nothing in this policy restricts the Select Board, in its discretion, from making any decision regarding the
placement, or non-placement, of any item on a secret ballot. This policy is intended as guidance to the
Select Board as it makes those decisions. It does not apply to decisions that the Select Board has the
authority to make on its own.
Public Information and Debate
Should the Select Board decide to place an item on a secret ballot, it will notify the voters, maximize the
opportunity for discussion and dissemination of information, and shall hold a public hearing, in accordance
with State law, at which 1) the item will be explained by the Board and the committee recommending the
item, and 2) voters will have the opportunity to express support or opposition to the item. The hearing
should be recorded and broadcast on Harpswell Community Television to further inform the voters.
Sufficient advance public notice should be given, if possible, to allow voter comment about the item in local
newspapers.
Considerations
The following considerations should guide the Select Board in the placement of items on a secret ballot.
An affirmative answer supports the use of a secret ballot. While a particular item may not involve each
consideration, the overall findings should provide the basis for a Board decision.
Has the item or a substantially similar item, been thoroughly debated at the annual town
meeting within the past three years?
Has the item been approved or defeated by a substantial margin in the most recent annual town
meeting?
Does the item involve the expenditure of a substantial amount of Town funds?
Does the item involve a significant change to an existing policy or a new policy that will affect
the future of the Town?
Does the item involve substantive changes in Town government?
29
Does the item involve substantive changes affecting the Town’s natural resources, such as ground water
or waterfront development?
Does the item involve bonding obligations?
For items involving the budget: Can budget limitations be appropriately dealt with at Town Meeting if
the vote on the item is not determined until after the close of floor actions at Town Meeting?
If, in the best interests of the Town, the item requires a decision before the next Annual Town Meeting,
the considerations listed above should be part of the consideration as to whether, at a special Town
Meeting, to hold a referendum or act on the floor.
Adopted by the Select Board on November 19, 2009
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT SELECTMEN’S MEETINGS
Meetings of the Harpswell Board of Selectmen are for the purpose of conducting Town affairs and are
subject to the Maine Freedom of Access Act and Harpswell’s policy of freedom of access.
Subject to the adoption of the Agenda, each Selectmen’s Meeting may include an opportunity for
general public comment at the beginning and at the end of the meeting. Public comment is also allowed prior to
final action on individual agenda items. A member of the public may request, through a Board member, that an
item be placed on a subsequent Selectmen’s Meeting agenda. The Chair may limit or structure public
comments as needed to ensure the orderly conduct of the meeting. The Board asks all to voice their comments
or concerns in a respectful manner.
Please note: It is neither the purpose nor the intent of public comment to provide an arena for ongoing
debate of topics not on the agenda, unless and until such time as a topic presents a question requiring action or a
decision by the Board of Selectmen, at which time the issue will be placed upon the agenda, and public
comment will be allowed as set forth above.
? To be eligible to address the Board, an individual must reside or own property in the Town, be an
employee of the Town, or be permitted by the Board to speak.
? Speakers must introduce themselves, giving their first and last names.
? The public comment period is intended to be used for brief comments, questions and/or
observations, not to exceed five minutes in length. Each speaker will be allowed one opportunity
to speak during the general comment period at the beginning of the meeting and one opportunity at
the end of the meeting, and one opportunity to speak on each item on the agenda. Unduly
repetitive comments may be excluded.
? If a large number of people wish to address the Board, the Chair may ask that they sign in.
Representatives of groups should be appointed by the group, or may be appointed by the Chair to
speak on behalf of the group if the group is unable to name one.
? Speakers are not permitted to share gossip, make defamatory comments or use abusive or vulgar
language. The Chair has the authority to stop any presentation that violates the Board’s policy or
the rights of others.
? Speakers should address all comments and questions to the Chair.
30
? Except in emergencies or for routine procedural matters, the Board will not decide questions raised
during public comment until it has fully examined the matter and there has been an opportunity for
research of the issue.
? Members of the Board and the Town Administrator may query those addressing the Board, but are
expected to refrain from arguing or debating with the speakers.
Amended November 10, 2004
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 31, 2006
Amended by the Board of Selectmen January 28, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen April 22, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 26, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen December 2, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen October 11, 2011
ROADS AND ROAD COMMISSIONER
Town of Harpswell
Policies and Procedures
Effective May 20, 2002
Amended July 31, 2003
This document outlines the duties and responsibilities of the Road Commissioner and the Board of Selectmen in
the planning, construction, maintenance and repair of public roads and related facilities within the Town of
Harpswell.
1. The Road Commissioner shall have primary responsibility for scheduling and supervising work on all Townowned
roads and bridges and those maintained under agreement with the State of Maine or others, operating
under the direction and authority of Selectmen (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §2701).
2. Appropriations for all such work shall be approved at annual or special Town Meeting. Commitment and
disbursement of funds shall follow the same public-meeting authorization, purchase order, bid and contract,
award, warrant approval and payment procedures as those governing other Town expenditures, except as
otherwise provided in these Policies and Procedures.
3. The Road Commissioner shall plan, schedule, and budget all repair, maintenance and construction projects
and present a detailed written plan for such to Selectmen for appropriate action. Such plan shall include a
detailed outline of proposed work, a work timetable including proposed starting and completion dates, a
breakdown of estimated costs including a proposed funding schedule and the recommended bid, contract
and award procedures involved with all such projects.
4. Work on all town road projects including, without exception, related professional services or direct
purchases of materials, labor, or equipment shall be acquired by purchase order or open, solicitation of bids
for such work, depending upon the size, scope and cost of work involved. The Road Commissioner will
arrange for complete specifications to be drawn for all work to be bid and submit them to the Selectmen for
prior review and approval before soliciting prices or bids from contractors or vendors. Selectmen meeting in
publicly noticed session shall have the sole authority to approve and commit for such projects, including
methods of contracting and payment.
5. The Road Commissioner will be responsible for maintaining proper and accurate accounts and files showing
all monies approved, committed and paid, to whom and for what purpose (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §2703). All
31
purchases of work, services, materials, labor and equipment of $2,500 or less as outlined in the Town of
Harpswell's purchase policy shall be prior approved and committed through use of the Town's purchase
order system. The Road Commissioner will submit monthly or more frequent requests for issuance of
purchase orders to Selectmen for prior approval. A majority of Selectmen must sign each purchase order for
it to be valid.
For purchases in the "Maintenance of Town Roads" account, when he or she deems it necessary, the Road
Commissioner may obtain a purchase order number from the Town Administrator and make purchases,
provided that (1) such purchases may not exceed $2,500 when the
balance in the account exceeds $20,000 and may not exceed $1,000 when the balance in the account is
$20,000 or less, (2) the Town Administrator must present the Selectmen with each such purchase order
immediately after the number it is issued, and (3) such purchase order shall be valid without the prior
signature of a majority of the Selectmen. Purchases or commitments for work in excess of $2,500 shall be
acquired or obtained through a public bid process unless other arrangements are approved in a publicly -
noticed meeting of Selectmen in which the proposed purchase or commitment at issue appears as an agenda
item.
6. The Road Commissioner will review and approve all bills and statements submitted by contractors or
vendors and specify to which prior-authorized project or account such bills or statements shall be charged
before submission of them to Selectmen for their review and warrant action.
7. The Road Commissioner will settle all road accounts in detail annually on or before the 20th day of
February-. A report on all such accounts shall be contained in the annual town report (M.R.S.A. Title 23
§2703). The Road Commissioner will participate in the budget process for determining appropriations and
capital construction projects for the coming year.
8. The Road Commissioner will inspect all town roads at least once each year and present a written report to
Selectmen on the status and condition of such, including suggested repairs. This report may also be
published in the Road Commissioner's Report contained in the Annual Town Report.
9. The Road Commissioner will maintain a complete and detailed monthly maintenance log on any Townowned
vehicles and equipment used for road repair or maintenance and will submit these to the Selectmen
for monthly review.
10. In case of sudden damage to a town road or bridge requiring emergency action the Road Commissioner
shall take necessary- steps to immediately repair it. In certain emergency cases, prior approval by Selectmen
may be difficult or impossible to obtain within the time constraints of the emergency. However, the Road
Commissioner shall file a detailed written report on action taken and funds committed the next business day
after the emergency repair is undertaken. For this purpose, an emergency is defined as any incident, which
could immediately endanger life or property. (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §3201).
11. The Road Commissioner shall not directly or indirectly commit to or employ any person(s) on a full or parttime
basis as a town employee without the prior written consent of Selectmen.
12. When any town way is blocked by snow or is otherwise impassible the Road Commissioner will remove the
snow or obstacles in a manner directed by the Selectmen ((M.R.S.A. Title 23 §320l). The Road
Commissioner will arrange for removal of brush and loose obstruction from town ways that impede travel.
32
13. If Selectmen determine that a condition exists which creates a hazard and determines a way unsafe for
motor-vehicle traffic, they will give the Road Commissioner written notice of the condition and order the
Road Commissioner to remedy the situation within 24 hours. If the Road Commissioner fails to act as
directed, Selectmen may take steps necessary to eliminate the safety hazard.
14. Only Town-owned vehicles and equipment may be stored or serviced in building owned or maintained by
the Town unless otherwise approved in writing by Selectmen.
15. The use of any Town-owned vehicle or equipment for maintenance or repair of statutory private ways
(public easements) is prohibited. The use of Town-owned or contracted equipment for private purposes is
prohibited.
16. The Town shall provide the Road Commissioner with administrative and technical assistance and office
resources necessary for the proper discharge of his duties and responsibilities as set forth herein, including
without exception professional engineering services, with payment for all such services to come out of road
operating and capital appropriations.
These policies and procedures shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one-year from date hereof,
subject to such interim amendments or changes deemed necessary or appropriate. Thereafter, they shall be
reviewed and continued as written or revised, amended and approved for a further period to be defined.
POLICY TO ACCEPT ADVANCE PAYMENT OF MOORING REGISTRATION FEES
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on September 20, 2007
The Town shall accept non-refundable advance payment of mooring registration fees for the following
calendar year as a convenience to its mooring holders. The Town’s acceptance of advance payment does not
eliminate the mooring holder’s obligation to pay any registration fee increase adopted subsequent to the
payment but relating to the following calendar year. In the event of a registration fee increase, the mooring
holder is responsible for payment of the additional amount by May 1 or otherwise is subject to a penalty
payment.
POLICY TO ACCEPT ADVANCE PAYMENT OF SHELLFISH LICENSE FEES
The Town shall accept advance payment in installments of not less than $10.00 for shellfish license fees
as a convenience to its current license holders. The Town’s acceptance of advance payment does not eliminate
the shellfish license holder’s obligation to pay any fee increase subsequently adopted. In the event of a license
fee increase, the shellfish license holder is responsible for payment of the full license fee, including the increase,
by the due date as established by ordinance. Pre-payment of the license fee in part or in whole does not
automatically secure a renewal shellfish license. Any license holder who has pre-paid and is later deemed
ineligible for a renewal shellfish license shall be reimbursed in full the amount of prepayment.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 6, 2010
33
BOARD OF APPEALS FEE WAIVER
Given that the Board of Selectmen has authority to determine the fee schedule for the Board of Appeals, the
Board shall waive fees associated with any Board of Appeals filing involving a Town Official or Town Entity in
his/her/its performance of Town business.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen September 3, 2015
TOWN OF HARPSWELL BUDGETARY PRACTICES AND POLICIES
The mission of the budget process is to help decision makers make informed choices about the provision of
services and capital assets and to promote stakeholder participation in the process.
Policy regarding non-property tax revenue budgeting
It is the policy of the Town of Harpswell to use non-property tax revenues, excluding those with dedicated
purposes, to offset the impact of the municipal budget on the property taxpayer. As part of the budget process,
estimates of non-property tax revenues for the budget year must be made. These estimates should be made in a
conservative manner and, generally speaking, not exceed the current or prior year actual revenues without firm
support, e.g. increases set forth in contracts, known changes in fee schedules or number of users.
Policy regarding use of Unassigned General Fund Balance
It is the intent of the Town to maintain a minimum unassigned General Fund balance of one month, 8.33%, of
operating expenditures, defined as total prior year’s general fund expenditures less any expenditure made from
reserve funds. The targeted balance for fiscal year-end is 2 months or 16.66%, and the maximum balance is not
to exceed 25% of the operating expenditures, so long as cash flow needs are met. Any amount in excess of the
targeted balance may be used to reduce the tax commitment or be appropriated as assigned or committed fund
balance, or it may remain as unassigned Fund Balance. The Town’s Board of Selectmen may recommend
transfers to the Town that would reduce the balance below 25%, but no transfers shall be made that would
reduce the balance to less than 8.33%. In the event that the unassigned fund balance drops below the minimum
level, the Town will develop a plan, implemented through the annual budgetary process, to bring the balance to
the targeted level over a period of no more than three (3) years.
Policy regarding carryover funds
In general, it is the policy of the Town of Harpswell to not carryover to a future year funds appropriated in the
current year for operating expenditures. Capital reserves and reserve accounts for other special purposes, e.g.
heating assistance, property tax assistance may be carried over as long as their intended use continues to be a
need of the Town. Unexpended funds appropriated for purposes that are no longer relevant must lapse to the
General Fund. Unexpended funds in amounts equal to or less than $2,500 should lapse unless there is a specific
plan for the expenditure in the next year.
Policy regarding Capital Assets and Capital Reserves
It is the policy of the Town to inventory its capital assets (those whose cost basis exceeds $2,500) and to
regularly assess the need for and the condition of these assets. The assessment should include an evaluation of
issues, challenges, and opportunities affecting the provision of capital assets in the future, such as community
needs and priorities; the impact of deferred maintenance; funding issues; changes in technology; economic,
demographic, or other factors that may affect demand; and legal or regulatory changes. This review may be
undertaken in conjunction with an evaluation of the program or service utilizing the particular assets. The
review is to be conducted by administrative staff with the input of the Recycling Center Manager, the Caretaker,
the Harbormaster, and representatives of HCBC and the Fire Departments, among others. The assessment of
capital asset condition should consider the impact of any deferred maintenance and needed improvements.
34
Identification or development of measurement standards for the condition of capital assets (including what is
regarded as acceptable) are a valuable output of this practice.
The Town has a number of capital reserves for the acquisition or rehabilitation of long-term assets, including a
capital road reserve and an emergency vehicle reserve which are their own governmental funds. Upon
completion of the review contemplated in the first paragraph of this policy, an assessment of the adequacy of
the balances of these reserve accounts will be completed and recommendations made as to potential adjustments
thereto.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES REGARDING CASH RECEIPTS
Cash is received by a number of individuals at the Town offices, as well as at both the Transfer Station and at
the Recycling Center. The individuals at the Town office are the Receptionist and substitute Receptionists, the
Town clerk and her deputy, the Tax Collector and her deputy and, on a limited basis, the Codes Enforcement
Assistant. The Receptionist/ Office Assistant prepares the deposit for the Recycling Center and Transfer Station.
The Transfer Station Attendant and the Recycling Center Manager also handle cash receipts.
These procedures apply to all persons who prepare deposits.
Electronic Deposit of Cash Receipts
Effective August 10, 2012, all checks received by the Town will be deposited electronically by the receipting
office, either in one or multiple batches. Each batch should be accompanied by a print-out of the checks
processed. A second print-out should be retained with the day’s work. The day’s work will be reconciled at the
end of the day to the sum of all check batches and cash. The day’s work total is equal to the contents of the
cash drawer less the amount of the change fund issued to that person.
Once the amount of the day’s work is determined, it must be reconciled to the totals on the computer generated
receipts journals, except for the receipts of the Transfer Station and Universal Waste fees which are reconciled
to the manual pre-numbered receipts. Each cash handler reconciles their own day’s work.
Any difference between the total amount of the check batches and cash and the recorded amount should be
investigated. Any unresolved difference must be reported to the bookkeeper promptly.
At no time should a shortage be made up with employee funds and no overage should be set aside for future
resolution. If an overage exists, it must be included in the day’s deposit.
Upon completion of the day’s reconciliation, cash will be placed in an envelope, with the date, cash amount,
total receipts for the day and office marked on the envelope. A deposit slip, dated the day the office received
the cash, should be completed and placed inside the cash envelope. The cash envelopes and all checks with the
batch reports should be given to the Deputy Town Administrator (“DTA”) or, in her absence, to the Town
Treasurer for safe-keeping. If neither is available, the cash envelope and checks should be placed in the vault
overnight. The cash in the envelopes will be verified by the DTA or Treasurer in the presence of the person who
reconciled the day’s work and a written receipt provided.
The Deputy Town Administrator or Treasurer will assure that the cash envelopes and checks are secured.
Checks will be destroyed on a regular basis.
When the amount of cash on hand is relatively significant (as determined by the Treasurer), all cash previously
reconciled will be transported to the Bank. At this time, the person going to the bank will also see if any of the
offices need small bills.
35
These procedures apply to all persons who handle cash receipts.
The issuance of Treasurer’s or Tax Receipts is a key control. Treasurer’s or Tax Receipts should be generated
at the time of the transaction. Transactions should not be set aside for batch recording. The only current
exception to the immediate generation of a Treasurer’s Receipt is in the Town Clerk’s office where 2 people
could be receiving monies, but only one can access the computer. In these instances, the second receipt should
be entered into the computer as soon as the computer becomes available.
At the Transfer Station, the use of pre-numbered weigh slips is the key control. These slips should be used in
sequential order and a copy of the day’s slips should be submitted to the Office Assistant with the day’s deposit.
Sales of reclaim are documented on these same weigh slips but submitted on a separate day sheet. Universal
Waste receipts received at the Transfer Station are documented on a separately sequenced receipt book. In
entering the cash receipt, the cash handler must use their own initials. All checks should be immediately
endorsed using the cash handler’s stamp.
No personal checks are to be cashed. No checks are to be accepted in amounts greater than that of the
transaction.
No monies should be taken from the change fund for any purpose other than to make change, except for the
funds of the Receptionist which are used to reimburse petty cash vouchers
Any exception to the above procedures must be authorized in writing by the Town Administrator, the Deputy
Administrator or the Treasurer.
Amended by the Town Treasurer and established as policy by the Town Administrator on September 14, 2006.
Amendments adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012
CELL PHONE USE ALLOWANCE POLICY
The Town has certain employees who perform work in the field and are not near an office phone on a regular
basis. The Town will provide an allowance to such employees for use of his/her cell phone for Town business
based on the type of cell phone: $50 allowance per month for a smart phone on a taxable basis and a nominal
allowance per month of $25 for a regular cell phone. The employee agrees: 1) that his/her cell phone number
will be made available to the public; and 2) to comply with any possible freedom of access request that may
include his/her cell phone records, text messages, photos and emails. Pursuant to this policy, the following
employees are authorized to seek an allowance for using personal phones for Town business:
• Road Commissioner
• Animal Control Officer and Alternate Animal Control Officer
• Code Enforcement Officer and Alternate Code Enforcement Officer
• Recycling Center/Transfer Station Manager
• Recreation Director
• Harbormaster
• Fire Administrator
• Other positions as determined by the Town Administrator
Approved by the Board of Selectmen August 21, 2014
Amended by the Board of Selectmen July 20, 2017
36
CONTINGENCY POLICY
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen February 22, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen February 5, 2009
The Town should maintain a contingency account in the event that certain expenditures may exceed
appropriated amounts due to special or unforeseen circumstances. Such an account should be maintained at a
level that is determined by the five-year average of the historical experience of the contingency account
multiplied by a certain factor which allows for future needs outside the historical norm. The year end balance in
the contingency account should be increased only to the extent that the balance does not correlate with the
Town’s historical experience.
The Board of Selectmen by majority vote may cover an overage of a warrant article appropriation from the
contingency reserve account. The Board at its discretion may seek an advisory recommendation from the
Budget Advisory Committee whenever such overage of a given warrant article exceeds or is expected to exceed
$5,000.
Note: The 2006 Budget Advisory Committee recommends using a factor of 125%.
COMPETITIVE BID POLICY FOR GOODS AND SERVICES VALUED AT $4,000 OR MORE .
Adopted November 20, 1997 Re-Titled June 25, 1998
1. For all purchases of goods and services of a value of $4,000 or greater, the Town shall use competitive
bidding and shall solicit offers by advertising, direct mail or any other means appropriate to obtaining the
largest number of offers.
2. For all other purchases, the Town shall use competitive bidding as the Selectmen may deem appropriate.
3. The Selectmen may use sole source selection when the supplier of goods and services has previously been
selected through a competitive bidding process, has performed satisfactorily and where the interest of the
Town would be served by having the same supplier continue to provide the same goods or services. The
Selectmen may also use sole source selection when they determine that the supplier is the only reasonably
possible source.
4. The competitive bid process shall be conducted on a sealed bid basis with a fixed deadline at which time the
bids will be opened by staff. Bidders shall be notified of the time and place of the opening of the bids and
are welcomed to attend. The bid shall specify the Town's requirements and evaluation criteria. To the
degree that any proposal is not subject to protection as containing proprietary information or trade secrets,
all bids will be public. In any case, the price quoted shall be public information.
5. In general, the Town shall use, for purposes of guidance in conducting competitive purchasing, the rules and
procedures of the State of Maine, Bureau of Purchases.
6. The Town may require a supplier of goods and services to enter into a contractual agreement. .
7. This policy does not apply to purchase of goods and services required for routine office operation even if, in
the aggregate, a specific supplier provides such goods and services in an amount exceeding $4,000 in any
one year.
Amended by the Board of Selectmen September 23, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 18, 2011
37
CREDIT CARD FEE REFUND POLICY
The Town may accept in-person payments using VISA, MasterCard and American Express. These payments
will be processed by InforMe using the State of Maine's merchant account. InforMe will assess a fee for these
payments to the cardholder on a per item basis. In the event a cardholder requests a refund of a payment made
by credit card, the Town may at its discretion refund the payment of the item itself, however, it is the policy of
the Town not to refund the fee charged by Informe, except in instances where a representative of the Town
made a clear error.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 15, 2009
DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY
Background
The Town of Harpswell invests in capital assets, including buildings, roads and other infrastructure assets, land
and landings, vehicles and equipment. The Town has a 5 year capital plan for the maintenance and replacement
of existing assets. In preparing the capital plan, consideration was given to future needs and projects. To
finance these plans The Town may borrow or it may fund them from reserves established over a number of
years and periodically increased through appropriations from taxpayers.
Generally, the Town has participated in Maine Municipal Bond Bank issues to fund long-term projects,
although on occasion the Town has requested bids from other financial institutions. None of these individual
borrowings have exceeded $1.5 million at the time of issuance and each has been or is scheduled to be repaid
within 10 years.
Purpose
The goal of this policy is to provide a guide for managing debt levels. This includes evaluating the need for
capital investment versus the capacity to pay for financing the costs of meeting those needs. The focus of the
policy is to measure debt secured by the full faith and credit of the Town (General Obligation Bonds) which
support the debt service. This Policy also covers lease purchases as they are similarly secured.
The Town shall maintain an outstanding General Obligation debt level that complies with State law, which
currently limits outstanding long-term debt to 15% of the State assessed valuation of the Town, however, the
target debt level of the Town will be of 1% of this valuation.
The Town shall not issue long-term debt to fund current or ongoing operations of the Town. Those operations
may be funded by Tax Anticipation Notes issued in compliance with State law and in conformance with
Internal Revenue Service regulations.
The Town shall not lend its borrowing capacity to or guarantee debt of any other entity.
Maturity of debt obligations must be no more than the useful life of the capital investment being financed, but in
no case more than 20 years.
To the extent reasonably possible, new issuances of debt will take advantage of the scheduled declines in
existing debt principal. Planning for new capital investment will include analysis of the impact on the debt
service schedule. If a significant new borrowing is identified for the near future, other capital needs will be
evaluated relative to existing reserves and the capacity to appropriate funds considered. Further, lower priority
capital investments may be deferred or down-sized.
38
Debt Limitations
Borrowing capacity will be evaluated using a number of factors:
Need – The Capital Plan will identify most needs, however unforeseen opportunities may arise which require
capital investment
Capacity – The maximum amount to be borrowed at any time will be determined by evaluating the following
factors:
Current and projected annual debt service
Market conditions, including interest rates
Economic conditions, including construction costs
Opportunities for participation in low interest financing programs, grant opportunities or other situations
beneficial to the Town
Affordability – Annual debt service impacts for each borrowing will be projected, both in terms of the municipal
budget and the impact on the taxpayer. Debt service payments should not exceed 8% of general fund
expenditures. Total outstanding long-term debt should not exceed 1.0% of the State assessed valuation of the
Town.
Term – Financing should be secured with the goal of paying it back over a term that is of the greatest benefit to
the Town. It may be equal to the expected life of the asset, but may also consider the benefit gained by future
taxpayers.
Payments – Payments will generally be structured with level principal and declining interest over the term,
except where other structures may offer economic benefit to the Town. – Opportunities for refunding will be
considered in light of changes in the economic environment.
Direct Issuances
As the Town identifies larger capital projects, it may wish to issue Town of Harpswell bonds directly to the
public market.
Bond Ratings – As the Town considers bond issues whose magnitude may provide opportunity for cost savings
to the Town if direct issuance is chosen, the Town will be rated by agencies specializing in the analysis of
organizations’ abilities to repay their debt. It is the goal of the Town to obtain the highest possible rating, so
that favorable interest rates and ease of entry to the market may be obtained. This policy in conjunction with
other fiscal policies of the Town, overall fiscal management and reliable reporting are critical in achieving a
beneficial rating.
Debt Issuance – The Town may rely on the sale of bonds for certain large borrowing needs. These sales will be
conducted through the use of financial advisory firm and quality bond counsel. This allows the Town continued
access to the bond market and ensures compliance with Securities and Exchange Commission, Municipal
Securities Rulemaking Board and IRS regulations. The Town will comply with the ongoing disclosure
requirements of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 22, 2017
39
DISPOSITION OF TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY POLICY
Adopted March 12, 1998
Amended September 17, 2009
Article 1. General
1.1 The purpose of this policy is to establish procedures for the management, administration and disposition of
real property acquired for non-payment of taxes by the Town of Harpswell. Nothing in this policy, however,
shall limit or restrict the rights of the Board of Selectmen to manage or dispose of tax-acquired property in the
best interests of the Town.
Article 2. Pre-Foreclosure Procedures regarding Liened Property
2.1 By statute, foreclosure of a tax lien mortgage occurs 18 months after the date of the filing of the tax lien
certificate, provided that the assessed party and any other mortgage holder(s) have been notified of the
impending foreclosure at least 30 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to the end of the 18 month redemption
period. It is the Town’s policy to attempt to contact assessed parties prior to the mailing of the notices of
impending foreclosure by mail and/or telephone so as to increase the awareness of the assessed party as to the
consequences of non-payment of taxes, interest and costs by the expiration of the redemption period. This
contact may be made by the Treasurer or by another member of the Town staff.
Article 3. Management of Tax Acquired Property Pending Final Disposition
1.1 Following the foreclosure of the tax lien mortgage, the Treasurer, by certified mail return-receipt, shall notify
the last known owner of record that his or her right to redeem the property has expired. The notification shall
advise the last known owner of record that the property will be disposed of in accordance with this policy, a
copy of which shall be included with the notification.
3.2 The Treasurer shall prepare a list of properties acquired and forward a copy to the Selectmen.
3.3 The responsibility for the management of tax-acquired property rests with the Selectmen. Pending the
Selectmen's decision regarding the final disposition of property, they shall:
3.3.1 determine because of potential liability inherent in owing the property whether the Town's best
interest would be served by immediately disposing of the property.
3.3.2 determine and obtain, if necessary, a level of insurance required to protect the Town's interest in
the property and to protect the Town from liability.
3.3.3 determine if and when any occupants of tax acquired property shall be required to vacate the
property.
3.3.4 determine whether a rental fee should be charged to any occupants of the property. A rental fee
shall not be imposed unless the Town has acquired sufficient liability insurance.
3.4 In the event the property is vacated for 60 consecutive days, the Selectmen shall obtain
appropriate liability coverage for the property.
3.5 If, because of potential liability, the Selectmen determine it is in the Town's best interest to
immediately dispose of the property, they may do so on terms it deems advisable without regard to any
other provisions of this policy.
Article 4. Review of Tax-Acquired Properties
4.1 The Selectmen may also retain a property on a temporary basis if, in their judgment, the immediate sale
would cause the occupants to be placed on public assistance or to become homeless.
4.2 Selectmen shall make the final determination regarding property disposition. The Selectmen shall also
determine the conditions, if any, for property sales.
40
Article 5. Redemption and Sale Dates
5.1 The Selectmen may establish a final redemption date for the re-acquisition of the property by the prior
owner and, if necessary, a sale date. The redemption date shall be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
sale date.
5.2 The Board of Selectmen may vote to allow the former owner(s) to repurchase the tax-acquired property.
Except as otherwise provided in Article 5, the party from whom the property was acquired has until the
final redemption date to redeem the property by paying all outstanding taxes, including estimated taxes for
the current tax year if the conveyance is after April 1 and the exact amount of tax has not been determined,
interest, lien costs and any other costs relating to the property including, but not limited to insurance,
notice and advertising costs. The Town may also require the payment of any other delinquent taxes or
obligations due the Town. It is not the Town’s policy to enter into land purchase installment contracts
with the party from whom the property was acquired.
5.3 It is hereby understood that Article 5 shall not obligate the Board of Selectmen to allow the former
owner(s) to repurchase and no action of the Board under this Article shall be deemed to set precedent with
respect to any other past, present or future foreclosure and property disposition by the Town of Harpswell.
Article 6. Property to be Retained
6.1 If the Selectmen deem it to be in the Town's best interest, they may retain the acquired property without
offering the opportunity for redemption. By way of example, but not limitation, the Selectmen may deem
it to be in the Town's best interest to retain the property without offering the prior owner the opportunity
to redeem the property where:
6.1.1 the property has or will have recreational value or economic value to the Town.
6.1.2 the property has or will have potential for a public facility or additions to public facilities.
If the Selectmen deem it to be in the Town's best interest to offer the prior owner the opportunity to
redeem the property, that party has until the final redemption date under the conditions specified in
Article 5 to redeem the property.
6.2 If the property is retained for public use, the Selectmen may pursue an action for equitable relief as a
means of securing clear title to the property.
6.3 The Selectmen shall cause the tax-acquired property retained for public use to be managed 64and insured
as it would any other municipal property.
Article 7. Property to be Sold
7.1 The Selectmen shall cause to be published a notice of the sale of the tax acquired property in a local
newspaper. Said notice shall be published at least three (3) times with the last publication at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the sale. The notice shall also be posted within the Assessing and Tax
Collection Departments and in at least one other conspicuous place within the Municipal Building. The
notice shall specify the time and date bids are due and the general terms of the bid. It shall also contain
the following information for each piece of property:
7.1.1 Brief description of the property, i.e. land, building, mobile home, etc.
7.1.2 Location of the property.
7.1.3 Brief description of the conditions of the sale.
7.1.4 The minimum bid.
The Selectmen shall also notify the party from whom the property was acquired of the sale and the bid
requirements.
41
7.2 Unless the Selectmen stipulate otherwise, the minimum bid for any tax acquired property shall be the total
of all outstanding taxes, including estimated taxes for the current tax year if the conveyance is after April
1 and the exact amount of tax has not been determined, interest, lien costs and any other costs relating to
the property including, but not limited to insurance, notice and advertising costs. The Town may refuse to
award the bid to the party from whom the property was acquired unless all other obligations due from that
party are also paid.
7.3 All interested bidders shall be provided with a copy of the notice of sale and bid forms. All bids shall be
submitted on forms prescribed by the Selectmen in an envelope clearly marked "Tax-Acquired
Property Bid" and accompanied by a cashier's or certified check equal to the minimum bid.
Bids shall be publicly opened and read on the date and at the time specified.
7.4 The Selectmen shall review all bids and determine the successful bidder.
7.5 The Selectmen shall notify the successful bidder by certified mail.
7.6 The Town of Harpswell reserves the right to reject any or all bids, accept other than the highest bid and
waive any of the requirements of this policy should the Selectmen, in their sole determination, judge such
actions to be in the best interest of the Town of Harpswell. Instances where this right may be invoked
include, but are not limited to:
7.6.1 The Selectmen may wish to sell the property to an abutting property owner rather than the highest
bidder.
7.6.2 The Selectmen may prefer a use proposed by a party other than the highest bidder.
7.7 The disclaimer contained in the first sentence of section 7.6 shall be included in the notice of sale and bid
forms.
7.8 Should the Selectmen reject all bids, the property may again be offered for public sale without
notification to the prior owners.
7.9 The bid deposit of the successful bidder shall be retained as a credit towards the purchase price. All other
deposits shall be returned to the bidders.
7.10 The Selectmen shall require payment in full from any successful bidder within thirty (30) days from the
date the bids are opened. Should the bidder fail to pay the full price within thirty (30) days, the Town
shall retain the bid deposit and title to the property. The Selectmen may offer the property to the next
highest bidder who shall also have thirty (30) days to make payment in full.
7.11 Title to tax-acquired property shall be transferred only by means of a Quit Claim deed.
7.12 The successful bidder shall be responsible for the removal of any and all occupants and contents of
purchased tax-acquired property.
42
Policy re Establishing Municipal Fees and Charges
Background
Fees may be charged for a particular service that benefits the party paying the fee in a manner not shared by
other members of the public. In other words, a fee may not be charged for general services that are mandatory
or supplied to the public at large.
A fee is paid by choice. The person paying the fee must have the option of not using the service and thereby
avoiding the charge. Any fee, however, may be waived by the Board of Selectmen in the event of special
circumstances.
A fee cannot be used to raise revenues generally, but to compensate the Town for its expenses in providing the
service.
The Town of Harpswell assesses fees for certain services which benefit certain users more than taxpayers
generally. Historically, these services involve the Harbormaster (supported by the Town Clerk’s office), the
Codes Enforcement Office, the Planner and the Transfer Station. The services provided include the
management of moorings, the issuance of land use (including wharf applications) and plumbing permits,
planning board and board of appeals reviews and the disposal of materials not considered to be general
household waste. Additionally, shellfish harvesters are charged a fee to obtain a shellfish license and those who
use the Pott’s Point float to tie up their dinghy pay a fee.
Further, the Recreation Department charges those who participate in its programs and fees are charged for the
use of certain Town properties.
Establishing Fees
The Town establishes fees by first estimating the amount of time the respective department(s) spend on the
identified services. The second step is to estimate the portion of that time directed to specific parties rather than
the general taxpayer. In addition to wages and salaries, the Town includes the associated employee benefits,
certain other items in the department’s budget and, if applicable, a portion of the capital costs associated with
the service. Additionally, a general overhead estimate is applied. Generally speaking, the Town’s fee levels do
not cover 100% of the cost of the service. On a case by case basis, the Town estimates what general benefit of
the service should be covered by the taxpayer rather than a user.
The resulting costs are compared to the Town’s existing fee schedule and to fees charged by other Towns for
these services.
This information is reviewed with the Budget Advisory Committee and then submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for decision making.
The process is completed at least once every five years or when circumstances change.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 28, 2018
43
FIXED ASSET POLICY
This policy establishes the minimum cost value (capitalization amount) that shall be used to determine the
capital assets, including infrastructure assets, that are to be recorded in the Town’s annual financial statements
in order to comply with the requirements of GASB Statement No. 34.
This policy also addresses other considerations for recording and depreciating fixed assets.
Capital Asset Definition:
Capital assets will be defined as tangible and intangible assets that have initial useful lives in excess of 1 year.
Capitalization Method:
All capital assets will be recorded at historical cost as of the date acquired or constructed. If historical cost
information is not available, assets will be recorded at estimated historical cost derived as current replacement
cost deflated by a price-level index. Donated capital assets will be recorded at their estimated fair market
values at the date of acquisition.
Capitalization thresholds:
The Town establishes the following minimum capitalization thresholds for financial reporting purposes:
Land and improvements $5,000
Building and improvements $5,000
Machinery/equipment/vehicles $5,000
Infrastructure:
Roads $25,000
Dry Hydrants $5,000
Thresholds will be reviewed by the Board of Selectmen every 5 years to determine if they remain appropriate.
Adjustment may be required to reflect the effects of inflation on asset prices or changes in the level of Town
operations.
Infrastructure assets:
The Town will record “major” infrastructure assets (as defined in Statement 34) that were acquired, constructed
or significantly reconstructed, or that received significant improvements after June 30, 1980. Other
infrastructure assets may be capitalized as deemed appropriate.
Depreciation and useful life:
An estimated useful life will be assigned to all fixed assets whose costs exceed the capitalization thresholds, in
most cases using the attached schedule of “Suggested Useful Lives”. Asset lives will be adjusted as necessary
depending on the present condition and use of the asset and based on how long the asset is expected to meet
current service demands. Reasons for adjustments will be documented.
Capitalized amounts less the asset’s expected salvage value will be depreciated using the straight line method
and the half-year convention (in the years of acquisition and disposition).
Accountability for fixed assets:
Capitalization thresholds for financial reporting purposes are established as set forth above. The Town will
track its fixed asset purchases using a $5,000 threshold. “Tracking” for this purpose means keeping a record of
acquisition cost, date of acquisition, expected useful life, location of asset and whether such purchase represents
the replacement of an existing asset. Periodically, but not more frequently than once a year, the existence of the
assets listed in these tracking records will be verified.
44
Schedule of Suggested Useful Lives
Asset Type Examples Depreciable Life (in years)
Land Improvements Ball field, landscaping 15
Buildings:
Long-lived components Foundations, frame, enclosure 50
Medium-lived components Electrical, mechanical, roof 20
Short-lived components Carpeting, appliances 5
Building Improvements 20
Vehicles (including Emergency Services Vehicles 5 to 20
Boats 10
Equipment 5 to 20
Infrastructure Roads 50
Dry Hydrants 20
Revised by the Board of Selectmen February 1, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen February 7, 2008
Revised by the Board of Selectmen January 24, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen January 14, 2016
FUNDING FOR INDEPENDENT NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
The Town may be asked to provide financial assistance to certain not-for-profit, local organizations that provide
services to the Town and its citizens. In deciding whether to provide such support, the following factors will be
included in the consideration:
1. A need for services has been identified. Services that duplicate or compete with existing services may
not warrant consideration.
2. Groups seeking Town funding should demonstrate fiscal sustainability going forward before Town
financial support is authorized. Sustainability should not be based exclusively on Town support.
3. Organizations should have a corporate or other legal status or be affiliated with same to enable the Town
to deal with a legally accountable entity. Should such status be pending or revoked or should the
organization not be able to fulfill its mission, the Town shall reconsider whether to recommend funding.
4. The Town should consider both current and future implications before recommending funding.
Adopted by the Board Selectmen December 3, 2015
45
INTEREST POLICY ON TRANSFER STATION CHARGES
The Town of Harpswell assesses interest on unpaid balances at the Transfer Station. Interest will be charged at
the same rate that is charged on delinquent property taxes (see note) and will be assessed retroactively to the
billing date if unpaid by the subsequent month billing cycle.
Note: Interest rate is currently 8% until September 15, 2010 at which time it will decrease to 6%.
The Town reserves the right to pursue in small claims court charges which have not been paid for more than six
months once notice of such intention is provided to the delinquent user.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen April 26, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen June 3, 2010
INVESTMENT POLICY
1. The Town of Harpswell hereby establishes this Investment Policy to ensure that the Town’s funds are
invested in a manner which in general provides safety, liquidity and return and is in conformance with
applicable regulations.
2. This investment policy shall apply to all cash, cash equivalents and investments of the Town of Harpswell.
3. The Town’s investment activity shall be governed by all applicable state and federal laws and regulations
concerning the investment of public funds. The Town will look to professional consultants for counsel to
ensure that any policy adopted conforms fully to such laws and regulations.
4. The Town’s investment portfolio will be managed in a manner that seeks to attain a market rate of return
considered reasonable under generally accepted market principles, throughout budgetary and economic cycles,
while preserving and protecting Town capital in the overall portfolio, thus affording prudent use of public funds
and preservation of the public trust.
5. The principal objectives of the Town’s investment activities, stated in the order of their importance, shall be
as follows:
A. Safety of principal.
Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the Town investment program. Investments of the Town
shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure preservation of capital.
An investment will be deemed to be safe if it can meet its maturity without jeopardizing cash flow
objectives. No investment will be deemed safe if there is a reasonable chance it may have to be
liquidated, for any reason that was foreseeable at the time of the investment, at a loss of principal.
It is recognized and not in contradiction with this policy that the Town may on occasion realize a loss of
principal on an investment when premature liquidation is necessary to meet an unforeseen demand on
Town resources.
The objective will be to minimize credit risk and interest rate risk.
46
i. Credit Risk (Custodial Credit Risk and Concentration Credit Risk)
a. The Town will minimize Custodial Credit Risk, which is the risk of loss
due to the failure of the security issuer or backer, by limiting investments to the
types of securities listed in Section 9 of this Investment Policy; and by prequalifying
the financial institutions, broker/dealers, intermediaries and advisors
with which the Town will do business.
b. The Town will minimize Concentration of Credit Risk, which is the risk of
loss attributed to the magnitude of the Town’s investment in a single type of
investment or in a single issuer, by diversifying the investment portfolio so that
the impact of potential losses from any one type of security or issuer will be
minimized.
1. Not more than 20% of the total amount of the Town funds available for
investment will be invested in any single type of investment.
2. The Town will not hold more than 10% of the total investments in any single
investment, unless in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen conditions warrant
otherwise.
3. Provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) investments in U.S. Government obligations
(2) certificates of deposit that are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation
(3) cash balances held at depository banks which are fully collateralized either by
insurance or by letters of credit from a federal agency.
ii. Interest Rate Risk
The Town will minimize Interest Rate Risk, which is the risk that the market value of securities
in the portfolio will fall due to changes in market interest rates, by: structuring the investment portfolio so that
securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities
in the open market; and, investing operating funds primarily in shorter term securities, liquid asset funds, money
market mutual funds, or similar investment pools and limiting the average maturity in accordance with the
Town’s cash requirements.
B. Liquidity of Funds.
The Town investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the Town to meet daily and projected
cash flow demands, as well as all operating requirements.
To the extent possible, the Town shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements.
Unless matched to a specifically recognized and identified future cash flow need, the Town will not invest in
securities maturing more than 2 years from the date of purchase.
47
C. Rate of return on investment
The Town’s investment portfolio will be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return
considered reasonable under generally accepted market principles, throughout budgetary and economic cycles,
taking into account constraints on Town investment risk and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
D. Diversification
The potential for market change and other conditions introduce the element of risk to investment of all types.
Portfolio diversification is traditionally employed as a means to control risk. The Treasurer shall exercise
prudence in the selection of securities as a means to minimize risk of loss.
6. Standard of Prudence
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which a person of
prudence, intelligence and discretion might exercise in the management of his/her own affairs, not for
speculation but for investment, with due consideration taken of the probable safety of capital as well as the
probable income to be derived.
7. Ethics and Conflict of Interest
A. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer and staff members in positions of authority in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that may in fact or appearance conflict with
proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions.
B. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer, staff members and employees of external
investment management firms, shall disclose any material financial interest in financial institutions under
consideration, and shall further disclose any meaningful or significant personal financial and/or investment
positions that could relate to performance of the Town’s investment portfolio.
C. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer and all staff are prohibited from participating
in the decision to invest or withdraw Town funds in any instrument or institution in which he/she directly or
indirectly has any material financial interest that might affect or be affected by the Town’s investment, nor shall
he/she accept any gift, free service, or payment of any kind for performing their duties under this policy.
8. Personal Responsibility
A. It is anticipated and expected that investment officials and/or advisors will act in good faith, with due
diligence, that deviations from and exceptions to the investment policy will be reported in timely fashion and
that appropriate action will be taken timely to control adverse developments.
B. Investment officials and/or advisors acting in such a manner, and in accordance with this investment
policy, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for individual security performance and fluctuations in
market price.
9. Authorized Investments.
Town funds may be invested in the following types of securities:
Obligations of the U.S. government and its agencies
Fully insured or collateralized certificates of deposit at commercial banks and savings
and loan associations
Repurchase agreements collateralized by U. S. Treasury securities, and accompanied by
executed master repurchase agreements;
48
Money market mutual funds whose portfolios consist of U.S. government securities or
broadly diversified money market instruments whose purpose is to maintain a
stable principal dollar value, and which invest exclusively in short- and
intermediate-term investments;
10. Collateralization
A. Collateralization shall be required on two types of investments:
Certificates of deposit, for amounts which exceed insurance
Repurchase agreements
B. To anticipate market changes and provide the required security for all funds, the collateralization
level will be 102% of market value of principal and accrued interest.
C. Collateral will in all instances be held by an independent third party with whom the financial
institution has a current custodial agreement.
E. A clearly marked evidence of ownership must be supplied by the custodial entity to the financial
institution and retained by it while the investment is in force.
11. Delegation of Authority
The Town Treasurer is responsible for the day-to-day management of the Town’s funds consistent with the
provisions of this policy. The Treasurer will obtain authorization from the Board of Selectmen before investing
in any instrument other than fully collateralized bank deposits, including certificates of deposit.
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN MAY 28, 2009
RECYCLING CENTER & TRANSFER STATION MATERIAL REMOVAL POLICY
Removal of certain materials from the Recycling Center & Transfer Station by Harpswell residents and
employees is permitted. Prior to removing any material, residents and employees must obtain permission from
the Recycling Center & Transfer Station manager or manager designee. After permission is granted, the
manager or designee will record the following information on the Material Removal Log: name, date, material
removed and where the material is being removed from, i.e., Recycling Center or Transfer Station. No material,
which the Town could otherwise sell, may be removed including but not limited to aluminum, brass, copper, or
stainless steel.
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT
Elected officials of the Town shall be reimbursed for mileage based upon submitted documentation consistent
with the reimbursement method for other Town employees. The reimbursement rate per traveled mile is
adopted annually by the Board of Selectmen and generally corresponds with the rate established by the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).
Adopted: February 22, 2007 by the Board of Selectmen
Effective Date: April 1, 2007
49
50
PETTY CASH POLICY
Petty cash accounts in specific amounts, as determined by the Town Administrator and not to exceed $2,500 in
total, have been established and are maintained by the:
Tax Collector
Deputy Tax Collector
Town Clerk
Deputy Town Clerk
Receptionist
Transfer Station Attendant
Recycling Center Manager
Deputy Treasurer
Only the Receptionist’s petty cash fund is to be used for the reimbursement of expenses and only purchases less
than $25 may be reimbursed. This account shall be balanced daily and replenished as necessary upon
submission of receipts to the bookkeeper for inclusion in the warrant.
Adopted February 16, 2006 by the Board of Selectmen.
Revision adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 25, 2009
Revised by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012 and August 8, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 18, 2014
51
POST ISSUANCE COMPLIANCE POLICY RELATING TO BONDS ISSUED BY THE TOWN
This policy is being adopted by the Town of Harpswell (the "Town") in order to assure that the Town
complies with the requirements of federal and state law and the covenants in its bond documents that apply
following the issuance of Bonds by the Town. For purposes of this policy, the term "Bonds" means any
obligations of the Town incurred for the purpose of borrowing money, including, without limitation, bonds,
notes, and equipment lease-purchase agreements.
1. Responsibility for Post-Issuance Compliance: The Town Treasurer (the "Treasurer") is
responsible for monitoring compliance with this Policy. The Treasurer may designate employees to carry out
their duties under this Policy.
2. Compliance with Covenants in Bond Documents: The Treasurer shall ensure compliance with all
covenants made by the Town in the Bond documents, including, but not limited to, financial reporting,
restrictions on the use and disposition of property, restrictions on the use and investment of Bond proceeds, and
arbitrage and rebate compliance.
3. Continuing Disclosure Compliance: The Town will comply with any applicable continuing
disclosure requirements of Rule 15c2-12 under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and
officially interpreted from time to time and the terms of any continuing disclosure agreement or certificate
entered by the Town (each, a "Continuing Disclosure Agreement"), including submission of annual financial
information and operating data to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or any successor thereto
(“MRSB”) established under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended and notice of the
occurrence of material events with respect to the Bonds.
4. Federal Tax Law Compliance: The Town will comply with the terms of each arbitrage and use of
proceeds certificate or tax compliance certificate (each, an "Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate") for each
issue of Bonds issued by the Town and with the applicable provisions of federal tax law. Without limitation of
the foregoing, the Town shall take the following actions:
(a) Proper Use of Proceeds — The Treasurer shall ensure that bond proceeds are expended and
allocated to expenditures in a manner that is consistent with the purpose for which each bond issue is
undertaken, as set forth in any Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate or agreement related to each bond
issue.
(b) Investment of Bond Proceeds — The Treasurer shall ensure that bond proceeds are invested in
investments that are permissible under the terms of Maine law, the bond documents, and applicable federal tax
laws.
(c) Arbitrage and Rebate — The Treasurer shall ensure that the Town complies with the arbitrage,
rebate and yield restriction requirements of Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto and that the Town completes all necessary arbitrage rebate calculations, payments
and filings in a timely manner or confirms that the Bonds are exempt from rebate.
(d) Administration of Direct Pay Bonds — The Treasurer shall ensure the proper administration of
each issue of Bonds qualifying for the payment by the Federal government of a credit equal to a percentage of
interest on such Bonds, including the timely completion and filing of any forms required by the Internal
Revenue Service to maintain or establish the applicable status of the Bonds for purposes of federal income
taxation.
52
(e) Use of Bond-Financed Facilities — The Treasurer shall consult with Bond Counsel for the Town
before entering into any agreement or other arrangement for the sale, lease, management or use of bondfinanced
property, including, but not limited to, service, vendor, and management contracts, research
agreements, licenses to use bond-financed property, agreements granting special rights or entitlements to private
parties or naming rights agreements. The Treasurer shall review such agreements for compliance with federal
tax laws.
(f) Post-Issuance Transactions — The Treasurer shall consult with Bond Counsel for the Town
before making any modifications or amendments to the bond documents for a bond issue, including, but not
limited to, entering or modifying investment agreements; making any change in security for the Bonds;
engaging in post-issuance credit enhancement transactions (e.g., bond insurance, letter of credit) or hedging
transactions (e.g., interest rate swap, cap); terminating or appointing successor trustees; releasing any liens, or
reissuing or refunding the Bonds.
(g) Remedial Action — In the event that is determined that any use of bond proceeds or bondfinanced
facilities is inconsistent with the character of the status for federal income tax purposes of the Bonds,
the Treasurer shall consult with the Town's Bond Counsel for the purpose of determining the nature and extent
of any remedial action necessary or proper for the Town to take with respect to such Bonds or bond-financed
facilities. If the Town takes any action after the issuance of Bonds that causes the conditions of the private
business tests or the private loan financing test to be met, then the Town shall take timely remedial actions in
accordance with the federal Treasury Regulations section 1.141-12 as necessary in order to preserve the taxexempt
status of the Bonds.
5. Record Retention: The Town shall maintain all records relating to the issuance of Bonds and the
requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and the representations, certifications and covenants set forth in the
Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate relating to the issuance of Bonds until the date six years after the last
outstanding Bonds have been retired. If any of the Bonds are refunded by tax-exempt obligations, the Town
shall maintain all records required to be retained by this section until the later of the date six years after the last
outstanding Bonds have been retired or the date three years after the last refunding obligations have been
retired. The records that must be retained include, but are not limited to (a) basic records and documents
relating to the Bonds (including any loan agreement, Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate and the opinion
of Bond Counsel); (b) documentation evidencing the expenditure of Bond proceeds; (c) documentation
evidencing the use of the project(s) financed by the Bonds by public and private sources (i.e., copies of
management contracts, research agreements, leases, etc.); (d) documentation evidencing all sources of payment
or security for the Bonds; and (e) documentation pertaining to any investment of Bond proceeds (including the
purchase and sale of securities, SLGS subscriptions, yield calculations for each class of investments, actual
investment income received from the investment of proceeds, guaranteed investment contacts, and rebate
calculations).
6. Annual Policy Review and Education: On an annual basis, or sooner if deemed necessary or appropriate
by the Treasurer, the Treasurer shall review this policy and assess the Town's compliance with this Policy. The
Treasurer shall recommend changes to this Policy as appropriate to ensure compliance with any covenants in
the bond documents or the requirements of federal tax and securities law and any other applicable law. The
Town will also implement a program, including appropriate instruction and education of personnel, for purposes
of ensuring compliance with the terms of this Policy.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen December 15, 2011
53
PURCHASING POLICIES
Effective June 14, 1998
Amended March 29, 2007, August 18, 2011, March 3, 2016, and May 12, 2016
Authorization for purchase of ALL supplies, services, furniture, equipment, books and subscriptions to be paid by
the Town of Harpswell must be obtained BEFORE a commitment to purchase is made. Contractors and subcontractors,
operating under a duly-authorized, current Town contract are excepted.
All purchase requests must be submitted to the Town’s Administrator or specified delegate—NEVER directly to
the company. If you order without an approved Purchase Requisition, you will be liable for payment. Purchase Order
Requisition Form, Exhibit 1, must be filled out for any item or service to be purchased. This form must be signed by the
person requesting the purchase, countersigned by a Department Head or Committee Chair, and given to the Administrator.
A Purchase Order, Exhibit 2, will be authorized—if purchase is determined to be appropriate and funds are
available—and issued by Administrator’s office. The Administrator will secure Selectmen’s authorization as needed. A
copy of the Purchase Order will be forwarded to the supplier, a copy will be given immediately to the requesting party and
the third copy shall be kept by the Receiving/Billing Agent and attached to the bill when received.
Procurement of all items will be accomplished in the most expeditious manner that will provide necessary
materials to accomplish the objectives of Town’s activities in a timely manner. Supply sources will be explored to obtain
best price. All reasonable methods shall be used including bids for lease versus purchase arrangements and sole source
contracts. Town may require a supplier to enter into a contractual agreement.
Energy efficient products and practices reduce energy cost without comprising quality. Accordingly, the Town of
Harpswell shall employ the most efficient energy conservation practices in the design, construction, renovation, operation
and maintenance of Town facilities. Furthermore, when replacing or purchasing new energy-consuming equipment, shall
purchase only ENERGY STAR labeled equipment unless such equipment is not available, appropriate or cost effective on
a life cycle basis.
EXPENDITURES
The Town Administrator is authorized to approve budgeted expenditures for goods and services including
supplies, furniture and fixtures up to $4,000 in cost. In addition, the Town Administrator is authorized to approve any
expenditure for winter road materials consistent with budgeted amounts.
All purchases with a cost more than $4,000 require the approval of the Selectmen prior to purchase. This
approval shall be secured by the Administrator after an appropriately signed Purchase Requisition has been received.
All purchases with a cost more than $2,500 or more shall be placed on a Town property inventory list at year-end.
This inventory is to be maintained by the Administrator’s office and one copy shall be maintained offsite. Each item must
be appropriately documented and shall be inventoried no less than annually by each Department.
54
PURCHASE ORDER REQUISITION FORM
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
PO Box 39
Harpswell, ME 04079
DATE: ____________________ PO#______________
Item having a unit cost of $4,000.00 or more, must be submitted for competitive bids.
Indicate vendor if selected under completive bid basis.
VENDOR: _____________________________________ Check Needed: ___________
______________________________________ Vendor will Bill: ___________
______________________________________
DEPT-ACC# QUANITY DESCRIPTION UNIT COST TOTAL COST
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
REASON REQUEST: __________________________________________________________________
REQUESTED BY: ___________________________________________________________________
APPROVALS DATE
Town Administrator ________________________ _______________________________
Department Head ________________________ _______________________________
Committee Chair ________________________ _______________________________
Selectmen ________________________ _______________________________
_______________________ _______________________________
_______________________ _______________________________
55
POLICY RE: SPECIAL REVENUE FUND FOR RECREATION
Adopted by Board of Selectmen on March 29, 2007
Introduction: Since the Town has authorized recreation revenues to be dedicated for recreation programs
(including operational and maintenance costs associated with Trufant-Summerton Field), it maintains a Special
Revenue Account for Recreation. Such account is the result of surpluses accumulated over time.
General Operation: While it is the objective to operate recreational programs and Trufant-Summerton Field in a
manner as revenue neutral as possible, it is recognized that total expenditures may exceed total revenues in any
given year. In the event that this occurs, the Special Revenue Reserve Account will decrease. In a year when
total revenues exceed total expenditures, the Special Revenue Account will increase.
These increases and decreases occur on a program by program basis and in the aggregate. The Town’s general
ledger system includes the Special Revenue Account in fund balance in the aggregate and internal worksheets
are maintained which account for the Special Revenue Account by program. These worksheets contain
information necessary for the successful management of the Recreation programs.
Special Authorization: In addition to the Special Revenue Account for Recreation functioning as described
above, the Board of Selectmen may authorize the use of these Special Revenue funds for the following
recreational purposes: (1) capital items; (2) special equipment; and (3) specific identified operational expenses.
Such funding requests shall be initiated by the Recreation Director after consultation with the Recreation
Committee. The intent of the Special Authorization is to ensure that funds collected for recreation purposes are
expended for recreation purposes.
TOWN DEVELOPMENT FEES WAIVER
The Town of Harpswell undertakes land use activities and development projects from time to time. Given that
the Board of Selectmen has authority to determine the fee schedule for such activity and development, the
Board shall exempt applications initiated by the Town of Harpswell for projects on Town-owned property from
the terms listed in the Harpswell Development Fee Schedule, including but not limited to, land use permit fees,
septic fees and Planning Board fees.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 13, 2013
56
POLICY ON TREASURER’S DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS FOR EMPLOYEE WAGES AND
BENEFITS
Purpose. This policy allows designated municipal officers (selectmen or councilors), acting on behalf of the full
board of municipal officers, to review, approve, and sign municipal treasurer’s disbursement warrants, for wages and
benefits only.
This policy is additional to, not in lieu of, majority power. Nothing in this policy is intended to replace the
authority of the full board of municipal officers, acting by majority vote, to act on any treasurer’s warrant, including
warrants for wages and benefits.
Delegation of authority. Pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 5603(2)(A)(1), the following authority is granted with respect
to treasurer’s disbursement warrants for municipal employee wages and benefits only:
Current municipal officers. The municipal officers in office at the time of execution of this policy are:
______________________ (Chair), and _______________________________,
_________________________________.
?Any one of the municipal officers named above, acting alone, may review. approve, and sign such
warrants.
?Either ____________________ or ___________________, acting alone, may review, approve,
and sign such warrants.
?__________________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
Effective date. This policy becomes effective on the date indicated below. Copies. The Chair of the
municipal officers will furnish copies of this policy to the municipal clerk and to the municipal treasurer. If the clerk
and the treasurer are the same person, a copy shall nonetheless be provided to that person in each capacity.
Lapse. This policy lapses one year after its effective date, if not sooner amended or cancelled.
Renewal. This policy may be renewed at any time before its lapse. Thereafter, it may be readopted at
any time. Any renewal is valid for one year from its effective date, unless a sooner date of expiration is
specified.
Reminder. If the municipal treasurer is an appointed official, the treasurer shall remind the municipal officers to
consider renewing this policy annually before it lapses. If the municipal treasurer is an elected official, the treasurer
is requested to provide such an annual reminder.
Original. The Chair of the municipal officers will maintain the original of this policy on file unless the municipal
clerk is an appointed official, in which case the clerk shall maintain it on file, if requested to do so by the Chair.
Dated: __________________, 20_____
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
57
POLICY ON TREASURER’S DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS FOR STATE FEES
Purpose. This policy allows designated municipal officers (selectmen or councilors), acting on behalf of the full
board of municipal officers, to review, approve, and sign municipal treasurer’s disbursement warrants for payment of
state fees only.
This policy is additional to, not in lieu of, majority power. Nothing in this policy is intended to replace the
authority of the full board of municipal officers, acting by majority vote, to act on any treasurer’s warrant, including
warrants for payment of state fees.
Delegation of authority. Pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 5603(A)(3), the following authority is granted with respect to
treasurer’s disbursement warrants for payment of state fees only.
Current municipal officers. The municipal officers in office at the time of execution of this policy are:
________________________________ ______________________________
??Any one of the municipal officers named above, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
??Either _____________________or _____________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such
warrants.
??___________________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
Effective date. This policy becomes effective on the date indicated below.
Copies. The Chair of the municipal officers will furnish copies of this policy to the municipal clerk and to the
municipal treasurer. If the clerk and the treasurer are the same person, a copy shall nonetheless be provided to that
person in each capacity.
Lapse. This policy lapses one year after its effective date, if not sooner amended or cancelled.
Renewal. This policy may be renewed at any time before its lapse. Thereafter, it may be readopted at any time. Any
renewal is valid for one year from its effective date, unless a sooner date of expiration is specified.
Reminder. If the municipal treasurer is an appointed official, the treasurer shall remind the municipal officers to
consider renewing this policy annually before it lapses. If the municipal treasurer is an elected official, the treasurer
is requested to provide such an annual reminder.
Original. The Chair of the municipal officers will maintain the original of this policy on file unless the municipal
clerk is an appointed official, in which case the clerk shall maintain it on file, if requested to do so by the Chair.
Dated: ________________________,
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
58
POLICY FOR USE OF MBNA CREDIT CARD
The Town has a credit card issued by MBNA primarily for the purpose of accessing the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds online.
The credit card may be used by the Assessing, Codes Enforcement, Tax Collector’s and Treasurer’s offices and
for those purposes where previously a request of the Registry was made by telephone or a search was performed
at the Registry itself.
It is expected that Assessing and Codes will use the card to download property deeds on an occasional basis in
connection with new subdivisions, property transfers or problems with existing deeds (Assessing) and building
permits (Codes). The Tax Collector and Treasurer will use the card to perform searches for mortgagors in
connection with the filing of tax lien mortgage certificates and notices of impending automatic foreclosure.
Each search costs $.50 and the viewing of each document costs $.25. In the event that any office undertakes a
project expected to incur more than $10 in fees, the Town Administrator must be notified of the nature of the
project in advance.
Searches will only be conducted by the Town staff for the Town’s benefit. Deed research for individuals should
not be performed. Assessing and Codes may provide copies of deed at the appropriate charge to property
owners.
The Treasurer receives an e-mail from the manager of the Registry of Deeds website each time the credit card is
charged and therefore will be responsible for monitoring the usage of the credit card.
Effective September 4, 2008, the credit card may also be used for certain purchases, that have been preapproved
by the Town Administrator, not to exceed $1,000, where the vendor will not accept a purchase order
and the purchase is needed in a timely fashion. An annual list will be maintained and submitted to the Board
regularly, at least annually.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen Thursday, July 6, 2006.
Revised policy adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 4, 2008.
59
Abandoned/Recovered Property Policy
Any vehicles, vessels, equipment, fishing gear, etc. herein referred to as property or items, known to be
stored in violation of Town property ordinances, land use rules, right of ways, easements, etc., or
deemed to be a hazard to navigation, the environment or the wellbeing of others may be recovered by
the Town of Harpswell. Every effort will be made to establish ownership and contact said owner
before removal, except in an emergency situation. Items that are in violation will be considered
abandoned until ownership can either be established, or after all efforts have failed, the owners cannot
be determined.
All property or items removed by the town will be taken to the Transfer Station for storage or disposal.
Upon arrival at the Transfer Station the removed property will be weighed and recorded to establish a
disposal cost and date of arrival for the item.
All property deemed to have real value will be stored within the secured facility until the owner can be
reached or determined. Upon arrival the property will be tracked for 21 days. All attempts to locate an
owner will be documented. At the end of said period, if ownership cannot be established, or the owner
has been contacted and not responded, said item will be deemed abandoned and will become Town
property. The item will then be properly disposed of. Special consideration will be taken, concerning
the period of time an item is stored before disposal if:
• It is believed that the recovered property belongs to a non-resident and is recovered out of
season.
• If the property or item is suspected of being stolen, in which case the Sherriff’s office or
Wardens service will be contacted.
• If the owner has been identified and is making a considerable effort to recover said property.
• If owner has been identified and is claiming a legitimate hardship that prohibits recovery.
If property is claimed by the owner or an owner’s representative, certain fees will need to be paid to
facilitate the items recovery and return. Removal of claimed items will not be permitted until all
associated fees have been paid. Fees to be assessed include but are not limited to:
• Any and all recovery and transportation fees incurred by the Town.
• The value of a third-party contractor hired or sent by the Town to remove the item or cleanup
the affected area of abandonment. (Note: Town employee time may be considered if extensive
time and effort is involved).
• Any and all environmental or hazardous waste cleanup costs either at the site of the affected
removal site or Transfer Station holding area.
• A Transfer Station storage fee of $5 per day.
Proof of payment will be required before any item can be physically removed from the facility.
Owners wishing to recover items or materials from a recovered property will be allowed to remove
said items after the following conditions are met:
• Any and all associated Town fees as mentioned above pertaining to the recovery,
transportation, storage etc. of said property are paid.
• The initial disposal cost established when item arrived has been paid.
• Proof of payment will be required before parts, pieces, materials, miscellaneous items, etc. can
be removed from the recovered property or facility.
60
All charges, billings or fees associated with the removal of the property from the Transfer Station or
items taken from the recovered property, from within the Transfer Station will be the responsibility of
the owner or owner’s representative.
The Town reserves the right to bill any owner who has been identified, but who doesn’t claim their
property. Billing may include but is not limited to:
• Recovery and transportation fees
• Any and all storage fees
• Any and all disposal fees
• Any hazardous waste recovery fees associated with the disposal
• Any fees that the Transfer Station cannot handle on site. (i.e. asbestos, etc.).
Nonpayment of above said billing may result in the Town taking certain actions including but not
limited to legal action.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 1, 2019
BOAT OPERATOR QUALIFICATIONS Adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 6, 2012
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to provide a clear understanding of the skills and abilities
required for boat operators to operate Town-owned vessels.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Town of Harpswell will operate Town-owned
vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell recognizes that to operate a boat in the coastal marine
environment poses unique challenges that require specialized skills and abilities.
These skills and abilities include but are not limited to: marine navigation, seamanship
and boat operation in adverse weather & sea conditions. They also include the
trailering, launch and retrieval of the boat during use. In addition the operator should
develop a working knowledge of the coastal waters of the Town.
Responsibility: The Town will require that boat operators provide documentation to show that they
possess
the minimum qualifications and experience to safely operate Town-owned vessels.
The Town may require a demonstration of those skills and abilities as witnessed by
the Town’s agent. The Town will maintain the records of approved operators.
61
BOAT MAINTENANCE POLICY Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on September 20, 2012
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to ensure an “operational readiness” for the boat as well as to
provide for necessary repairs and required annual maintenance.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Harbormaster of the Town of Harpswell, who shall
keep a list of all authorized users, will operate Town-owned vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell has a substantial investment in its boats, motors and trailers.
Proper maintenance will ensure the overall safety, reliability and longevity of service of
the vessel.
Responsibility: “operational readiness”
The boat operators will complete a visual survey of the boat and trailer prior to each use to
identify any damage or defects which would create a hazard to its use.
The safety equipment and electronics will be inspected for serviceability and compliance with
the United States Coast Guard.
Deficiencies will be recorded on a maintenance checklist to include a plan for correction.
The boats will be placed “out of service” if the vessel cannot be operated safely until repairs are
completed.
“Annual Maintenance and Repair”
The Town will be responsible to see that the boats are brought to an authorized service center
on an annual basis for an overall inspection. This inspection shall include the boat, motor and
trailer. The maintenance schedule as recommended by the manufacturer shall be followed as
applicable.
FACILITY CLOSURE POLICY FOR EMERGENCIES
Certain emergencies may require closure of a municipal facility in order to provide appropriate
emergency response and/or to maintain the safety of employees and the public. Those emergencies
may include but are not limited to major medical crises, public health or safety threats, fires, serious
workplace injuries, vehicular and pedestrian accidents. The Town Administrator or his/her designee
shall have the discretion to close a municipal facility for such emergencies. The Town Administrator
or designee may choose to consult with Selectmen and/or other officials in making closure
determinations. Any closure expected to continue for 4 or more hours shall require notification of
members of the Board of Selectmen.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen December 29, 2016
62
FUTURE ACQUISITION OF LAND POLICY
Regarding the potential acquisition of land, the Town, acting through its Board of Selectmen, may give
priority consideration to properties that:
a) are adjacent to or near existing Town properties;
b) provide public waterfront access;
c) enhance parking for waterfront access;
d) are located on the Mountain Road corridor;
e) provide acquisition in areas of the Town where there may not be much publicly accessible land;
f) are identified as Focus Areas in the Town’s Open Space plan;
g) enable accommodations that improve or expand access for commercial fishing and/or for other
waterfront activities –such accommodations might be parking for vehicles and boat trailers,
boat ramps that are sized for larger vessels.
Note: Only the Town Meeting is authorized to acquire land on behalf of the Town.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 1, 2014
FOCUS AREAS From the OPEN SPACE PLAN
Focus Area 1: Long Reach, Great Island
Focus Area 2: Brickyard Watershed, Great Island
Focus Area 3: Bethel Point, Cundy’s Harbor
Focus Area 4: Sandy Cove, East Cundy’s Point
Focus Area 5: Ice Pond, Gun and Long Points, Great Island
Focus Area 6: Wilson’s Pond Orr’s Island
Focus Area 7: Cedar Beach, Bailey Island
Focus Area 8: Otter Brook Corridor, North Harpswell
Focus Area 9: Wilson & Widgeon Coves, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 10: Lookout Point, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 11. Allen Point Road Corridor, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 12 Basin Cove, South Harpswell
63
58
64
POLICY REGARDING LEASE OF TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY AT THE
ORR’S ISLAND BRIDGE
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 12, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen June 14, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen June 22, 2017
The Board of Selectmen shall decide on an annual basis whether to enter into annual lease agreements
with certain individuals who historically have had commercial wharves attached to Town-owned
property at the Orr’s Island Bridge. The Board shall determine the annual lease fee, require proof of
insurance including to name the Town as additional insured when appropriate, and make final
determinations about with whom the Town should enter into lease agreements.
The following provisions shall apply with respect to the Board’s final determination about with whom
the Town should enter into lease agreements.
1. The Town shall not enter into a lease agreement with anyone who has outstanding unpaid prior year
taxes relating to the wharf property.
2. The lessee shall have 75 days, from the date that the Town sends a proposed lease agreement to the
lessee, to return a signed agreement to the Town or the lease agreement shall be deemed invalid.
3. Only property related to the commercial fishing operation of a properly authorized lessee may
remain on-site. All other items and debris must be removed. There shall be no property left on-site that
is owned by anyone other than a properly authorized lessee. The Town reserves the right to withhold
the assignment of a lease for non-compliance with this provision.
65
Town of Harpswell
George J. Mitchell Field & Harpswell Bandstand
Use Policy
This policy applies to:
Mitchell Field: Groups over 50 attendees Harpswell Bandstand: Any size group
Mitchell Field, including the Harpswell Bandstand, is the property of the Town of Harpswell.
The Board of Selectmen administers this Policy. The Selectmen may waive any provision of this
policy if they determine that such waiver is consistent with the intent of this policy and in the public
interest.
1. Mitchell Field
a. This Use Policy shall apply to all groups, entities including but not limited to any not-for-profit
organizations or assemblage which exceeds or is expected to exceed 50 people, and requires
Selectmen approval A streamlined approval process may be utilized for repeat group use applicants
previously approved by the Board of Selectmen, for the Town’s three fire departments and for
private functions such as weddings, reunions, and birthday parties that have more than 50 guests but
less than 125. For these applicants, a one-page Mitchell Field Group Use form shall be used and
staff shall have the authority to approve the request as long as it is consistent with the policy and
rules.
b. While this policy does not apply to not-for-profit organizations or groups expecting fewer than 50
people, reserving a specific area through the Town is recommended.
2. Harpswell Bandstand
a. A Group Use application must be submitted for groups of any number, including not-for-profit
groups, whether they are public or private.
b. The Bandstand is solar powered and electricity can be provided up to 2800 watts.
c. Bandstand events are scheduled in half or full day increments. A half day is six hours or less. A
full day is more than six hours, but less than 12 hours.
3. General
a. Applicant: The applicant may be an individual, organization (not recognized by government) or a
non-profit (recognized by government) or for profit organization. All groups must adhere to the
rules regarding use of Mitchell Field, a copy of which is attached. All groups must comply with
applicable laws and regulations prohibiting discrimination. All activities conducted at Mitchell
Field shall comply with all State and federal laws and regulations and with all local ordinances.
Activities that pose a threat to persons or property are prohibited. The use of Mitchell
Field/Bandstand may be denied if the proposed event is inconsistent with the nature and location of
the property. The Town reserves the right to refuse the use of Mitchell Field/Bandstand to any
group. All applications must specify those areas of Mitchell Field for which the application is being
made.
b. Reservation: The applicant must complete a Group Use application form requesting use for the
event. The Town reserves the right to limit the number of events per day at Mitchell Field. First
priority will be given to Town-sponsored events.
c. Duration: For any events lasting more than 12 hours, a double fee may be charged.
66
d. Security Deposit: A $50 refundable security deposit beyond the facility fee will be collected at the
time of approval. This deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 30 business days of the
event if all conditions of the Use Policy have been met.
e. Fees: Functions sponsored by the Town of Harpswell and school groups are exempt from fees.
Applications proposed for use of both Mitchell Field and Bandstand will be charged full price for
the principal use and .5 fee for the secondary use. Applicable fees are as specified below and are
due upon approval of use:
f. Payment: Payment may be made in cash, check or credit card at the Harpswell Town Office.
g. Insurance: The applicant must provide a certificate of public liability insurance for the event. The
Town of Harpswell must be named as an additional insured in the amount of $400,000.
h. Parking: All event parking must take place in designated areas approved by the Town.
i. Restrooms: Two handicap accessible portable restrooms are on premises from April through
November. Applicant must provide additional restrooms, to be sited by the Town, at his/her
expense for events with greater than 100 people (1 additional per 50 persons above 100). Portable
restrooms must be removed immediately after the event.
j. Tent(s): If a tent(s) is to be used it must be sited by the Town and the applicant must provide the
tent(s) at his/her own expense. Any tent(s) must be removed immediately after the event.
k. Barbecues/Cook Stoves: The applicant must provide his/her own barbecues or cook stoves and fuel.
They must be approved for use in Mitchell Field by the Town and may be sited by the Town. No
barbecues or cook stoves may be used inside the Bandstand or on the brick walkway.
l. Water: Drinking water is not available in Mitchell Field.
m. Electricity: Limited electricity is available in Mitchell Field. If the applicant requires electricity for
an event, the event will be sited in an area where electricity is available. However, the applicant
will be responsible for all associated costs. Solar powered electricity is available at the Bandstand.
n. Private Equipment: Utilization of private equipment within the facility is permitted with prior
approval by the Town.
o. Noise: Amplified sound is allowed for an approved use provided it does not constitute a nuisance to
the surrounding property owners. All amplified sound will cease not later than 10:00 pm.
p. Sub-Contractor: The applicant is responsible for adherence to all regulation by any subcontractor,
employee or volunteer including but not limited to: caterers, musicians, etc.
Mitchell Field: Bandstand:
Resident, taxpayer, Harpswell based organization
or benefit to Harpswell residents or taxpayers .5 day $100 / full day $200 .5 day $100 / full day $200
Individual or organization - not Harpswell based
or no benefit to Harpswell residents or taxpayers .5 day $200 / full day $400 .5 day $200 / full day $400
Not-for-profit (recognized by government)
Harpswell based or benefit to Harpswell None .5 day $100 / full day $200*
Not Harpswell based or not benefit to Harpswell .5 day $100 / full day $200 .5 day $200 / full day $400*
For Profit entity (use approved by Board of Selectmen)
up to 200 people $500*+ $500*+
201-500 people $1000*+ $1000*+
over 500 people $2000*+ $2000*+
*requires Selectmen approval regardless of size
*+ fees listed are minimum fees and may be subject to change during Selectmen review
67
q. Decorations: No physical changes may be made to the property in any way. No staples, screws,
tacks, tape or any other material that may cause permanent damage shall be used to fasten or affix
anything to the Bandstand, brick walkway, fence or to any structure.
r. Damage: Mitchell Field/Bandstand grounds must be left as found. This means no damage to or
collecting of animals or plants, no refuse left behind and no damage to roads, trails, and structures.
Violators will be responsible for restoring the facility to the condition it was in prior to the approved
use.
s. Access: An event and its participants shall not interfere with the concurrent use and enjoyment of
Mitchell Field by others and there shall be no entry charge for non-event users. Participants in
events sponsored by non-profit organizations may be asked for voluntary donations.
t. Security: Groups exceeding 200 must provide private security covering the event.
u. Trash: Each applicant is responsible for providing trash receptacles that must be emptied at his/her
own expense and removed immediately after the event.
v. Intoxicating Beverages: Prohibited on the premises.
w. Waterfront: Swim at your own risk – no lifeguard on duty.
x. Picnic Tables: Picnic tables may be used for events, all but two that must be left near the waterfront
for use by others. Picnic tables must be returned to the waterfront area immediately after use.
4. Vendors
a. See Policy on Sale of Food Items at Mitchell Field by Nonprofits and Non-Profit Entity Request
Form for Use of Mitchell Field to Sell Food Items.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen March 6, 2014
Fees amended by Board of Selectmen October 4, 2018
68
RULES FOR GEORGE J MITCHELL FIELD
Mitchell Field is open from sunrise to sunset.
For your safety and to protect this resource:
• Remain on the trails when in the forested area.
• Stay off the bluff on the southwest perimeter. It is unstable.
• The buildings and water tower, which are safety hazards, are off limits.
• Leave the soil undisturbed.
• No fires are allowed.
• Leave flowers and other vegetation for others to enjoy.
• Carry out what you carry in – all trash.
Prohibited Items:
• Intoxicating beverages
• Hunting
Animal Control:
• Pets must be under owner’s control. From 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. daily, dogs must be
leashed.
• Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by their pets.
• Feeding or touching wild animals is dangerous and forbidden.
• Report unusual animal behavior to the Animal Control Officer at 1 (800) 501-1111.
Vehicles:
• Automobiles are allowed when the gate is open.
• All-terrain vehicles are not allowed.
ALL USES OF THIS FACILITY ARE AT THE USER’S RISK.
THERE ARE NO LIFEGUARDS
FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL THE TOWN OFFICE AT 833-5771
FOR AN EMERGENCY CALL 911
69
Town of Harpswell
Request for Use of Mitchell Field and/or Harpswell Bandstand
Group Making Request:
[ ] Resident or taxpayer [ ] Non-Resident [ ] Organization, Harpswell based [ ] Non-Profit,
Harpswell based [ ] Organization, not Harpswell based [ ] Non-Profit, not Harpswell based
[ ] For Profit If a benefit, for who or what purpose ________________
Contact Person_______________________________________________ Phone__________________
Address___________________________________________Email____________________________
I hereby request permission to use an area within Mitchell Field: ___________(include diagram)
Bandstand: [ ] Half Day [ ] Full Day [ ] Other ______________________________________
Date(s) requested______________________________________ Time: Start________ End________
Purpose of activity___________________________________________________________________
Special needs or requests__________________________________________ Number of
Guests_______
The Group Representative who will be present at all times and in charge of this event is:
Name______________________________________________________ Phone__________________
Electricity Needed_______ Amplified Sound_______ Diagram included showing use areas &
parking_____ Insurance_______ Sub-Contractor_______
Our group hereby acknowledges that it has received a copy of the Rules and the Group Use Policy
applicable to Mitchell Field/Bandstand. It agrees to adhere to these Rules and to the Group Use Policy.
Our group will leave the facilities in the same condition in which it found them, and agrees to pay the
full costs of repairing any damages incurred and/or clean up necessitated by this event.
The Town of Harpswell shall be held free and harmless from any liability for accidents, personal
injuries and damage to property caused by the activities and/or participants in this event.
Signature of Applicant______________________________________________ Date______________
[ ] The applicant has received a copy of the Rules.
[ ] The applicant has received a copy of the Group Use Policy.
Application received by____________________________________________Date_______________
Request: Approved [ ] Disapproved [ ] Group Notified [ ] Proof of Insurance [ ]
Total Fee: $________________ Paid [ ] Deposit Received [ ] Deposit refunded [ ]
By _____________________________________________________________Date______________
70
POLICY ON SALE OF FOOD ITEMS AT MITCHELL FIELD BY NONPROFITS
Mitchell Field is the property of the Town of Harpswell. It is maintained for the benefit and use of
Harpswell property owners, renters and their guests. At times the Board of Selectmen is requested to
permit the sale of food items at Mitchell Field by nonprofit organizations. Granting such permission
shall be based on the following:
1. The organization shall be clearly identified and shall be non-profit in nature. For instance, the
organization may include but not necessarily be limited to educational, charitable or governmental in
purpose.
2. The organization shall provide proof of liability insurance consistent with the Town’s Group Use Policy
for Mitchell Field.
3. The organization must clean up any debris resulting from its use, and ensure that the property is returned
to its condition prior to the sales activity.
4. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to limit the number of organizations selling food items at any
one event.
5. Staff shall review and make a determination on applications. If staff is unable to reach a determination,
the final determination as to the granting of permission for the sale of food items by nonprofits rests
with the Board of Selectmen, and in making such determination, the benefit to the general community
shall be considered.
6. The organization shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary food license required by the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services. The organization shall submit a copy of the license or
evidence that one is not required.
7. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to charge a fee to the organization for permitting the sale of
food items.
8. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to set any other limitations it deems necessary or appropriate.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen June 27, 2013
POLICY REGARDING POLITICAL SIGNS ON TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY
Signs bearing political messages relating to an election, primary, referendum or warrant article are
prohibited on Town-owned property and buildings, excluding Town roads, outside the travelled way;
provided however that political signs are prohibited on Community Drive and all ways at Mitchell
Field.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 9, 2010
71
Potts Point Town Dock Policy
The Town of Harpswell owns and maintains a public wharf and float system on Potts Point providing
public access to Casco Bay.
The purpose of this policy is to (1) foster an organized and orderly use of the Town’s float system at
the Town Dock; and (2) adopt rules and regulations governing the use of a Town Wharf, Dock or Float
that establish a systematic approach for the Harbormaster to grant permission for vessels to exceed the
thirty (30) minute tie-up limit, pursuant to Section 8.1.11 of the Harbor and Waterfront Ordinance..
This policy applies only to long-term dinghy registration. Owners of transient and temporary boat tieups
shall still contact the Harbormaster for use of the Town float as stated in the Harbor and
Waterfront Ordinance (section 8.1) A Town-issued registration and number shall be required for
keeping a dinghy, or skiff on designated float space at the Town Dock. A current registration
application form will be available on January 15 of each year (on April 1st in 2013) from the
Harbormaster, the Town Clerk’s Office or on the Town website (http://www.harpswell.maine.gov/).
Applications may be submitted to the Town Clerk, by mail, in person or by email addressed to
harbormaster@town.harpswell.me.us.
Upon receipt of a dinghy registration application, the Town Clerk shall affix the day’s date and at the
end of the day, forward the applications to the Harbormaster for processing. A permitted dinghy space
shall be assigned a location at the Town Dock by the Harbormaster on a first-come first served basis as
space permits and assigned in accordance with the priority list, allowing 10% of the available spaces to
be assigned to non-residents:
Priority List:
Residents and Non-Resident Taxpayers (25);
Non-Resident (3)
Note: the terms Resident, Non-Resident Taxpayer and Non-Resident are defined as set forth in Section
4, Definitions, of the Town of Harpswell’s Harbor and Waterfront Ordinance:
Resident: An individual who maintains a legal residence in the Town of Harpswell.
Non-Resident Taxpayer: A non-resident who pays real estate taxes to the Town of
Harpswell.
Non-Resident: Any individual who does not maintain a legal residence within the Town of
Harpswell.
All applications received on the day the number of applications exceeds the number of unassigned
spaces available at the dock will be entered into a lottery and, based on the priority list, the remaining
spaces will be assigned. Applicants will not be granted more than one dinghy registration in any given
year.
Following review of the applications the Harbormaster shall inform the applicants of the success or
failure of their application and issue registration numbers specific to the dinghy or skiff noted on the
application form. The applicant will have fifteen (15) business days to complete the registration
process pick up registration number and pay the registration fee. Failure to meet this deadline will
result in the voiding of his or her application and that space will go to the next applicant on the priority
list. The priority list shall be maintained from the current year’s application period until the next
application period. At which time, the priority list will begin again based on current year applications.
72
The issuance of a registration number specific to the dinghy or skiff allows the dinghy or skiff to be
secured at the designated float space and left unattended at the Town Dock for more than 30 minutes.
By virtue of the acceptance of a registration number by a dinghy or skiff owner or operator by the
Harbormaster, the owner/operator agrees to the following:
a. Each dinghy or skiff, shall be marked with the dinghy or skiff registration number, which shall be
assigned by the Harbormaster.
b. All dinghies and skiffs shall be properly secured and maintained, but shall not be secured with
chains or wire, or padlocked to the Town Dock.
c. No dinghy or skiff exceeding 12 feet in length, shall be registered for a designated float space at
the Town Dock.
The sale, lease, rental, transfer or assignment of a registration number is prohibited. The registration
numbers shall expire December 31 of each year. No vested rights to the issuance of a registration
number at a later date or a priority space assignment are obtained by the owner/operator by virtue of
the issuance of a registration number by the Harbormaster
POTTS POINT TOWN DOCK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
1. It shall be unlawful to leave a vessel at a Town Wharf, Dock or Float for a period exceeding
thirty (30) minutes without the permission of the Harbormaster.
2. No person shall create a public nuisance or consume alcoholic beverages on the Town Dock.
3. The storage of dinghies or skiffs, fishing gear, bait or personal items on the Town Dock is
prohibited.
4. No person shall leave any trash, garbage or waste on the Town Dock.
5. The refueling (either diesel, gasoline or otherwise) of boats, outboard motors or auxiliary
motors is prohibited on the Town Dock.
6. The Harbormaster may remove, or cause to be removed, to Town-owned property, any
unattended dinghy, or skiff obstructing use of designated areas after due effort has been made
by the Harbormaster to notify the owner or operator of said dinghy, or skiff of the violation.
The vessel owner shall be responsible for all associated costs of removal.
7. The Harbormaster shall have the general authority to supervise use of the Town Dock and shall
be responsible for the neat and orderly use of the Town Dock and for the assignment of float
space.
8. Any dinghy or skiff filled with water to the seat level shall be considered unattended.
Contact information
Town Office: 207 833-5771
Registration fee: Resident/Non-Resident Taxpayer: $50.00
Non-Resident $100.00
ADOPTED BY HARPSWELL BOARD OF SELECTMEN March 6, 2013
Amended June 25, 2015
Amended March 28, 2019
73
Town of Harpswell
RULES FOR TOWN TRAILS
Adopted November 4, 2004
1. Do not dig or disturb the soils.
2. Everything carried in must be carried out. This is the trash
disposal policy.
3. NO fires are allowed.
4. Intoxicating beverages are not allowed.
5. Do not pick any living thing. Leave everything for others to enjoy.
6. Pets must be under owner’s control.
7. Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by
their pets on the trail.
8. Report any unusual animal behavior to the Town of Harpswell’s
Animal Control Officer at 1-800-266-1444.
9. NO motorized vehicles allowed, other than wheelchairs and
authorized vehicles.
10. Users should wear safety orange clothing during hunting season.
All uses of the Town trails are at the user’s risk.
74
Management of Trails on Town Lands
Personnel and Responsibilities
1. Recreation Department Director (RDD)
The RDD Director shall oversee the maintenance of the trails on Town lands:
Cliff Trail
Devil’s Back Trail
Giant Stairs Trail
Mitchell Field Trails
And any future trails to be established on Town lands
Responsibilities include:
a. Appoint Trail Monitors
b. Produce trail maps and signage
c. Maintain a list of community volunteers who are interested in doing trail work and/or
have special skills (i.e., chainsaw, trucks and trailers for hauling, etc.). and organizing
community-wide work parties when more extensive maintenance is required
2. Trail Monitors (TM)
Each trail on Town lands shall have a designated Trail Monitor. The TM need not be a member of
the Recreation (RC) or Town Lands (TL) Committees but should be a person committed to monitoring and
seeing to the maintenance of the trail. Ideally this person may be the Town Land Steward.
Responsibilities include:
a. Clearing the trail of fallen trees, branches, and litter
b. Trimming back the sides of trail to allow for clear and easy passage
c. Maintaining trail blazes, signs and replenishing maps
d. Walking trail and reporting condition back to RC at least twice a year
e. Notifying the RDD when additional volunteers are needed for major
remediation and other trail improvements
3. Volunteers
All volunteers shall sign a Town Volunteer Liability Release form (Appendix A).
4. Work Party Safety
If power equipment (chainsaws, trimmers, etc.) is to be used, all members of the work party are
required to follow the procedures outlined in Appendix B.
Unofficial Trails
The TM shall identify unofficial trails (often referred to as Bootleg trails) and monitor their
effect on the town trail. If it leads hikers off the town trail, the TM shall take actions to block the trail
with brush or logs, establish new signs and blazes, or other appropriate means to prevent hikers from
getting lost. If the problem persists (i.e., the “bootlegger” removes the barriers or cuts new trails) the TM
shall bring the issue to the RDD. From there the matter will go as high as needed (Administrator, BOS).
Public Input and Communication
At each trailhead and exit a sign shall read: “To report a downed tree or other trail problem, please
notify the Recreation Department Director” and shall include the phone number and email.
Town Rules
The Town, through whatever appropriate means, shall establish that ONLY designated parties such
as the TM, RC, and TL have the authority to create, alter or discontinue sections of trails on Town lands.
Furthermore, these parties, under the direction of the Recreation Director, have authority for maintenance of
the trails and for re-routes for safety and convenience. Any new or major trail construction shall go through
the established process of plans to be brought before the Board of Selectmen
75
APPENDIX A
Town of Harpswell Recreation Department
P.O. Box 39
Harpswell, Maine 04079
Volunteer Liability Release
Name: Phone:
Address: E--mail:
City/St/Zip:
I would like to participate in the following activity: Trail Clearing & Construction Operations
Site of the activity:
Duration of the activity:
Specific hazards and restrictions:
This activity will involve clipping & cutting trees & bushes, and mowing grass. These operations will involve
the use of hand tools, power lawn mowers and chain saws. There is always potential danger of injury associated
with falling limbs and trees.
Anyone operating a lawn mower or chain saw does so at their own risk, with the understanding that the
operator will comply with all safety and equipment procedures and guidelines governing correct use, proper
clothing attire and any other safety procedures as stated in the equipment operating manual.
Release from Liability
In consideration of the permission granted to the undersigned by the Town of Harpswell to participate in the
above stated volunteer support activities during the Spring, Summer and Fall of (year), the undersigned hereby
releases and discharges the Town of Harpswell, its agents and officers, from all actions, causes of action,
damages, claims or demands which the undersigned, the undersigned’s heirs, executor, administrators and
assigns may have against the aforementioned parties, for all personal injuries, known or unknown, which the
undersigned has or may incur by participation in the above mentioned activities. The undersigned realizes
he/she must provide his/her own health accident insurance for injuries that they may sustain while participating
in the above-mentioned activities. The undersigned gives the supervisor permission to obtain whatever medical
treatment may be necessary in the event of an injury which renders the undersigned unable to make a conscious
decision of their own.
I have read and understand the description of activity, specific hazards and restrictions, and agree to the Release
from Liability.
Signature of Participant/Guardian ________________ ____ _ _______ ____ ____ _
Date:_________________________
76
APPENDIX B
Use of Chainsaws, Trimmers and other powered tools.
- While the town does not require specific training before a person can use gas or electric powered tools or
equipment on town property when performing trail maintenance, it is assumed that the user is familiar
with the tool or equipment, knows how to operate it in accordance with the operating instructions, and is
familiar with its associated safety requirements.
- Persons utilizing the equipment/ tools are doing so at their own risk.
- At a minimum, the user is required to wear the appropriate Personal Protection
Equipment (PPE) recommended when operating specific equipment.
- Chainsaw:
- Approved hardhat, full brim or cap style
- Wrap-around eye protection (safety glasses or shield)
- Hearing protection
- Long sleeve shirt and long pants
- Gloves
- Boots
- Chain saw chaps
- Trimmer:
- Wrap-around eye protection (safety glasses or shield)
- Hearing protection
- Long sleeve shirt and long pants
- Gloves
- Boots
- PPE is required for all members of the crew who will be working in proximity of powered
equipment:
- Safety glasses
- Hearing protection
- Gloves
- A safety brief must be conducted for the work crew prior to starting the project on required safety
instructions, standoff requirements and safety equipment.
- The work crew must have a first aid kit available when power tools or equipment are in use.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen August 8, 2013
77
TOWN LAND STEWARDS
To create the position of Town Land Steward for each parcel of town owned land. Those
seeking to be Stewards will apply using the Town Committee application forms and will be
appointed by the Select Board for 2-year terms. A Town Land Committee member shall
automatically be considered a Steward with the term to correspond to the member’s term on the
Town lands Committee.
The Town Lands Committee will assign each Steward to one or more parcels of land to monitor and
To report the conditions of those parcels to the Town Lands Committee at least twice per year based
on a schedule developed by the Committee. Stewards are observers and reporters. They are not
managers of town lands.
The Town Lands Committee shall adopt reporting formats for the Stewards and for the Committee
substantially similar to the drafts accompanying this proposal. The Committee shall report annually
to the Select Board on the conditions of each parcel for which they are responsible, along with
recommendations for action, if any.
Approved by Board of Selectmen as revised June 5, 2008
Amended by Board of Selectmen May 25, 2016
(Stewards Form next Page)
78
79
Town of Harpswell Tobacco-Free Resolution
The Town of Harpswell in the State of Maine in order to promote the health and safety of residents, visitors
and recreation participants establishes a Tobacco-Free Campus at the following Town owned properties or
facilities: Trufant-Summerton Ballfield property, the Old Town Meeting House property, Recycling Center
and Transfer Station facilities. Employees and other visitors shall not smoke or use any tobacco products
within 30 feet of any entranceway to any building at the Town Office.
Whereas the Town of Harpswell, Maine has set a goal that Town property be a safe and healthy place to
recreate, live and work; and
Whereas tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of death and disease in the United States, as well
as in the state of Maine; and
Whereas secondhand smoke contains many harmful chemicals and cancer causing agents, and is a serious
health risk to humans, especially infants, children, and pregnant women; and increases a nonsmokers’ risk of
asthma, heart disease, and lung cancer; and
Whereas chewing tobacco contains many harmful chemicals and cancer-causing agents, and its use is
associated with concerns of the mouth, gums, tongue, and throat; and
Whereas vaping products are electronic nicotine delivery devices such as e-cigarettes, e-pipes, e-hookahs
and hookah pens that are battery operated devices that are used to inhale a vaporized liquid solution that
frequently contains nicotine and also contains additional ingredients that are suspected of being harmful to
humans; and
Whereas the purpose of the recreation program is to provide quality recreation and leisure experiences that
enhance the quality of life of the citizens of Harpswell, including providing a safe environment for these
experiences; and
Whereas the tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke are contrary to enhancing the quality of life
and providing safe environments; and
Whereas the staff and coaches are important role models for the youth who participate in community
recreation activities and whereas what coaches promote is respected and imitated by youth; and
Whereas the intent of this Policy is to create a tobacco-free environment for all residents and visitors in
certain public areas of Harpswell;
Now therefore, be it resolved that the above-mentioned Town-owned properties are to be tobacco-free or
tobacco restricted, including but not limited to cigarettes, non-FDA approved electronic nicotine devices,
cigars, and chewing tobacco.
Be it further resolved that:
• Neither tobacco free company sponsorship nor their resource will be accepted and participants and
staff will be discouraged from wearing clothing or using gear that advertises tobacco products.
• Tobacco-free signage, provided at no expense by the Health Maine Partnership, will be posted in
appropriate areas.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen October 2, 2008; Amended by the Board August 3, 2017
80
TOWING OF DISABLES VESSELS
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to provide a clear understanding of boat operator responsibilities in
assisting disabled vessels.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Town of Harpswell will operate Town owned vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell recognizes that in the operation of the Marine Patrol Boat, it may be
necessary to provide assistance to disabled vessels. This assistance should explore all
reasonable remedies that do not necessitate the towing of the disabled vessel.
Exception: In the event that an operator of the Marine Patrol Boat encounters a disabled vessel that is in
immediate danger or presents a life safety risk to the occupants, the operator is authorized to
take the appropriate action (within their skills and abilities) to tow the vessel to a safe position
clear of the hazard.
Responsibility:
The operator of the Marine Patrol Boat will require the disabled vessel occupants to don
personal flotation devices.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012
81
Town Of Harpswell
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field Use Policy
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field is the property of the Town of Harpswell. The Recreation Director administers this
Policy. The Recreation Director may waive any provision of this policy if determined that such waiver is consistent
with the intent of this policy and in the public interest.
It is the policy of the Town of Harpswell and its Recreation Department to allow the use of Trufant Summerton
Athletic Field to:
• Residents and non-resident taxpayers
• Non-profit organizations and businesses that reside in Harpswell or pay taxes in Harpswell
• Youth organizations in Harpswell and the greater Harpswell area that provide services for Harpswell residents
• Other organizations that have a significant participation rate of Harpswell residents or provide services for
Harpswell residents
All groups must comply with applicable laws and regulation prohibiting discrimination. All activities conducted shall
comply with all State and federal laws and with all local ordinances. Activities that pose a threat to persons or
property are prohibited. The use of the facility may be denied if the proposed event is inconsistent with the nature
and location of the property. The Town reserves the right to refuse the use of the facility to any group.
1) The scheduling of the Athletic Field shall be done on the following premise with Harpswell groups taking
precedence over others:
• Recreation Department programs, activities and functions
• Youth programs
• All others listed above on first come, first served basis
2) The applicant must complete a Group Use application requesting use for the event.
3) Facilities:
Water – There is water available in the concession stand.
Electricity – Electricity is available at the facility. However, the applicant will be responsible for all associated
costs.
Restrooms – There are two restrooms in the garage.
4) Tents, barbeques/cookstoves, and private equipment are permitted. Applicants are responsible for providing
their own equipment at their expense. All equipment must be removed immediately after the event.
5) Use of sports equipment owned by the Town of Harpswell may be permitted if equipment is available and
approved by the Recreation Director.
6) No use of the concession stand for profit will be permitted.
7) The Town of Harpswell reserves the exclusive right to either deny/cancel use of the facility based upon
condition, weather, and the wear of the impending activity on the facility for any reason at any time.
8) Any group using the facility is responsible for costs of any damages or missing property which occur during
the time of their use. Costs that are incurred for additional clean up/maintenance time may be charged.
82
9) An event and its participants shall not interfere with the concurrent use and enjoyment of the facility by
others and there shall be no entry charge for non-event users. Participants in events sponsored by non-profit
organizations may be asked for voluntary donations.
10) No physical changes may be made to the property in any way. No staples, screws, tacks, tape or any other
material that may cause permanent damage shall be used to fasten or affix anything to structures or fencing.
11) The Trufant Summerton Athletic Field is an alcohol, drug, tobacco, vape, e-cig, etc. free facility.
12) Dogs are not permitted inside the fenced areas.
13) Each applicant is responsible for providing trash receptacles that must be emptied at his/her own expense
and removed immediately after the event.
14) A $25 refundable security deposit beyond the facility fee will be collected at the time of approval. This
deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 30 business days of the event if all conditions of the Use
Policy have been met.
15) Functions sponsored by the Town of Harpswell and school groups are exempt from fees. Applicable fees are
below and are due upon approval of use.
Fee Schedule:
Residents and non-resident taxpayers (groups over 25) $10 per hour
Businesses and non-profit organizations within Harpswell $15 per hour
Youth organizations $5 per child under 18
Other organizations significant Harpswell attendance/providing services $20 per hour
16) Payment may be made by cash, check or credit card at the Harpswell Town Office.
17) The applicant must provide a certificate of public liability insurance for the event. The Town of Harpswell
must be named as an additional insured in the amount of $400,000.
Rules for Trufant Summerton Athletic Field
• Open from sunrise to sunset
• Leave the soil undisturbed
• No fires or fireworks allowed
• Carry In – Carry Out trash policy
• No bicycles or motorized vehicles permitted on field
• No dogs permitted inside the fenced areas
• No climbing on dugouts or fences
• No alcohol, drugs, tobacco, vape, e-cigs, etc.
Animal Control
• Dogs permitted outside the fenced area only
• Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by their pets
• Feeding or touching wild animals is dangerous and forbidden
• Report unusual animal behavior to the Animal Control Officer at 1-800-501-1111
All uses of this facility are at the user’s risk
83
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field
Group Use Application
Date of Event___________________________________ Day _________________________________
Time______________________________ Alternate Date_____________________________________
One-time Event On-going Use (end date_________)
Name of Event or Activity ______________________________________________________________
Sponsoring Group/Club __________________________Contact Name __________________________
Phone _______________________________ Email _________________________________________
Address ________________________ Town/Zip____________________________
Event Director if different from above _____________________________________________________
Proposed Activity or Activities ____________
Estimated Attendance ____________ Will admission fees be charged? __________________________
Specify area to be used_________________________________________________________________
Specific Equipment or Set up Requested ___________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS: General Liability Insurance coverage required in the amount of
$400,000 with the Town named as additional insured. Company name, policy number and certificate of
coverage will be required upon approval.
The Town of Harpswell shall be held free and harmless from any liability for accidents, personal injuries and
damage to property caused by the activities and/or participants in this event.
[ ] I have received a copy of and agree to all terms of the Use Policy.
[ ] I agree to pay any facility usage fees and/or any fees incurred due to electricity usage, damage, missing
items, or excessive clean up.
Signature of Applicant _________ ________________ Date ______________
Request: Approved [ ] Denied [ ] Group Notified [ ] Proof of Insurance [ ] Fees $______
Comments ___________________________________________________________________________
Signature _________________ ______________________________________________________
Recreation Director Date
84
POLICY FOR USE AND OPERATION OF MOWER
The Town of Harpswell has purchased a mower for use only by authorized volunteers*
at Mitchell Field. When not in use, the mower shall be stored on-site in the garden building where an
activity/incident log shall be maintained indicating the date and time of use, the area mowed, the volunteer
responsible and note any incidents. This log shall be submitted to the Town Office on a monthly basis.
Issues related to maintenance shall be brought to the immediate attention of Town administrative staff. The
purchase of fuel shall be authorized by Town staff and payment shall be made directly by the Town to the
vendor from whom the fuel was purchased.
*An authorized volunteer must at least 18 years of age and sign a waiver which shall be kept on file at the
Town Office.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen April 25, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 19, 2013
TOWN OF HARPSWELL POLICY FOR USE OF TOWN OFFICE MEETING FACILITIES
Adopted May 26, 2011
Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to outline the circumstances under which the Town Office meeting
facilities may be used. It is the intent of this policy to give priority for use of meeting rooms to the Board of
Selectmen, its appointed Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces, Town-sponsored recreational
programs and staff.
Policy: It is the general policy that the Town Office meeting facilities shall be used primarily by the Board
of Selectmen, its appointed Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces, Town-sponsored
recreational programs and staff. Additionally, the meeting facilities shall be made available for use by other
government agencies and officials, groups and organizations receiving direct funding from the Town and
not-for-profit and civic organizations when such uses can be accommodated during regular business hours
without interfering with the needs of the Town or with citizens wishing to transact business. For priority
uses 5, 6 & 7 below, after hours use may be allowed for special circumstances as authorized by the Town
Administrator. The use of the Town Office Building meeting space by for-profit entities is not authorized.
Priorities for Use:
1. Meeting of the Board of Selectmen
2. Meeting of Town Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces
3. Recreational Program
4. Meeting of Town staff
5. Meeting requested by agencies or officials of County, State or Federal Governments
6. Meeting of Groups & Organizations receiving direct funding from the Town
85
7. Meeting for Not-for-Profit Organizations where the meeting is open to the general public and
intended to provide information to the general public.
A schedule for use of the Town Office meeting rooms shall be maintained at the Front Desk. The Town
Administrator should be contacted in the event of a scheduling conflict or if a question arises regarding
priority uses.
VEHICLE USE POLICY
Adopted March 2, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
The Town vehicle is for the use of the Codes Enforcement Office, the Assessing Office and such
other Town uses as the Town Administrator may determine. The operation of the Town vehicle will be for a
one-year period, beginning January 1, 2000, to determine its economic feasibility. If continued, it is
expected that the 2000 vehicle will be sold and replaced by the next vehicle turned back by the Sheriff.
A log book will be maintained in the vehicle and kept current each time the vehicle is used. The
following information shall be recorded in the log book:
1. Purpose of usage, user and mileage for each use
2. All purchases of gasoline, lubricants and other consumables showing their amount and
cost
3. A description and cost of all repairs and upkeep
4. A description of any damage to or by the vehicle
5. Any operating comments the driver may submit
The Town Administrator shall see that these records are kept, analyzed and the results presented to
the Selectmen prior to the return of the next vehicle.
Use of vehicle shall be within Harpswell town limits unless prior approval has been received from
Town Administrator or his/her delegate.
86
BOSTON POST CANE POLICY
Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to provide for the preservation of the tradition of the Boston Post Cane which
seeks to recognize and show appreciation for the oldest resident of Harpswell.
Requirements
To be nominated to receive the distinction, a person must:
1. be the oldest identified resident,
2. have been a resident in Harpswell for a minimum of 25 years including the most recent 10 years,
3. be 90 years of age or older, and
4. be willing to receive the honor in person or through a family member or friend.
Resident is defined as someone who is currently on the voter registration list or would qualify to be on the
voter registration list. Persons living outside the town on a temporary basis with the intent to return or in an
area nursing home may be eligible.
The Harpswell Board of Selectmen shall make the final decision about who shall receive the award and
provide for public acknowledgment of such resident.
Method of Search
The Town shall endeavor to determine the oldest resident by means such as review of voter registration list,
advertising, inquiry of civic groups, general public knowledge, or nomination by family or friends. The
Board of Selectmen shall establish a nomination period of not more than 60 days. Nomination forms will be
available online or at the Town Clerk’s Office.
Presentation
The Chair of the Harpswell Board of Selectmen or his/her designee shall present Harpswell’s oldest resident
with a plaque and pin signifying the honor. The location of the presentation will be determined according to
the circumstances of the honoree. If practicable, there shall be a photograph taken of the honoree with the
cane, however, the cane shall be returned for display at the Harpswell Town Office. Once awarded, the
subsequent discovery of an older resident or the relocation of another older person to the community shall
not invalidate the honor or designation.
The recipient shall retain the honor as long as he or she remains in Harpswell or in a nearby nursing home or
residence. The Town Clerk’s Office upon knowledge or notification that the recipient has died, changed
residency, or otherwise refused the honor, shall so inform the Board of Selectmen that a new search should
begin.
This policy shall be administered with reasonable flexibility by the Board of Selectmen.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 14, 2015
87
BOSTON POST CANE NOMINATION FORM
Harpswell, Maine
Name of Nominee: ___________________________________________________________
Nominee’s address:
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Nominee’s Date of Birth: _______________Telephone #:____________________
Year Nominee became a Harpswell resident: _______________
Please attach proof of date of birth and residency when submitting form.
Name of Person Making Nomination:
_____________________________________________
Address: ___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Telephone #:
___________________________________________________________
Email Address:
___________________________________________________________
Please forward form and attachments to:
Town Clerk’s Office
P.O. Box 39
Harpswell, Maine 04079
Fax: 207-833-0058 or
rknight@town.harpswell.me.us
If you have any questions please call Roz Knight, Town Clerk, at 207-833-5771.
88
COMMITTEE GUIDELINES---TOWN OF HARPSWELL
Effective April 15, 1998
Amended February 3, 2000, Amended September 27, 2001
Amended July 30, 2009, Amended May 6, 2010
Amended May 26, 2011, Amended December 13, 2012
Amended July 9, 2015
The role of most committees is to advise the Selectmen of the Town. Their mandate is to make recommendations and to draft
policies, if appropriate, for consideration and possible implementation by the Selectmen. Some committees have specific authority
vested in them by Maine Statute and Harpswell ordinance such as the Board of Appeals, Planning Board and Conservation
Commission. The following guidelines apply to all Town committees.
1. Committee members are appointed by the Selectmen as specified by law or ordinance, or at the discretion of the
Selectmen. Appointments terminate on April 30 of the appropriate year or 60 days from date of appointment should the
appointee not accept appointment by failing to execute a committee oath form on file at the Town Clerk’s Office.
2. Reasonable attendance at committee meetings is expected. Continued absence will result in replacement.
3. A quorum of a committee, required for a formal meeting, is a simple majority of all members.
4. The Selectmen may appoint the committee Chairman or authorize the committee to elect its own Chairman. When such
election is not made, the Selectmen shall designate the Chairman. The committee may elect its Secretary.
5. Minutes of all committee meetings shall be filed with the Selectmen no later than five days after the committee meeting at
which the minutes are accepted. Minutes are available for public review and should contain an account of all subjects
discussed and any recommendations and votes taken or other actions.
6. All committees are subject to the Freedom of Access law and to the Town’s Freedom of Access Policy. All meetings
must be open to the public and held on public property; however, the Chairman may determine the amount of public
participation allowed.
7. Only committee members who have accepted appointments or re-appointments may vote. In case of a tie vote, the vote
shall be considered negative.
8. A committee may take or approve actions, hold votes or authorize recommendations to the Board of Selectmen (BOS) or
take other actions only at official meetings when a quorum (more than half the members) is present. (Alternates acting in
the absence of a member are counted as members for the purpose of establishing a quorum.)
In the absence of a quorum, the committee may hold informal discussions. Any new information shared at an informal
meeting should subsequently be shared with members who are absent.
Recommendations to the BOS must be authorized by majority vote at an official meeting and in presenting a
recommendation to the BOS, the number of yeas & nays shall be reported.
Committees may not make decisions on behalf of the Town except as specifically provided by Maine statute or Harpswell
ordinance.
9. The Chair of the Board of Selectmen, or the Chair’s designee, should be consulted about any proposed media coverage.
All documents issued by a committee to the media or to any agency, other than the Town, must first be cleared by the
Chair of the Board of Selectmen, or the Chair’s designee. Media contacts on behalf of the committee should only be
made by the Chairman. No committee or committee members should represent that it/he/she is speaking on behalf of the
Town unless officially authorized to do so.
10. No committee or committee member may commit Town funds. The expenditure of funds, within amounts appropriated,
must be approved by the Selectmen. Town purchasing policies must be followed. Committees in needing to make a
purchase should consult the Town Administrator.
11. Notice should be given to the Town Administrator well in advance of any meeting dates to allow for adequate public
notice. Committees should try to avoid scheduling meetings at the same time as other meetings. No meetings may be
held at the same time as Selectmen’s Meetings or Town Meetings.
12. Upon acceptance of appointment to a committee, a person shall sign a copy of these Committee Guidelines and deposit
the signed copy with the Town Administrator.
I have received a copy of these guidelines
_____________________________________ _____________________
Signature Date
_____________________________________
Please Print Name
89
ENHANCED 911 ROAD NAME POLICY
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 10, 2001.
1. A property owner (owning property that is accessed from the proposed road) submits three
proposed road names, in the order of preference, and signed by a majority of the property owners
on the road to be named.
2. The 911 Addressing Officer reviews the three choices and selects the most appropriate name
following the State of Maine guidelines and the Harpswell 911 Ordinance guidelines. Generally
speaking, the road name choice selected would NOT be similar in name or sound to an existing
road name and would NOT include a number in the name (such as Sky Lane One) and would
NOT have special characters in the name (such as hyphens, apostrophes etc.)
3. The 911 Addressing Officer submits her recommendation to the Board of Selectmen for their
review and final approval at a Selectmen’s meeting.
4. If property owners are unable to submit road names that meet the above criteria, the Board of
Selectmen will determine the name.
5. Renaming roads will ONLY be considered if The Board of Selectmen determines that there is a
public safety concern.
90
STREET LIGHTING POLICY
Public places should have street lighting sufficient to protect public safety. Lighting should be located on the
nearest pole to the entrance of the building or the nearest pole to the entrance/exit of the parking area. Public
places include, but are not limited to, schools, churches, libraries, fire departments, community halls, grange
halls, playing fields and municipal areas.
The Selectmen should, consistent with public safety, limit the proliferation of street lights to minimize the
effect of lighting on energy consumption, on light pollution, and to protect the rural character of the Town.
Intersections of Town or state aid roads with side roads having significant traffic capacity, as well as areas
with sharp or otherwise dangerous curves, should be lighted in order to draw a driver’s attention to the
potential hazard.
Congested areas having speed limits of 25 MPH or slower should be lighted where absolutely needed based
on evidence of pedestrian traffic on or near the roadway. Pedestrians are expected to carry flashlights and/or
other forms of lighting to make presence known to drivers.
The Town should consult with Central Maine Power to ensure that new street lights are installed with a
minimum of glare and light trespass while lighting the desired area with a non-irritating, pleasant and safe
light spectrum. Lights should be the most energy efficient and cost effective lighting available.
The Town shall provide a form on which residents, and non-resident property owners, may request addition,
retention, or removal of street lights. The form shall include the following:
• Name, address and contact information of the requesting resident,
• General location of the light or proposed light (nearest street address)
• Specific utility pole by identifying numbers, letters or other means
• Aspects of the Street Lighting Policy that support the request
• Other basis and evidence that support the request
• Incidence of accidents or other events that support the request
• Names and addresses of other residents of the area who support the request
Town staff shall evaluate requests, including obtaining information from law enforcement that may have a
bearing on the requests, and shall refer them to the Select Board with or without recommendations.
For effective administration of this policy, the Select Board shall review requests not more than once per
calendar year.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 20, 2010
Revised by the Board of Selectmen April 12, 2012
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 2, 2015
91
SPONSORSHIP POLICY
Periodically, the Town is asked to sponsor an event. In deciding whether the Town should be a sponsor, the
Board of Selectmen shall consider the following:
Question 1. Is the event occurring on Town or public property?
Question 2. Is the event under the control, in whole or part, of the Town? Does the Town have a role in
organizing, directing or coordinating the event?
Question 3. Is the event consistent with identified goals of (1) the Board of Selectmen, (2) any advisory
committee or (3) the Town’s Comprehensive Plan as determined by the Board of Selectmen?
Question 4. Is there any fundraising activity associated with the event? If so, is it for a non-profit purpose
consistent with Question 3?
Question 5. Is there any high-risk activity occurring at the event for which the Town’s insurance carrier has
advised that the Town should prohibit?
The Town shall be considered a sponsor of an event only upon majority vote of the Board of Selectmen at a
publicly held meeting.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 22, 2010
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE POLICY
The Town Administrator’s designee shall be the Deputy Town Administrator, except in those instances
where another designee is specified. This designation is consistent with the Deputy Town Administrator’s
job description which requires the Deputy Town Administrator to assume the duties and responsibilities of
the Town Administrator in his/her absence.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen March 2, 2017
92
TOWN OF HARPSWELL RECREATION DEPT. VOLUNTEER BACKGROUND CHECK
The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation value the safety of those who use our and take part in our
programs, either as participants, employees or volunteers. To this end, we will take sound measures to
attempt to protect our employees, volunteers and those we serve from potential harm.
We have special regard for children, who trust in our ability to provide them with wholesome, safe
recreational experiences. One specific measure will be to perform background checks on volunteers and
independent contractors who have the potential for regular or intermittent contact with children.
In order to protect the participants in Harpswell Recreation children’s programs and protect the integrity of
the Town the following Volunteer Background Check Policy has been established.
Prospective volunteers/independent contractors will complete an application with a Criminal History
Background Check Authorization and Release form. The following information will be collected from
volunteers to initiate the screening process:
1. First Name, Last Name, Middle Initial
2. Any alternate or maiden names
3. Date of Birth
4. Current Address, if less than 3 years, previous address
5. Signature authorizing permission to run the background check
6. Response (Yes or No) to Have you ever been convicted of a criminal offense
7. Response (Yes or No) to Have you ever been charged with a crime against a child
8. Response (Yes or No) to Are there any charges currently pending against you
9. All volunteer and independent contract applicants (of legal age) will be screened.
Screening Process
Upon receipt of the Criminal History Background Check authorization form, the background screening will
be conducted by authorized staff.
Disclosure information is only used for the specific purpose for which it was requested and for which the
volunteer’s full consent has been given.
Any crime, misdemeanor or felony where the applicant is the perpetrator, involving children as either a
victim or an accomplice is cause for exclusion. Having a criminal record will not necessarily bar someone
for working with us. This will depend on the nature of the application and the circumstances and
background of the offenses.
The following disqualifiers will be used as a guide in determining the volunteer’s eligibility:
Guilty or plea of guilty or no contest to the following:
1. All Sex Offenses (no time limit)
2. All Felony Violence (no time limit)
3. All Felony Offense (past 5 years)
4. All Misdemeanor Violence (past 3 years)
5. Any other Misdemeanor (past 3 years)
The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation want to be sure that every decision made about an
individual’s eligibility to volunteer is correct. The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation will
carefully consider all the information before any decisions are made that affect an individual’s eligibility.
Upon finding a record that may result in an ineligible determination, Harpswell Recreation will contact the
volunteer to make certain all information provided is accurate.
93
If a volunteer’s background check includes a charge set forth on the list of disqualifiers above, Harpswell
Recreation shall immediately disqualify that individual from volunteering.
Retention of Records
Volunteer Background Check record will be retained for 60 years if accepted as a volunteer or otherwise for
2 years.
Repeat Background Checks
Any volunteer/independent contractor that has served previously but three years has passed since serving,
will subject to a current Criminal Background Check.
Prepared by: Gina Perow, Interim Recreation Director
December 30, 2008
Revised on January 14, 2009
WEBSITE LINKS POLICY
The Town of Harpswell may include links on the Harpswell web site to organizations funded by the Town;
to quasi-governmental entities; and to certain information that is considered to be of interest to Harpswell
residents. The presence of a link on the Harpswell web site does not imply or indicate Town support for the
product, organization or point of view expressed on the linked site or supported by the sponsoring
organization. While reasonable efforts are made to include accurate information, appearance of a link is not
a guarantee of accuracy. The Town will not link directly to businesses, unless considered in a category
previously stated. All decisions as to what links appear on the Harpswell web site are the responsibility of
the Harpswell Board of Selectmen or its designee.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 13, 2011
TOWN OF
HARPSWELL
POLICY
MANUAL
GENERAL Pgs Pgs
• Preamble 1 • Freedom of Access Procedures 24
• Severability 1 • Placement of Items on Secret Ballot 28
• Affirmative Action 1 • Public Participation - Selectmen's Mtgs 29
• Hiring 1 • Roads/Road Commissioner Policies 30
• Physicals 1
• Personnel File 1 FISCAL
• Confidentiality 1 • Advanced Payment of Mooring Reg Fees 32
• Performance Evaluations 1 • Advance Shellfish License Fees 32
• Conflict of Interest 1 • Board of Appeals Fee Waiver 33
• Gift 2 • Budgetary Policies 33
• Town Property & Equipment 2 • Cash Receipts 34
• Employee Classification 2 • Cell Phone Use Allowance Policy 35
• Probationary 2 • Contingency Policy 36
• Hours of Work 3 • Competitive Bid Policy 36
• Overtime/Compensatory Time 3 • Credit Card Fee Refund Policy 37
• Wages 3 • Debt Management Policy 37
• Appointed Officials Policy 3 • Disposition of Tax Acquired Property 39
• Fee and Charges Policy 42
BENEFITS • Fixed Asset Policy 43
• Health Insurance 4 • Funding for Non-Profit Organization 44
• Life Insurance 4 • Interest on Transfer Station Charges 45
• Dental Insurance 5 • Investment Policy 45
• Worker's Compensation 4 • Material Removal Recycling Ctr/Transfer 48
• Social Security 4 • Mileage Reimbursement 48
• Maine State Retirement System 5 • Order of Municipal Officers 49
• Deferred Compensation Plan 5 • Petty Cash Policy 50
• Holidays 5 • Post Issuance Compliance Policy 51
• Vacation 6 • Purchasing Policy 53
• Sick Leave 7 • Purchase Order Requisition Form 54
• Short-Term Disability 7 • Special Revenue Fund for Recreation 55
• Leaves of Absence 8 • Town Development Fees Waiver 55
• Jury Duty 8 • Disbursement Warrants Wages & Benefits 56
• Hazardous Weather Policy 8 • Disbursement Warrants State Fees 57
• Family and Medical Leave Act 9 • Use of MBNA Credit Card 58
PROCEDURAL TOWN PROPERTY / FACILITIES
• Discipline 10 • Abandoned/Recovered Property 59
• Grievance Procedure 10 • Boat Operation Qualification 60
• Employment Separation 10 • Boat Maintenance Policy 61
• Sexual Harassment Policy 11 • Facility Closure Policy for Emergencies 61
• Annual Written Notificaton of Harassment 12 • Future Acquisition of Land Policy 62
• Policy of Workplace Threats/Violence 14 • Lease of Town Property at Orr's Is Bridge 64
• Threat Incident Report 15 • Mitchell Field/Bandstand Group Use Policy 65
• Use of Information Technology Rscs 18 • Mitchell Field Rules 68
• Inspection Policy for Field Workers 21 • Mitchell Field - Request for Use of 69
• Significant Development Proposals 22 • Mitchell Field Food Sale Policy 70
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TOWN PROPERTY / FACILITIES (con't) Pgs
• Political Signs on Town Property 70
• Potts Point Town Dock 71
• Rules For Town Trails 73
• Management of Trails on Town lands 74
• Stewards Policy & Form 77
• Tobacco-Free Resolution 79
• Towing of Disabled Vessels 80
• Trufant-Summerton Athletic Field Use Policy 81
• Use & Operation of Mower 84
• Use of Town Office Meeting Facilities 84
• Vehicle Use Policy 85
MISCELLANEOUS
• Boston Post Cane Policy 86
• Committee Guidelines 88
• Enhanced 911 Road Name Policy 89
• Street Light Policy 90
• Sponsorship Policy 91
• Town Administration Designee Policy 91
• Volunteer Background Check Policy 92
• Website Links Policy 93
1
PREAMBLE
The Harpswell Board of Selectmen hereby adopts the following policy for the administration of
personnel activities of the employees of the Town of Harpswell. These rules shall supersede any policy(s)
previously adopted by the Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen may delete, modify or add to this policy at any time.
The provisions of this policy are not contractual, but rather, are general guidelines for the Town in its
relationship with its employees.
This policy does not apply to elected Town officials.
SEVERABIILTY
If any article, section or provision of this policy should be found to be invalid or unenforceable by
decision of the courts, only that article, section or provision specified shall be of no force and effect, and such
decision shall not invalidate any other article, section or provision.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
As an Equal Opportunity Employer, The Town of Harpswell shall employ and promote employees
without discrimination as to religion, race, age, sex, disability, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
national origin, political affiliation or sexual orientation except as a bona fide occupational qualification.
HIRING
The Town shall employ the best qualified persons who are available at the salary levels established for
the position. All other consideration being equal, preference will be given first to present employees, and then
to residents of Harpswell. Final decisions for hiring will be the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen. As
part of the hiring process for all positions, such positions shall be advertised.
PHYSICALS
As a condition of employment, the Town may require a physical exam, appropriate to the position, at the
expense of the Town by a physician of the Town’s choice.
PERSONNEL FILE
Personnel record files are maintained for each employee of the Town. Any employee may, upon
reasonable notice, review his/her file during normal working hours.
CONFIDENTIALITY
During the course of their duties, employees of the Town are privy to information which is sensitive,
confidential and/or personal in nature. Employees are required to respect the confidential nature of such
information. [See “Freedom of Access Policy”].
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
All employees will receive an annual performance review, in writing, by their supervisor and will have
an opportunity to discuss their evaluation with their reviewer.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No Town employee who is authorized to make purchases shall have any interest directly or indirectly in
any contract with the Town.
GIFT
No Town employee shall accept a gift exceeding $10.00 in value of any type from any person or
organization with whom the Town deals.
2
TOWN PROPERTY & EQUIPMENT
Employees must not, directly or indirectly, use or allow the use of Town property or equipment of any
kind for other than official activities, except as authorized by the Board of Selectmen or their designee.
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION (as assigned by Board of Selectmen)
A. Regular Full-time - Regular full-time employees work an annual average of 37.5 hours per week.
Regular full-time employees are entitled to the benefits provided to Town employees as described in
this policy manual, subject to eligibility requirements and any applicable waiting periods.
*Hrs. Worked Benefit (Holiday, Sick & **Vacation)
37.5 or more 8 hours
B. Regular Part-time – A regular part-time employee works an annual average of fewer than 37.5
hours per week.
Regular part-time employees who work an annual average of twenty (20) hours or more per week
are entitled to the benefits provided to part-time Town employees as described in this policy manual.
Any such benefits are subject to eligibility requirements and any applicable waiting periods.
Regular part-time employees who work an annual average of less than twenty (20) hours per week
are not entitled to benefits except as required by law.
Vacation, sick leave and holidays shall be determined on a pro rata basis.
*Hrs. Worked Benefit (Holiday, Sick & **Vacation)
30.00 – 37.49 6 hours
20.00 – 29.99 4 hours
C. Temporary/Seasonal – All other employees are considered temporary/seasonal. Typically
temporary/seasonal employees are employees hired for special projects, to fill-in for an absent
employee, or for a limited duration of time. Temporary/seasonal employees are not entitled to
benefits except as required by law.
*Hours worked must be determined using average hours worked during the preceding calendar year. Benefits
eligibility will only be adjusted annually unless an employee’s classification status changes. Health insurance
benefits will not be affected if a regular full-time employee’s annual average is less than 37.5 hours per week
but not less than 35 hours per week.
**Vacation benefit is adjusted depending upon number of years of employment (See page 8)
Revised by the Board of Selectmen March 28, 2013 and September 28, 2017
PROBATIONARY
All new hires are considered probationary for the first six (6) months of employment. The employee
may be dismissed at any time during the probationary period without cause and without appeal.
HOURS OF WORK
The Town’s normal work week will be Sunday through Saturday. Hours of work start and quitting time,
and break periods will be established by the Department Head. The normal, maximum work week will be forty
(40) hours per week. The Town will pay time and a half for hours actually worked in excess of forty (40) in a
3
given week for non-exempt employees. Overtime hours must be approved by the employee’s supervisor and
should be approved in advance insofar as possible.
Salaried employees, exempt from overtime, will accomplish the work assigned to their position
regardless of hours, within reasonable limits.
It is the employee’s, and his/her supervisor’s, responsibility to verify and sign their time sheets weekly.
OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME
Occasionally, it may be necessary to ask employees to work beyond the maximum hourly work week. If
employees are asked by an appropriately authorized individual to work in excess of 40 hours regardless of the
day or time, then compensation will be at the rate of time and one-half for those hours worked over 40 in the
work week (Sunday through Saturday).
Overtime will be kept at a minimum and will only be requested after careful analysis of overall Town
workload and priorities and with written approval by the Administrative Assistant and the respective
Department Head. Hours related to any type of leave are not time worked, and these hours will not be used in
computing overtime. Overtime is paid only to hourly employees such as secretarial, clerical, and research
assistant staff.
Salaried staff members are expected to work extra hours as necessary to accomplish the overall
objectives of their areas of responsibility which may exceed 40 hours per week.
Compensatory time may be granted in lieu of overtime pay with the written approval of the Department
Head and the Administrative Assistant. Compensatory time only applies to hourly-paid employees. Salaried
employees are not eligible except in unusual circumstances which must be approved in advance with the
Selectmen.
WAGES
Wage adjustments shall be effective January 1 of each year, but shall not be paid to an employee until
(1) annual budgets have been approved by Town meeting and (2) the Board of Selectmen votes to authorize the
increase. A wage or salary adjustment may occur during the year, upon approval of the Board of Selectmen, for
reasons such as a significant change in job responsibilities or successful completion of a probationary period.
Adopted April 15, 2004 by the Board of Selectmen as an Addition to the Personnel Policy
APPOINTED OFFICIALS POLICY
Adopted March 2, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
Amended May 11, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
The Selectmen annually appoint officials to carry out various tasks and responsibilities for the Town of
Harpswell on an occasional basis. Each appointment carries with it duties to be performed, some year-round
and some for a specific part of the year.
At the time of appointment, Town must provide appointees with written job descriptions setting forth
specific tasks to be accomplished, anticipated number of hours to be worked, if payment is to be made on an
hourly basis, or stipend to be paid. Stipends and/or hourly wages are set by the Selectmen, and Town
contributes appropriate taxes as required by law. Under established Town policies, part-time appointed officials
are not eligible for other benefits such as medical coverage, retirement, disability or leave of any kind unless
such coverage existed prior to January 1, 2000.
4
Each appointed official shall maintain a daily record showing any travel expenses incurred for which
reimbursement is requested. Each appointed official shall provide Town with a written progress report
quarterly outlining progress and problems to date. Appointed officials shall be paid monthly, the last pay period
of each month, unless otherwise arranged.
Appointed officials are directly accountable to the Town Administrator for day-to-day supervision and
must cooperate fully with him/her and the Selectmen in the conduct of Town business. Appointed officials
shall be evaluated at least semi-annually, the second evaluation must be at least ninety days prior to expiration
of appointment.
Annual appointment carries no implied contract for continuation beyond a one-year appointment
regardless of evaluation. All positions will be advertised prior to new appointments being made.
This policy is effective beginning with appointment of May 1, 2000 and thereafter.
HEALTH INSURANCE
All elected officials, regular full-time employees and regular part-time employees, shall be eligible at the
first day of the next month after hire for health, hospitalization and basic life insurance under the Maine
Municipal Employees Health Trust (MMEHT) or other insurer providing comparable coverage. An employee
who does not elect to enroll in medical insurance, remains eligible for basic life insurance (equal to one time
annual salary) at his/her own expense. Effective March 28, 2013, the Town will pay 80% of the single premium
only for regular part-time employees. Employee contribution will be by payroll deduction. Effective January 1,
2007, the Town will offer health insurance on a pre-tax basis. With respect to the elected positions of
Selectmen and Road Commissioner and the appointed position of Treasurer, the Town will pay 80% of the
Single premium only. Effective May 1, 2016, the Town will offer a health reimbursement account as an option.
Available Premium Levels:
• Single: The Town will pay 80% and the employee will pay the remainder.
• Single with Child(ren): The Town will pay 80% of the Single premium and 65% of the
remaining Children premium, and the employee will pay the remainder.
• Family (including Spouse; Domestic Partner; Spouse and children): The Town will pay 80% of
the Single premium and 65% of the remaining Family premium, and the employee will pay the
remainder.
SUPPLEMENTAL LIFE INSURANCE
All elected officials, regular full-time employees and regular part-time employees, shall be eligible on
the first day of the next month after hire for supplemental life insurance through MMEHT or other insurer
providing comparable coverage. Supplemental Life Insurance allows any employee enrolled in the Basic Life
Insurance to increase that coverage by an additional 1X, 2X or 3X. (Note any employee electing to increase the
coverage by 2X or 3X will be subjected to an Evidence of Insurability review for that coverage). The cost of
the Supplemental Life Insurance will be 100% at the employee’s expense.
DENTAL INSURANCE
Employees and/or their family may participate on a voluntary basis at their own expense if dental is
offered as an option under the Town’s Health Insurance.
WORKER’S COMPENSATION
The Town provides Worker’s Compensation benefits to all employees, at no cost. Employees who
sustain work-related injuries or illnesses (no matter how minor) must inform their supervisor immediately.
5
SOCIAL SECURITY
The Town and the employee shall contribute to Social Security as required by law.
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 14, 2006 and February 22, 2007, effective date April 1, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 27, 2007, October 1 and 15, 2009, March 14 and 28, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 14, 2017
MAINE STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
The Town of Harpswell is a participant in the Maine State Retirement System (MSRS) and all
employees and elected officials are eligible for membership. Employee contribution (6.5%) is optional and
contribution will be made by payroll deduction. The Town’s contribution is set annually by the MSRS.
Effective 3/14/98, this benefit is no longer available to Town employees. Those already in the plan may
continue under the same terms or may terminate and join the Deferred Compensation Plan.
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
A Deferred Compensation Plan (“Plan”) has been established by the Town of Harpswell (Town) to provide
retirement benefits for its employees. The implementation date of the Plan is April 1, 1998 and shall be the only
retirement Plan offered to newly-hired employees. All full-time and regular, part-time employees who work
twenty (20) hours or more a week on a regularly-scheduled basis are eligible for participation in the Plan.
Employee contributions may begin on the first day of employment, and employees may contribute up to the
Plan’s limits. Contributions to the Plan by the Town for eligible employees shall begin upon completion of six
months of service. The Town will then contribute an amount equal to employee’s contribution up to a maximum
of 6% per year of their annual salary. Contributions are not retroactive. Employees shall receive a contribution
from the Town for only one retirement plan. Travel stipends are not considered salary.
The Plan has been approved by the Internal Revenue Service. Amounts contributed to the Plan by the Town are
sheltered from tax so long as participants remain in the Plan. The Plan is fully vested meaning that employees
will not forfeit any portion of the total monies contributed by them or on their behalf in case of employment
termination. In case of termination, monies will be distributed in accordance with the Plan’s terms. The Plan is
administered by the International City Management Association (ICMA) as trustee and is monitored by an
Administrative Committee on behalf of the Town. Additional information on the Plan is provided to each
individual upon acceptance of employment including request to designate employee’s beneficiary. It is the
responsibility of the participant to see that this designation is kept current.
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017
HOLIDAYS
A. Subject to these rules, the following holidays shall be paid holidays for regular
Town employees:
New Year’s Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day Columbus Day
Presidents’ Day Veterans’ Day
Patriots’ Day Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Day After Thanksgiving
Independence Day Christmas Day
(½ days on Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve remain at the discretion
of the Board of Selectmen)
6
A. If a regular holiday falls on a Saturday, it will be observed on the preceding Friday; holidays that fall
on Sunday will be observed on the following Monday.
B. A person on a leave of absence without pay shall not be entitled to holiday pay.
C. Holiday pay will be computed on the basis of an 8-hour day or pro rata share thereof for regular,
part-time employees as previously defined.
D. When occasion or call in warrants, employees may be required to work whole or part of a holiday.
Employee must receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay for same. Hourly wage employees working
a holiday shall receive their regular pay for time worked plus their applicable holiday pay.
VACATION
A. Vacation privileges are available to regular, full-time employees. Such privileges are also available,
pro rata, to regular, part-time employees working no less than 20 hours per week. Employees are
urged to schedule and use their vacation time to be away from their job for rest and relaxation.
Regular, full-time employees will accrue vacation eligibility at the following rates:
0 – Three months of employment None
After three months 1.00 day per month
After five years 1.25 days per month
After ten years 1.50 days per month
B. Vacation will be scheduled in advance with the employee’s supervisor and approved by the Board of
Selectmen, or their designee. Seniority and the needs of the Town will be given due regard.
Vacation of more than two weeks duration will not be granted other than under extraordinary
circumstances.
C. Employees may carry forward up to one-half of their annual vacation accrual.
This carry forward is not cumulative. Unused vacation time will be paid to
employees upon resignation or retirement up to the amount accrued.
D. Employees may receive vacation pay prior to the start of their vacation, but
must request payment from the Treasurer at least five (5) business days in advance of the pay day
preceding the start of their vacation.
SICK LEAVE
A. Sick leave will accrue at the rate of one (1) day per month effective with the employee’s date of hire.
Sick leave may be accrued up to a maximum of thirty (30) days. Sick leave may be taken in
increments of two hours or greater.
B. Sick leave may be used for personal illness or physical incapacity of such degree as to render the
employee unable to perform the duties of his/her position unless the employee is capable of other
work for the Town; for personal medical or dental appointments; or to care for members of his/her
immediate family and/or household affected by serious illness.
7
C. When all accrued sick leave is used, time off due to illness may be charged to vacation leave upon
request, otherwise time absent will be classified as leave without pay.
D. Employees will be expected to inform their supervisor of their absence as early as possible on the
first day of their absence. Employees will inform their supervisor no later than the start of their
scheduled shift for each succeeding day of their absence.
E. If requested by the employee’s supervisor, the employee shall furnish the Town with a certificate
from his/her physician for any absence of more than three (3) days duration.
F. Sick leave will not be used to extend a vacation period.
G. There is no compensation for accumulated sick leave upon termination of employment for any
reason.
SHORT-TERM DISABILITY
Effective July 1, 1998, short-term disability benefits will be available to all regular full-time and parttime
Town employees working 20 hours or more per week who have completed their six month probationary
period. Elected officials are not eligible.
Each eligible employee shall be covered for short-term disability benefits at the rate of 60% of
employee’s regular salary. This benefit is payable, up to a maximum of nine (9) weeks, as long as an employee
is under the care of a physician who certifies that employee is not able to return to work. The Town reserves
the right to request a second medical opinion. No sick leave or vacation credits accrue while an employee is
receiving extended short-term disability benefits.
Benefits begin the day after the elimination period is completed. The elimination period for short-term
disability benefits shall be the later of:
A. 30 days after the date disability occurs due to an injury or sickness.
An employee absent for illness or disability should notify the Administrative Assistant as early as
possible on the first day of absence and shall keep that office informed as to probable length of absence.
Benefits are payable only for actual illness or non-work related disability preventing attendance at work and not
resulting from misconduct. In every instance of extended disability (over three days), the attendance of a
physician and evidence thereof may be requested.
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
A. Bereavement Leave. An employee may be excused from work for up to three
(3) work days because of death in his/her immediate family, as outlined below,
and shall be paid his/her regular rate of pay for the scheduled work hours
missed. It is intended that this time off be used for the purpose of handling
necessary arrangements and attendance at the funeral.
For purposes of this article only, immediate family is defined to mean spouse,
parents, children, brothers, sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandfather,
grandmother, grandchildren or other household members.
8
One (1) work day may be granted to employees at the sole discretion of the
Board of Selectmen or their designee for attendance at funerals of persons not
covered under the above definition.
B. Leave Without Pay. A full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence
without pay by the Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the employee’s
supervisor, for a period necessary for the purpose of the leave, but not to
exceed sixty (60) calendar days. The employee is expected to return to work
upon the expiration of a granted leave or to have arranged an extension of a
leave, not to exceed thirty (30) days, granted at the discretion of the Board of
Selectmen. Continued absence without having arranged for an extension of
leave may be deemed a resignation from the service. Employees may choose to
continue insurance benefits for the duration of the leave by assuming the
employer contribution. Vacation, sick leave and other benefits will not accrue
during the leave.
JURY DUTY
The Town shall pay to an employee called for jury duty the difference between his/her regular pay and
juror’s pay provided the employee presents an official statement of jury pay received.
HAZARDOUS WEATHER
Unless otherwise notified prior to the normal office hours, Town offices will be open for work. Any
employee choosing to be absent at his/her own discretion may use vacation time accrued or be on leave without
pay. Each employee bears the responsibility of where he/she lives in relation to the office location.
When the weather is judged to be too hazardous for travel, employees will be notified not to come in to
work or the office will be officially closed at the direction of the Selectmen or their delegate so employees may
go home early with no loss of salary and/or leave time. Only employees scheduled to work on such days shall
be eligible for pay. (Employees scheduled for leave—vacation, sick or other—or on leave status are not
eligible). Employees leaving before this time may use accrued vacation leave or be on leave without pay.
9
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OR 1993 YOUR RIGHTS
FMLA requires covered employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave to
"eligible" employees for certain family and medical reasons. Employees are eligible if they have worked for a
covered employer for at least one year, and for 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months, and if there are at least
50 employees within 75 miles.
REASONS FOR TAKING LEAVE: Unpaid leave must be granted for any of the following reasons:
• To care for the employee's child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care;
• To care for the employee's spouse, son or daughter, or parent, who has a serious health
condition;
• For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the employee's
job;
At the employee's or employer's option, certain kinds of paid leave maybe substituted for unpaid leave.
ADVANCE NOTICE AND MEDICAL CERTIFICATION: The employee may be required to provide advance
leave notice and medical certification. Taking leave may be denied if requirements are not met.
• The employee ordinarily must provide 30 days advance notice when the leave is
"foreseeable" .
• An employer, may require medical certification to support a request for leave because of a
serious health condition, and may require second or third opinions (at the employer's
expense) and a fitness for duty report to return to work.
JOB BENEFITS AND PROTECTION:
• For the duration of FMLA leave, the employer must maintain the employee's health coverage
under any "group health plan".
• Upon return from FMLA leave, most employees must be restored to their original or
equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits, and other employment terms.
• The use of FMLA leave cannot result in the loss of any employment benefit that accrued
prior to the start of an employee's leave.
UNLAWFUL ACTS BY EMPLOYERS: FMLA makes it unlawful for any employee to:
• Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under FMLA;
• Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice made unlawful by FMLA or for
involvement in any proceeding under or relating to FMLA.
ENFORCEMENT:
• The U.S. Department of Labor is authorized to investigate and resolve complaints of
violations.
• An eligible employee may bring a civil action against an employer for violations.
FMLA does not affect any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination, or supersede any State or local law
or collective bargaining agreement which provides greater family or medical leave rights.
FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: Contract the nearest office of the Wage and Hour Division listed in most telephones directories under U.s. Government, Department of Labor.
Revised 1993
10
DISCIPLINE
The Board of Selectmen may demote, suspend or dismiss any employee when it has been determined to
be in the best interest of the Town. The employee’s supervisor and/or the Town’s Administrative Assistant
will specify in writing to the employee the cause of any disciplinary action and the recommended action prior to
the discipline taking effect.
Disciplinary action may call for any of Four Steps – verbal warning, written warning, suspension (with
or without pay) or termination. Each of the steps will be documented and are appealable. There may be
circumstances when, due to the severity of the infraction, one or more of the above steps are bypassed.
The Town recognizes that by using progressive discipline most employee problems can be corrected at
an early stage, thereby benefiting both the employee and the Town. However, the Town also recognizes that
certain problems will be severe enough to justify suspension or termination without going through the usual
progressive steps.
The employee has the right of appeal to the Board of Selectmen, if requested in writing within three (3)
working days. The Board of Selectmen will hold a hearing no later than their next scheduled meeting and will
return a decision no later then the next regularly scheduled meeting following the appeal hearing.
The Town’s Administrative Assistant may suspend with pay, for a period not to exceed fifteen (15)
working days, any employee whose continued presence at work may be a threat to persons or property, whose
presence might hinder the investigation of misconduct or be a detriment to the conduct of Town business. This
action must be confirmed by the Selectmen within two (2) business days and a report must be placed in
employee’s file thereupon.
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Should an employee feel aggrieved concerning the effect, interpretation, meaning or application by the
Board of Selectmen of any provision of the Town’s rules, regulations, policies and/or terms of employment, the
following steps will be utilized to resolve the dispute.
A. The employee will orally discuss the dispute with his/her supervisor.
B. If an agreement is not reached, the employee may, within three (3) working days of the initial oral
discussion, file a written complaint with the Town’s Administrative Assistant who must return a
formal, written decision within three (3) working days.
C. The decision of the Town’s Administrative Assistant may be appealed, within three (3) working
days, to the Board of Selectmen who will hold an appeal hearing at their next regularly scheduled
meeting, and will return a formal decision no later than their next regularly scheduled meeting
following the appeal hearing.
EMPLOYMENT SEPARATION
Separation is any action taken which ends the working relationship between an employee and the Town
of Harpswell (Town). Resignation is a separation initiated by the employee. Termination is separation initiated
by the Town and may result from, but is not limited to, any of the following:
A. Reduction in work volume and/or funding.
B. Failure to meet required work standards.
C. Inability to maintain proper working relationships.
D. Conduct prejudicial to the interests of the Town.
11
A decision to terminate the employment of a staff member is made by the Selectmen after discussion
with an employee’s immediate supervisor and the employee. The final decision relative to termination is,
however, the sole responsibility of the Selectmen, and they will authorize termination letters.
Any employee whose performance is judged unsatisfactory will be notified in writing of the nature of
the deficiency. If improvement is not forthcoming within a four-week period, employment may be terminated
without additional notice. In other instances when it is necessary to terminate employment, not for cause, staff
members will be given one month’s notice contingent on the availability of funds. In lieu of notice, pay may be
given at the Town’s option. Similar notice is expected from all Town employees in cases of resignation, unless
specifically waived by the Selectmen. If employment is less than six months, only two weeks’ notice will be
required.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
It is the policy of Harpswell that all employees have the right to work in an environment free of
discrimination, which includes freedom from sexual harassment. Harpswell will not accept any form of sexual
harassment by supervisors, co-workers, customers or suppliers. This policy is intended to prohibit offensive
conduct, either physical or verbal, that threatens human dignity and employee morale, and which interferes with
a positive and productive work environment.
Sexual harassment is illegal and, as outlined in the EEOC Sexual Discrimination Guidelines and the
Maine Human Rights Act, includes:
? Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature when (i) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual’s employment, (ii) submission to or rejection of such by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, (iii) such conduct has the
purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
The following examples are common types of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment:
? slurs, jokes or degrading comments of a sexual nature
? unwelcome sexual advances
? suggestive or lewd remarks
? unwelcome hugging, touching or kissing
? requests for sexual favors
? repeated offensive sexual flirtation or propositions
? the display of sexually suggestive pictures or objects
? repeated unwelcome physical contact or touching such as patting, pinching or constant brushing
against another’s body
12
Consistent with above guidelines, this policy prohibits any overt or subtle pressure for sexual favors
including implying or threatening that an applicant’s or employee’s cooperation of a sexual nature (or lack
thereof) will have any effect on the person’s employment, job assignment, wage, promotion, or any other
condition of employment or future job opportunities. This policy also prohibits any conduct which would tend
to create an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
Managers and supervisors are responsible for monitoring conduct which can be construed to be
harassment and for initiating necessary action to eliminate such behavior. Any employee who feels that he or
she is the victim of sexual harassment should immediately report the matter to his or her supervisor or, if the
employee would prefer, to Selectmen.
Selectmen will immediately investigate any complaint of sexual harassment and, where warranted, take
disciplinary action against any employee engaging in sexual harassment. Depending on the circumstance, such
disciplinary action may include suspension or termination of employment.
Any questions regarding this policy should be addressed to the Selectmen. Any employee who believes
that he or she has been a victim of sexual harassment, or who has knowledge of that kind of behavior, is urged
to report such conduct immediately. Employees will be requested, but not required, to put their complaints in
writing. No employee will be retaliated against for complaining about sexual harassment.
MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
624-6050
IF YOU FEEL YOU HAVE BEEN DISCRIMINATED AGAINST, CONTACT THE COMMISSION
OFFICE, STATE HOUSE STATION 31, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333
OR CONTACT TOWN ADMINISTRATOR OR SELECTMEN, 833-5771.
ANNUAL WRlTTEN NOTIFICATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY SEXUAL
HARASSMENT IS ILLEGAL UNDERSTATE AND FEDERAL LAW
It is illegal for any employee to sexually harass another employee and for any supervisory employee to
permit any act of sexual harassment in the workplace by anyone whether or not an employee.
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT UNDEILSTATE LAW
Unwelcome sexual advances requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature constitute sexual harassment when:
A. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's
employment;
B. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions
affecting such individual; or
C. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with a individual's work performance
or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.
DESCRIPTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The following type of conduct is considered to be sexual harassment and is not permitted:
13
A. Physical assaults of a sexual nature such as:
(1) rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these assaults; and
(2) intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching, pinching,
patting, grabbing, brushing against another employee's body, or poking another employee's body.
B. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as:
(1) sexually-oriented gestures; no remarks jokes, or comments about a person's sexuality or sexual
experience directed at or made in the presence of any employee who indicates or has indicated in
any way that such conduct in his or her presence is unwelcome;
(2) preferential treatment or promise or preferential treatment to an employee for submitting to sexual
conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any employee to engage in sexual activity for
compensation or reward; and
(3) subjecting or threats of subjecting an employee to unwelcome sexual attention or conduct or
intentionally making performance of that employee's job more difficult because of that employee's
sex.
C. Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the company by employees, such as: '
(1) displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, objects, promotional materials, reading materials, or
other materials that are sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic, or bringing into
the work environment or possessing any such material to read, display or view at work.
A picture will be presumed to be sexually suggestive if it depicts a person of either sex who is not
fully clothed or in clothes that are not suited to or ordinarily accepted for the accomplishment of
routine work in and around the company and who is posed for the obvious purpose of displaying or
drawing attention to private portions of ms or her body.
(2) reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that are. in any way sexually
revealing sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic; and
(3) displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by sex in any area of the
workplace (other than restrooms and similar semiprivate lockers/changing rooms).
INTERNAL COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
Any employee who believes he or she has been the subject of sexual harassment should report the
incident or act immediately to his or her supervisor or to one of the following individuals: (list at least two
individuals, preferably one of each sex). The company will promptly investigate all complaints. Each employee
alleging sexual harassment will be requested to put the specifics in writing. All information will be held in
confidence and will be discussed only with those who have a need to know in order to either investigate or
resolve the complaint. Any employee who the company determines has engaged in sexual harassment will be
promptly disciplined. Disciplinary measures may consist of suspension or termination depending upon the
severity of the offense.
LEGAL RECOURSE THROUGH THE MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
The Commission can be contacted at State House Station 51, Augusta, Maine 04333, telephone: 624-
6050. Any employee who believes he or she has b n subjected to sexual harassment may call or write the Maine
Human Rights Commission to register a complaint. Any complaint must be filed with the Commission within
180 days of the act of harassment. Once a signed charge form has been received by the Commission, an
investigation will be conducted and a determination will be made by the Commission of whether or not there
are reasonable grounds to believe sexual harassment occurred.
14
If the Commission determines that sexual harassment did occur, it will attempt to resolve the situation
between you and your employer through informal means. If informal means of resolution are unsuccessful, the
Commission counsel may file a civil action on your behalf in the Superior Court, seeking appropriate relief.
MAINE HUMAN RIGHTS ACT PROTECTION AGAINST RETALIATION FOR COMPLAINING ABOUT
SEXUAL HARRASSMENT
Under the law, you may not be punished or penalized in any way for reporting, complaining about or filing a
claim corning sexual harassment, or for testifying in any proceeding brought by anyone else.
This notice is provided to all employee s in compliance with 26 M.R.S.A. §807(2). If you have any questions
regarding this notification, please ask your supervisor, Selectperson or __Town Office Manager
(Insert names of individuals listed under the complaint procedure). SEMOOI
POLICY ON WORKPLACE THREATS AND VIOLENCE
The safety and security of employees of the Town of Harpswell (hereinafter referred to as
"the Town"), and also the public who conducts business in the various municipal buildings, is of paramount
importance to the Town. Therefore, threats, threatening behavior, or acts of violence against employees,
visitors, guests, or other individuals by anyone on Town property will not be tolerated. Violations of this policy
will lead to disciplinary action which may include dismissal, arrest, and prosecution.
Any person who makes substantial threats, exhibits threatening behavior, or engages in violent acts on
Town property shall be removed from the premises as quickly as safety permits, and shall remain off Town
premises pending the outcome of an investigation. The Town will initiate an appropriate response. This
response may include, but is not limited to, suspension and/or termination of employment, and/or criminal
prosecution of the person or persons involved. .
No existing Town policy, practice. or procedure should be interpreted to prohibit decisions designed to
prevent a threat from being carried out, a violent act from occurring or a life threatening situation from
developing.
All Town personnel are responsible for notifying the Town representative designated below of any
threats which they have witnessed, received, or have been told that another person has witnessed or received.
Even without an actual threat, personnel should also report any behavior they have witnessed which they regard
as threatening or violent, when that behavior is job related or might be carried out on a Town-owned site, or is
connected to Town employment.
Employees are responsible for making this report regardless of the relationship between the individual
who initiated the threat or threatening behavior and the person or persons who were threatened or were the
focus of the threatening behavior. If the designated Town Representative is not available, personnel should
report the threat to their supervisor or any Selectman. .
All individuals who apply for or obtain a protective or restraining order which list any Town location as
being a protected area, must provide to the designated Town Representative a copy of the petition and
declarations used to seek the order, a copy of any temporary protective or restraining order which is granted,
and a copy of any protective or restraining order which is made permanent.
The. Town of Harpswell understands the sensitivity of the information and has developed confidentiality
procedures which recognize and respect the privacy of the reporting employee(s).
The Designated Town Representative is: Selectperson 833-5772 Effective: 1-16-97
15
THREAT INCIDENT REPORT
To be completed by designated Town Reprehensive (Personnel Director) or Department Head if Personnel Director is not
available.
Employee Name: ______________________________________________ Date of Incident: _______________
1. Name of threat-maker: _______________________________________________________________________
Address of threat-maker: ____________________________________________________________________
Telephone #- of threat-maker: ________________________________________________________________
2. Relationship to organization/recipient: _________________________________________________________
3. Name{s) of victim(s) or potential victim(s): __________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
__________________________________________
4. Briefly describe the incident:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
5. When and where incident occurred:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
6. What happened immediately prior to the incident:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
7. Language of the threat (be specific):
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
16
Threat Incident Report Page Two
8. Was there any physical conduct that would substantiate an intention to follow through on the
threat: ___YES ___NO
If yes, please explain: __________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
9. Please indicate how the threat-maker appeared, physically and emotionally: °
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
10. List others who were directly involved and any actions they took:
_________________________ ______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
_________________________ ______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
11. Indicate how the incident ended:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
12. List names and telephone numbers of witnesses:
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
13. What happened to threat-maker after the incident?:
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________
17
Threat Incident Report Page Three
14. What happened to other employees directly involved after the incident?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
15. Names of supervisory staff involved, if any, and how they responded:
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
_____________________________ ____________________________________________________
16. What event(s) triggered the incident:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
17. Is there any history leading up to the incident?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
18. What steps have been taken to ensure that the threat will not be carried out?:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
19. Indicate any suggestions you may have for preventing this type of incident in the future:
__________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
Name of person completing form: ________________________________________________
Signature of person completing form: ____________________________________________
Date: ___________________________________
****If needed, additional comments may be attached.****
18
POLICY ON THE USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES
Adopted August 18, 2005
The Town of Harpswell provides its Town Employees with a variety of information technology
resources (hereinafter, "Information Resources"). Those Information Resources include computers, computer
programs, printers, facsimile machines, voice mail, and on-line capabilities such as electronic mail
(hereinafter, "e-mail") and the Internet. The Town of Harpswell provides those Information Resources in order
to permit the delivery of better and more efficient services to the Town and its residents. Town Employees are
encouraged to use those Information Resources to their fullest extent in connection with the official duties and
responsibilities of their employment. This Policy applies to all full- and part-time Town Employees, special
Employees, contract Employees and allelected, appointed and volunteer Town officials (hereinafter "Town
Employees.") It is intended to prevent the illegal and/or improper use or abuse of the Town's Information
Resources.
NOTICE: USE OF ANY OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES BY ANY TOWN EMPLOYEE
SHALL CONSTITUTE ACCEPTANCE OF THE TERMS OF THIS POLICY AND OF ANY FUTURE
AMENDMENTS THERETO.
I. TOWN EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES
It is the responsibility of all Town Employees to read, understand, and comply with the terms of this
Policy. Town Employees are expected to exercise reasonable judgment in interpreting this Policy and in making
decisions about the use of the Town's Information Resources. Any Town Employee with questions
about the application or interpretation of this Policy should seek clarification from the Town Administrator.
II. ACCEPTABLE USES OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION
RESOURCES
A. Town Employees may use the Town's Information Resources for the following purposes only:
1. Uses that (a) are directly related to a Town Employee's official duties and responsibilities, or
(b) directly further a particular Town goal in providing its citizens with better and more efficient
services.
B. It is a violation of this Policy for a Town Employee to use the Town's Information Resources
in any manner that interferes with the Town Employee's work performance, as determined by the
Town Administrator.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prohibitions set forth in Section III below apply at all times,
to all uses of the Town's Information Resources.
III. PROHIBITED USES OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES
Town Employees are strictly prohibited from using the Town's Information Resources for any of the
following activities:
A. Sending, receiving, downloading, displaying, forwarding, printing, or otherwise disseminating
material that is profane, obscene, harassing, fraudulent, offensive, discriminatory, or defamatory;
B. Disseminating or storing destructive programs (viruses or self-replicating codes) or other
unauthorized material;
C. Sending mass mailings or chain letters, spending excessive amounts of time on the Internet,
printing multiple copies of documents, or otherwise creating unnecessary network traffic. For the
purposes of this section, "excessive amounts of time" is time that interferes with the Town
Employee's official duties and responsibilities;
19
D. Using or copying software in violation of a license agreement or copyright;
E. Copying or distributing computer programs or information that is copyrighted without the
consent of the owner;
F. Intercepting communications intended for other persons, except for the limited purposes set
forth in Section VII, below;
G. Gaining or attempting to gain unauthorized access to any computer or network;
H. Violating any international, federal, state or local law; and/or
I. Conducting a private business.
J. Sending, receiving, transmitting or reviewing electronic information for any personal use.
"Personal use" is any use other than that described in Paragraph II(A)(1) of this Policy.
K. Violating state law by using a state computer system to prepare materials with the intent to
expressly advocate the election or defeat of any candidate for federal office, a state constitutional
office, or any elective municipal, county or state office, including leadership positions in the
Maine House or Senate, or with the intent to solicit political contributions that are reportable
under the state’s campaign finance laws.
IV. CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRESERVATION OF TOWN
INFORMATION
A. E-mail messages dealing with official Town business are generally considered to be "public
records" that are subject to public inspection and copying under Maine's Freedom of Access
Law, 5 M.R.S.A. Section 402. Moreover, e-mail messages can be stored, copied, printed, or
forwarded by any intended or unintended recipient. Therefore, Town Employees cannot expect
their e-mail messages to remain either private or confidential relative to the public.
B. Town Employees who, as part of their official duties, have access to confidential or proprietary
information (such as personal data about identifiable individuals or commercial information
about business organizations) are strictly prohibited from acquiring access to and/or
disseminating such confidential information unless access to and/or dissemination of such
confidential information is both authorized and required as part of their job descriptions.
C. Information and/or documents contained in or attached to e-mail sentor forwarded to the Town
by any attorney representing the Town shall not be disclosed by any Town Employee without the
prior express approval by the attorney who sent or forwarded the e-mail document to the Town.
D. Because e-mail is the equivalent of traditional correspondence dealing with official Town
business, e-mail messages must be preserved in accordance with the public record retention
standards set forth in 5 M.R.S.A. Section 95-B and the Maine State Archive Rules For
Disposition Of Local Government Records.
20
V. LANGUAGE STANDARDS
E-mail, like other forms of written communication, reflects upon the Town of Harpswell. Town
Employees shall communicate by e-mail only in a professional manner, and with proper spelling and grammar.
Any and all forms of profanity are prohibited. The Town Administrator may, in his/her discretion, require that
work-related e-mail messages be approved as to form and content prior to dissemination.
VI. NETWORK SECURITY AND COMPUTER VIRUSES
Town Employees are expected to take precautions to prevent the infection of Town computers with
computer viruses. Computer programs and files that originate outside of the Town's computer network shall not
be downloaded to Town computers without prior approval from the Town Administrator.
VII. PRIVACY OF TOWN INFORMATION RESOURCES
All Information Resources are the property of the Town of Harpswell and must be used in conformance
with this Policy. Because the Town owns those Information Resources, Town Employees are advised that they
should have no expectation of privacy when using the Town's Information Resources, whether their use of the
Town's Information Resources takes place during or outside of working hours. The Town reserves the right to
monitor use of the Town's e-mail and Internet systems for legitimate municipal business purposes, including,
but not limited to, the need for supervision and/or proper operation of the workplace.
NOTICE: A TOWN EMPLOYEE'S USE OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION RESOURCES FOR ANY
PURPOSE, AT ANY TIME, SHALL CONSTITUTE CONSENT BY THE TOWN EMPLOYEE TO THE
MONITORING AND INSPECTION OF THAT EMPLOYEE'S USE OF THE TOWN'S INFORMATION
SYSTEMS, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, INSPECTION OF E-MAIL RECEIVED, SENT, OR
STORED BY THE TOWN EMPLOYEE.
Except as provided in the preceding paragraph, no Town Employee shall access or attempt to access the e-mail
of any other Town Employee without the other Town Employee's consent. Town Employees are advised that
the interception of e-mail may, in certain situations, violate federal and/or state law.
VIII. DISCIPLINARY ACTION
It is the responsibility of all Department Heads to ensure that all Town Employees under their
supervision, and all special Town Employee and contractor Town Employees who are associated with their
Department, receive a copy of this Policy. Failure to observe this Policy will subject the Town Employee or
special Town Employee to disciplinary action ranging from curtailment of use of the Town's Information
Resources up to and including termination of employment. Failure to observe this Policy may subject contractor
Town Employees to sanctions ranging from curtailment of the use of Information Resources up to andincluding
termination of services.
21
INSPECTION POLICY FOR FIELD WORKERS
1) Vehicle should be marked as Assessor with magnetic signs to identify that this is a Town vehicle and to
alleviate calls from neighbor to Town Office or Police Department.
2) Photo Identification is to be displayed visibly when approaching any residence for inspection.
3) At time of inspection, if no one is present, leave a door hanger or other notice to inform the resident
that you are from the Assessing Department and what you have done during the visit. Do your normal
exterior inspection/measurement. This may alleviate some concern among neighbors.
4) If a person is present at time of inspection, identify yourself, why you are there, and ask them if you may
inspect their home for assessment purposes. If they refuse you entry ask them if they would mind
answering questions about the home or if they would rather schedule an appointment. If still refused,
thank them and leave your card. (Document date and time of the refused visitation). As a follow-up send a
letter to the owner/occupant requesting permission to do an inspection and also explaining that if they refuse
to grant entry, estimates will have to be made and they run the risk of not being able to apply for an
abatement at a later date. If you are not allowed on the property, do the best you can to obtain visual
information. Review Code Enforcement Office files for any additional information about the property.
5) If no adults are present or if homeowner is uncomfortable with your visit, leave your card and ask that
they have parents call or have the person reschedule for an appointment.
6) If you feel threatened or uneasy with a visit, leave your card if possible and ask to reschedule. Write
down time of visit after leaving, anything that made you uneasy and ask that your supervisor or another
inspector accompany you for any rescheduled appointment. Do usual estimate as before.
7) Never discuss town business or estimate current values of appraisal. Inform them that you are there only
in the role of Assessor’s Assistant and that they will later receive an estimate of valuation for any changes
noted as a result of your visit.
8) If you arrive and the person scheduling the appointment or an appropriate representative is not present,
wait 15 minutes and leave a door hanger or other notice. If two appointments are missed, a visual estimate
will be done and notice sent to owner.
________________________________
Agreed & Understood Date
Adopted by Board of Selectmen on April 15, 2004
22
POLICY REGARDING SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
1. Purpose.
1.1 Provision of information. To insure the timely and proper flow of information to Harpswell residents
concerning economic development proposals that involve the use of Town owned property and/or potential
changes to the Town’s Comprehensive Plan or ordinances.
1.2 Exclusions. This policy does not apply to proposals to use private land in conformity with the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan or ordinances.
2. General Procedures.
The Select Board shall follow the procedures contained in this policy. All procedures must be in conformity
with Maine laws and rules and with ordinances of the Town of Harpswell. No procedure shall be
interpreted in such a manner as to limit the lawful authority of the Select Board or any Town board,
committee, or commission. Failure to comply with these procedures shall not invalidate any development
proposal, otherwise lawful, as long as the Select Board has acted in good faith to keep the public informed
pursuant to this policy.
3. Definitions.
3.1 Entity. A person or organization making a formal proposal or an informal expression of interest.
3.2 Formal proposal. A document that provides a general description that will inform the Town
about the size, scope, and impact of a project, such as the size and location of buildings, number of
employees, parking, impervious surface coverage, and traffic patterns.
3.3 Informal expression of interest. Any document, or communication, that does not conform to the
description of a “formal proposal” in the opinion of the Select Board.
3.4 Project. For the purposes of this policy, “project” means any formal proposal from an entity, forprofit
or nonprofit, for economic development on Town owned property, or that would require a change
in a town ordinance, or both.
3.5 Town official. For the purposes of this policy, “Town official” means any person employed by the
Town or serving on any if its boards, committees, or commissions.
4. Response to a formal proposal.
4.1 When received by the Select Board or a Board member. Upon receipt of any formal proposal,
the Select Board shall, at its next meeting, disclose the receipt of the proposal, the identity of the person
or entity making the proposal, and all relevant information that is consistent with any lawful request for
confidentiality that may have been made by the person or entity and was accepted by the Select Board.
A proposal developed by the Select Board or any department of Town government will be handled in
the same manner.
4.2. When received by a Town official. Upon receipt by any Town official of any formal proposal, the
recipient shall promptly report that proposal to the Town Administrator who will inform the Select
Board so that it may take action pursuant to paragraph 4.1 and 4.3. Upon receipt of any formal proposal
by the Town Administrator, he or she shall inform the Select Board and it shall take action pursuant to
paragraphs 4.1 and 4.3.
4.3 Referral for advice. Before taking any action on a formal proposal, the Select Board shall seek the
advice of the bodies whose mandate from the Select Board covers the subject matter of the proposal,
23
provided taking such action is consistent with any lawful request for confidentiality that may have been
made by the entity and accepted by the Select Board. These bodies include but are not limited to the
Planning Board, Town Committees, and the Conservation Commission.
4.4 Action by the Select Board. The Board shall not be bound by any advice received or any lack of
action by a body to which it has referred a formal proposal.. Before taking any action to place a formal
proposal before a Town Meeting, the Board shall report any advice it has received to the public in a
public meeting or hearing, and/or by other means designed to inform Harpswell residents.
5. Response to an informal expressions of interest.
5.1. Oral informal expressions of interest. Upon receipt by a Town official of an oral informal
expression of interest, that official shall a) advise the person making the expression of interest to put that
expression in writing either as a written expression of interest or as a formal proposal, b) report the oral
expression of interest to the Town Administrator and c) not conduct negotiations regarding the matter
unless authorized by the Select Board.
5.2. Written informal expressions of interest. Upon receipt by a Town official of a written informal
expression of interest, that official shall refer it to the Town Administrator who shall inform the Select
Board so that it may take action pursuant to paragraph 4.1. The Board may, at its discretion, refer the
written expression of interest to other Town bodies for advice.
5.3. Provision of information regarding Town ordinances and policies. Nothing in this policy
should be construed to prevent Town officials from advising any person about the provisions of Town
ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, or policies that may be relevant to an informal expression of
interest.
6. Report of potential changes.
If, in the opinion of the Select Board or any Town body from which it has sought advice, a proposed project
will require a change in the Comprehensive Plan or Town ordinances, the Select Board will report at its
meetings, and at any public hearing that may be held regarding the proposal, such opinion or information
before taking any action to place the matter before the Town Meeting.
7. Select Board may conduct hearings.
Nothing in this policy limits the right of the Select Board to conduct public hearings at their discretion or as
provided by law.
8. Select Board rights and duties.
8.1. Negotiations. Nothing in this policy limits the right of the Select Board to conduct any lawful
negotiations with an entity proposing economic development in the Town, including the lawful use of
Executive Sessions when deemed appropriate by the Select Board, so long as such negotiations are in
conformity with the provisions of the Maine Freedom of Access Law.
8.2 Reports. The Select Board will attempt, to the fullest extent feasible, to provide at their meetings,
and at any public hearing that may be held, complete and timely information on the progress and content
of negotiations.
24
9. Proceedings by an advisory body.
9.1. Notice of confidentiality option. Before a proceeding held by the bodies mentioned in 4.3 above
may begin, the parties making formal proposals or expressing interest shall, at their first appearance,
sign a memorandum of understanding noting that they are aware that the proceeding and report will be
public and that they have a right to ask the Select Board to consider a request for confidentiality, which
may be granted in the Select Board’s discretion. The memorandum must be witnessed by the body’s
member presiding at the proceeding.
9.2. Purposes of the proceedings. The purposes of the proceeding are to enable the advisory body to:
1) understand the nature of potential uses of the land, 2) understand potential changes in ordinances and
the Comprehensive Plan, 3) advise the parties of relevant Town plans and current or anticipated
standards for development, and 4) summarize the parties’ development interest for the information of
the Select Board. The body may give informal advice about how the parties might improve their
proposal or expression of interest.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 29, 2009
FREEDOM OF ACCESS PROCEDURES
Amended April 17, 1997
Amended March 30, 1999
Amended October 14, 2004
Amended April 28, 2005
Amended November 7, 2013 – effective February 1, 2014
1 POLICY
Public proceedings and public records exist to aid in the conduct of the people’s business. Actions of
Town Government shall be conducted openly and records of Town Government shall be open to public
inspection. These procedures should be interpreted liberally to promote the underlying purpose stated
above. These procedures are intended to implement Title 1, Chapter 13, sub-chapter 1 of Maine Law.
2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 Public proceeding means the transaction of any functions affecting the people of Harpswell by:
2.1.1 Board of Selectmen, except that the exercise of purely administrative functions by the
Board of Selectmen or any one Selectman shall not be deemed to be a public proceeding,
2.1.2 Any board or commission of the Town, and
2.1.3 Committees and other bodies entirely advisory in nature to the extent required herein and
unless exempted by the Board of Selectmen.
2.2 Public records means any written, printed or graphic matter or any mechanical or electronic data
compilation from which information can be obtained, directly or after translation into a form
susceptible of visual or oral comprehension, that is in the possession or custody of an agency or
public official of the Town, and has been received or prepared for use in connection with the
transaction of public or governmental business, except as provided in 1 M.R.S.A § 402 sub-§3 A,
B, D, H, I, and J:
2.2.1 Records which are confidential by law,
25
2.2.2 Records within the scope of legal privilege against discovery or use as evidence,
2.2.3 Materials prepared for and used specifically and exclusively in preparation for
negotiations,
2.2.4 Materials related to the adoption of positions on legislation or related to insurance or
insurance-like protection or services,
2.2.5 Medical records and reports of ambulance and rescue units,
2.2.6 Juvenile records,
2.2.7 Working papers of bodies included under 2.1.3 unless distributed by a member or
distributed in a public meeting, and
2.2.8 Records used in proceedings authorized to be conducted in executive session.
3 MEETINGS
3.1 Open to the public
Except as provided by statue and by Section 4, all public proceedings shall be open to the public, any
person shall be permitted to attend any record or minutes of such proceedings shall be make promptly and shall
be open to public inspections.
3.2 Recording or live broadcasts authorized
All persons are entitled to make written taped or filmed records of public proceedings or to live
broadcast them, provided that the writing, taping, filming or broadcasting does not interfere with the orderly
conduct of proceedings. The body holding the public proceeding may make reasonable rules governing these
activities, so long as these rules do not prevent the actions authorized. These rules may require that a person
making a recording make a reasonable effort to record all participation in the public proceeding.
4 EXECUTIVE SESSION
Those bodies cited in 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 may hold executive sessions subject to the following conditions:
4.1 These sessions shall not be used to defeat the purposes of these procedures
4.2 No official action may be finally approved at executive session.
4.3 Executive sessions may be called only by a public, recorded vote of 60 per cent of the members
present and voting.
4.4 A motion to go into executive session shall indicate the precise nature of the business of the
executive session.
4.5 No other matters may be considered in that particular executive session.
4.6 Deliberations may be conducted in executive sessions pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A §405 sub-§ 6.as may
be amended from time to time:
26
5 PUBLIC NOTICE
5.1 Notice required. Public notice shall be given of all public proceedings.
5.2 Posting of notices. Notice of public proceedings will be given no less than 3 days before the
meeting except that standing notice may be given of meetings occurring at regular times and places.
Notices of meetings of the Board of Selectmen must be posted at no less than two places designated
by the Board. Notices of meetings of other bodies must be posted in the Town building or as
otherwise provided. All notices must be provided to the local media.
5.3 Agendas. Each public proceeding will have an agenda which will be adopted at the start of the
proceeding. The agenda of meetings of the Board of Selectmen will be posted 24 hours before the
meeting
5.4 Emergency meetings. When emergency meetings are held, the local news media shall be notified in
advance by telephone in order to allow their representation at the meeting.
6 DECISIONS
Conditional approval or denial of an application, license, certificate of other type of permit and dismissal or
refusal to renew an employment contract shall be the subject of a written record as provided in 1 M.R.S.A
§407.
7 PUBLIC RECORDS
7.1 Open for public inspection. Except as otherwise provided by law, every person shall have the right
to inspect and copy any public record during regular business hours of the Town, including
electronic data, provided that the cost of copying any public record to comply with this section shall
be paid by the person requesting the copy. Requests for copies shall not be permitted to interfere
with the regular activities of the Town office; provided, however, that this provision may not be
used to defeat the purposes of this open access procedure. Unless a request is denied, any request
not requiring research, as defined herein, will be met within 5 working days. Requests may be
made orally or in writing.
7.2 Fees
7.2.1 Paper copies
7.2.1.1 Made by Town. 8 ½” x 11”@ $0.25 per copy. $0.30 per double-sided copy.
11” x 17” @ $.50 per copy. $0.55 per double-sided copy. 8 ½” x 14” @ .35 per
copy.
7.2.1.2 Mailing. Actual cost of postage unless self-addressed, stamped envelope is
provided.
7.2.1.3 Each faxed page received, proof of insurance excluded: $0.50.
7.2.1.4 Deed copies. $1.55 per copy.
7.2.1.5 Ordinances. The first copy of an ordinance, each year, is free; thereafter, the charges
are: $2.00 up to 10 pages; $5.00 above 10 pages.
7.2.1.6 Comprehensive Plan. No charge for single copy. $10.00
Tax Map: 8 ½” x 11” @ .25/copy Complete set: $20.00
11” x 17” @ .50/copy Complete set: $40.00
27
GIS Maps: 8 ½” x 11” $3.00/copy
11” x 17” $5.00/copy
24” x 36” $15.00/copy
7.2.1.7 Commitment book. $150.00 (14 7/8” x 11”, continuous form paper) $50.00 (8 ½” x
11”, single sheet on laser printer)
7.2.1.8 Partial Printout of the valuation book by map; $25.00 for 8 ½” x 11”. $50.00 for 14
7/8” x 11”
7.2.1.9 Voting list
Complete alphabetical list for all 3 districts: $25.00
Complete list one district 10.00
Complete list Democrats only 10.00
Complete list Republicans only 10.00
Complete list Unenrolled Voters only 10.00
Research. If the Town must research public records according to selection criteria set by the
requester (other than for records of a specific type): $10.00 per hour after the first hour;
provided, however, that the requester may conduct such research without charge and that
there shall be no research charge for standing orders other than for research required at the
time the standing order is initiated. If the total cost will be more than $20, the Town must
inform the requester before the proceeding. If the total cost will be more than $100, or if the
requester has previously failed to pay costs in a timely manner, the Town may require
payment in advance. The Town may waive part or all of the costs if the requester is indigent.
7.2.1.10 Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the Town to distribute copies free of
charge in connection with the conduct of a public proceeding.
7.2.2 Electronic copies
7.2.2.1 Media provided by Town. $5.00 per 3.5 inch disk or CD.
7.2.2.2 When printed copies are made from electronic form: (See copy charges). Requests for
such copies shall not be permitted to interfere with the regular activities of the Town office;
provided, however, that this provision may not be used to defeat the purposes of this open
access procedure.
7.3 Payment may be required in advance, subject to prompt refund of any excess amount received. If
advance payment is inadequate, final payment shall be made before delivery of copies.
7.4 Denial of access shall be made in writing, within 5 working days of the date of the request for
inspection by any person.
7.5 Destruction, removal, mutilation, theft of public documents may be referred by the Selectmen to law
enforcement authorities in accordance with 1 M.R.S.A §452.
8 APPEALS
Appeals of denial of public access or of actions taken in executive sessions are governed by 1 M.R.S.A
§409.
28
POLICY REGRDING PLACEMENT OF ITEMS ON A SECRET BALLOT
Purpose.
1.1 Preservation of the Town Meeting. To insure the maximum in-person participation of Harpswell
voters at the annual town meeting, an important aspect of the town’s historical tradition.
1.2 Allow Maximum Voter Participation. To present opportunities for all voters to cast their ballots for
certain items that are appropriate for placement on a secret ballot, including items that should be decided
before the next annual town meeting.
Context.
The town meeting form of government allows voters to debate and decide policies that will guide the
community for the following year. However, certain factors inhibit participation by some voters:
confinement to home, temporary absence from town, employment obligations, child care responsibilities,
and sometimes the length of the meetings – a special hardship on older and infirm voters. The Select Board
wishes to encourage in-person participation at the annual town meeting by insuring that its length does not
discourage that participation. It also wishes to provide voting opportunities for those who cannot attend the
annual town meeting.
Limitations
Nothing in this policy restricts the Select Board, in its discretion, from making any decision regarding the
placement, or non-placement, of any item on a secret ballot. This policy is intended as guidance to the
Select Board as it makes those decisions. It does not apply to decisions that the Select Board has the
authority to make on its own.
Public Information and Debate
Should the Select Board decide to place an item on a secret ballot, it will notify the voters, maximize the
opportunity for discussion and dissemination of information, and shall hold a public hearing, in accordance
with State law, at which 1) the item will be explained by the Board and the committee recommending the
item, and 2) voters will have the opportunity to express support or opposition to the item. The hearing
should be recorded and broadcast on Harpswell Community Television to further inform the voters.
Sufficient advance public notice should be given, if possible, to allow voter comment about the item in local
newspapers.
Considerations
The following considerations should guide the Select Board in the placement of items on a secret ballot.
An affirmative answer supports the use of a secret ballot. While a particular item may not involve each
consideration, the overall findings should provide the basis for a Board decision.
Has the item or a substantially similar item, been thoroughly debated at the annual town
meeting within the past three years?
Has the item been approved or defeated by a substantial margin in the most recent annual town
meeting?
Does the item involve the expenditure of a substantial amount of Town funds?
Does the item involve a significant change to an existing policy or a new policy that will affect
the future of the Town?
Does the item involve substantive changes in Town government?
29
Does the item involve substantive changes affecting the Town’s natural resources, such as ground water
or waterfront development?
Does the item involve bonding obligations?
For items involving the budget: Can budget limitations be appropriately dealt with at Town Meeting if
the vote on the item is not determined until after the close of floor actions at Town Meeting?
If, in the best interests of the Town, the item requires a decision before the next Annual Town Meeting,
the considerations listed above should be part of the consideration as to whether, at a special Town
Meeting, to hold a referendum or act on the floor.
Adopted by the Select Board on November 19, 2009
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT SELECTMEN’S MEETINGS
Meetings of the Harpswell Board of Selectmen are for the purpose of conducting Town affairs and are
subject to the Maine Freedom of Access Act and Harpswell’s policy of freedom of access.
Subject to the adoption of the Agenda, each Selectmen’s Meeting may include an opportunity for
general public comment at the beginning and at the end of the meeting. Public comment is also allowed prior to
final action on individual agenda items. A member of the public may request, through a Board member, that an
item be placed on a subsequent Selectmen’s Meeting agenda. The Chair may limit or structure public
comments as needed to ensure the orderly conduct of the meeting. The Board asks all to voice their comments
or concerns in a respectful manner.
Please note: It is neither the purpose nor the intent of public comment to provide an arena for ongoing
debate of topics not on the agenda, unless and until such time as a topic presents a question requiring action or a
decision by the Board of Selectmen, at which time the issue will be placed upon the agenda, and public
comment will be allowed as set forth above.
? To be eligible to address the Board, an individual must reside or own property in the Town, be an
employee of the Town, or be permitted by the Board to speak.
? Speakers must introduce themselves, giving their first and last names.
? The public comment period is intended to be used for brief comments, questions and/or
observations, not to exceed five minutes in length. Each speaker will be allowed one opportunity
to speak during the general comment period at the beginning of the meeting and one opportunity at
the end of the meeting, and one opportunity to speak on each item on the agenda. Unduly
repetitive comments may be excluded.
? If a large number of people wish to address the Board, the Chair may ask that they sign in.
Representatives of groups should be appointed by the group, or may be appointed by the Chair to
speak on behalf of the group if the group is unable to name one.
? Speakers are not permitted to share gossip, make defamatory comments or use abusive or vulgar
language. The Chair has the authority to stop any presentation that violates the Board’s policy or
the rights of others.
? Speakers should address all comments and questions to the Chair.
30
? Except in emergencies or for routine procedural matters, the Board will not decide questions raised
during public comment until it has fully examined the matter and there has been an opportunity for
research of the issue.
? Members of the Board and the Town Administrator may query those addressing the Board, but are
expected to refrain from arguing or debating with the speakers.
Amended November 10, 2004
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 31, 2006
Amended by the Board of Selectmen January 28, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen April 22, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 26, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen December 2, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen October 11, 2011
ROADS AND ROAD COMMISSIONER
Town of Harpswell
Policies and Procedures
Effective May 20, 2002
Amended July 31, 2003
This document outlines the duties and responsibilities of the Road Commissioner and the Board of Selectmen in
the planning, construction, maintenance and repair of public roads and related facilities within the Town of
Harpswell.
1. The Road Commissioner shall have primary responsibility for scheduling and supervising work on all Townowned
roads and bridges and those maintained under agreement with the State of Maine or others, operating
under the direction and authority of Selectmen (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §2701).
2. Appropriations for all such work shall be approved at annual or special Town Meeting. Commitment and
disbursement of funds shall follow the same public-meeting authorization, purchase order, bid and contract,
award, warrant approval and payment procedures as those governing other Town expenditures, except as
otherwise provided in these Policies and Procedures.
3. The Road Commissioner shall plan, schedule, and budget all repair, maintenance and construction projects
and present a detailed written plan for such to Selectmen for appropriate action. Such plan shall include a
detailed outline of proposed work, a work timetable including proposed starting and completion dates, a
breakdown of estimated costs including a proposed funding schedule and the recommended bid, contract
and award procedures involved with all such projects.
4. Work on all town road projects including, without exception, related professional services or direct
purchases of materials, labor, or equipment shall be acquired by purchase order or open, solicitation of bids
for such work, depending upon the size, scope and cost of work involved. The Road Commissioner will
arrange for complete specifications to be drawn for all work to be bid and submit them to the Selectmen for
prior review and approval before soliciting prices or bids from contractors or vendors. Selectmen meeting in
publicly noticed session shall have the sole authority to approve and commit for such projects, including
methods of contracting and payment.
5. The Road Commissioner will be responsible for maintaining proper and accurate accounts and files showing
all monies approved, committed and paid, to whom and for what purpose (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §2703). All
31
purchases of work, services, materials, labor and equipment of $2,500 or less as outlined in the Town of
Harpswell's purchase policy shall be prior approved and committed through use of the Town's purchase
order system. The Road Commissioner will submit monthly or more frequent requests for issuance of
purchase orders to Selectmen for prior approval. A majority of Selectmen must sign each purchase order for
it to be valid.
For purchases in the "Maintenance of Town Roads" account, when he or she deems it necessary, the Road
Commissioner may obtain a purchase order number from the Town Administrator and make purchases,
provided that (1) such purchases may not exceed $2,500 when the
balance in the account exceeds $20,000 and may not exceed $1,000 when the balance in the account is
$20,000 or less, (2) the Town Administrator must present the Selectmen with each such purchase order
immediately after the number it is issued, and (3) such purchase order shall be valid without the prior
signature of a majority of the Selectmen. Purchases or commitments for work in excess of $2,500 shall be
acquired or obtained through a public bid process unless other arrangements are approved in a publicly -
noticed meeting of Selectmen in which the proposed purchase or commitment at issue appears as an agenda
item.
6. The Road Commissioner will review and approve all bills and statements submitted by contractors or
vendors and specify to which prior-authorized project or account such bills or statements shall be charged
before submission of them to Selectmen for their review and warrant action.
7. The Road Commissioner will settle all road accounts in detail annually on or before the 20th day of
February-. A report on all such accounts shall be contained in the annual town report (M.R.S.A. Title 23
§2703). The Road Commissioner will participate in the budget process for determining appropriations and
capital construction projects for the coming year.
8. The Road Commissioner will inspect all town roads at least once each year and present a written report to
Selectmen on the status and condition of such, including suggested repairs. This report may also be
published in the Road Commissioner's Report contained in the Annual Town Report.
9. The Road Commissioner will maintain a complete and detailed monthly maintenance log on any Townowned
vehicles and equipment used for road repair or maintenance and will submit these to the Selectmen
for monthly review.
10. In case of sudden damage to a town road or bridge requiring emergency action the Road Commissioner
shall take necessary- steps to immediately repair it. In certain emergency cases, prior approval by Selectmen
may be difficult or impossible to obtain within the time constraints of the emergency. However, the Road
Commissioner shall file a detailed written report on action taken and funds committed the next business day
after the emergency repair is undertaken. For this purpose, an emergency is defined as any incident, which
could immediately endanger life or property. (M.R.S.A. Title 23 §3201).
11. The Road Commissioner shall not directly or indirectly commit to or employ any person(s) on a full or parttime
basis as a town employee without the prior written consent of Selectmen.
12. When any town way is blocked by snow or is otherwise impassible the Road Commissioner will remove the
snow or obstacles in a manner directed by the Selectmen ((M.R.S.A. Title 23 §320l). The Road
Commissioner will arrange for removal of brush and loose obstruction from town ways that impede travel.
32
13. If Selectmen determine that a condition exists which creates a hazard and determines a way unsafe for
motor-vehicle traffic, they will give the Road Commissioner written notice of the condition and order the
Road Commissioner to remedy the situation within 24 hours. If the Road Commissioner fails to act as
directed, Selectmen may take steps necessary to eliminate the safety hazard.
14. Only Town-owned vehicles and equipment may be stored or serviced in building owned or maintained by
the Town unless otherwise approved in writing by Selectmen.
15. The use of any Town-owned vehicle or equipment for maintenance or repair of statutory private ways
(public easements) is prohibited. The use of Town-owned or contracted equipment for private purposes is
prohibited.
16. The Town shall provide the Road Commissioner with administrative and technical assistance and office
resources necessary for the proper discharge of his duties and responsibilities as set forth herein, including
without exception professional engineering services, with payment for all such services to come out of road
operating and capital appropriations.
These policies and procedures shall remain in full force and effect for a period of one-year from date hereof,
subject to such interim amendments or changes deemed necessary or appropriate. Thereafter, they shall be
reviewed and continued as written or revised, amended and approved for a further period to be defined.
POLICY TO ACCEPT ADVANCE PAYMENT OF MOORING REGISTRATION FEES
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on September 20, 2007
The Town shall accept non-refundable advance payment of mooring registration fees for the following
calendar year as a convenience to its mooring holders. The Town’s acceptance of advance payment does not
eliminate the mooring holder’s obligation to pay any registration fee increase adopted subsequent to the
payment but relating to the following calendar year. In the event of a registration fee increase, the mooring
holder is responsible for payment of the additional amount by May 1 or otherwise is subject to a penalty
payment.
POLICY TO ACCEPT ADVANCE PAYMENT OF SHELLFISH LICENSE FEES
The Town shall accept advance payment in installments of not less than $10.00 for shellfish license fees
as a convenience to its current license holders. The Town’s acceptance of advance payment does not eliminate
the shellfish license holder’s obligation to pay any fee increase subsequently adopted. In the event of a license
fee increase, the shellfish license holder is responsible for payment of the full license fee, including the increase,
by the due date as established by ordinance. Pre-payment of the license fee in part or in whole does not
automatically secure a renewal shellfish license. Any license holder who has pre-paid and is later deemed
ineligible for a renewal shellfish license shall be reimbursed in full the amount of prepayment.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 6, 2010
33
BOARD OF APPEALS FEE WAIVER
Given that the Board of Selectmen has authority to determine the fee schedule for the Board of Appeals, the
Board shall waive fees associated with any Board of Appeals filing involving a Town Official or Town Entity in
his/her/its performance of Town business.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen September 3, 2015
TOWN OF HARPSWELL BUDGETARY PRACTICES AND POLICIES
The mission of the budget process is to help decision makers make informed choices about the provision of
services and capital assets and to promote stakeholder participation in the process.
Policy regarding non-property tax revenue budgeting
It is the policy of the Town of Harpswell to use non-property tax revenues, excluding those with dedicated
purposes, to offset the impact of the municipal budget on the property taxpayer. As part of the budget process,
estimates of non-property tax revenues for the budget year must be made. These estimates should be made in a
conservative manner and, generally speaking, not exceed the current or prior year actual revenues without firm
support, e.g. increases set forth in contracts, known changes in fee schedules or number of users.
Policy regarding use of Unassigned General Fund Balance
It is the intent of the Town to maintain a minimum unassigned General Fund balance of one month, 8.33%, of
operating expenditures, defined as total prior year’s general fund expenditures less any expenditure made from
reserve funds. The targeted balance for fiscal year-end is 2 months or 16.66%, and the maximum balance is not
to exceed 25% of the operating expenditures, so long as cash flow needs are met. Any amount in excess of the
targeted balance may be used to reduce the tax commitment or be appropriated as assigned or committed fund
balance, or it may remain as unassigned Fund Balance. The Town’s Board of Selectmen may recommend
transfers to the Town that would reduce the balance below 25%, but no transfers shall be made that would
reduce the balance to less than 8.33%. In the event that the unassigned fund balance drops below the minimum
level, the Town will develop a plan, implemented through the annual budgetary process, to bring the balance to
the targeted level over a period of no more than three (3) years.
Policy regarding carryover funds
In general, it is the policy of the Town of Harpswell to not carryover to a future year funds appropriated in the
current year for operating expenditures. Capital reserves and reserve accounts for other special purposes, e.g.
heating assistance, property tax assistance may be carried over as long as their intended use continues to be a
need of the Town. Unexpended funds appropriated for purposes that are no longer relevant must lapse to the
General Fund. Unexpended funds in amounts equal to or less than $2,500 should lapse unless there is a specific
plan for the expenditure in the next year.
Policy regarding Capital Assets and Capital Reserves
It is the policy of the Town to inventory its capital assets (those whose cost basis exceeds $2,500) and to
regularly assess the need for and the condition of these assets. The assessment should include an evaluation of
issues, challenges, and opportunities affecting the provision of capital assets in the future, such as community
needs and priorities; the impact of deferred maintenance; funding issues; changes in technology; economic,
demographic, or other factors that may affect demand; and legal or regulatory changes. This review may be
undertaken in conjunction with an evaluation of the program or service utilizing the particular assets. The
review is to be conducted by administrative staff with the input of the Recycling Center Manager, the Caretaker,
the Harbormaster, and representatives of HCBC and the Fire Departments, among others. The assessment of
capital asset condition should consider the impact of any deferred maintenance and needed improvements.
34
Identification or development of measurement standards for the condition of capital assets (including what is
regarded as acceptable) are a valuable output of this practice.
The Town has a number of capital reserves for the acquisition or rehabilitation of long-term assets, including a
capital road reserve and an emergency vehicle reserve which are their own governmental funds. Upon
completion of the review contemplated in the first paragraph of this policy, an assessment of the adequacy of
the balances of these reserve accounts will be completed and recommendations made as to potential adjustments
thereto.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES REGARDING CASH RECEIPTS
Cash is received by a number of individuals at the Town offices, as well as at both the Transfer Station and at
the Recycling Center. The individuals at the Town office are the Receptionist and substitute Receptionists, the
Town clerk and her deputy, the Tax Collector and her deputy and, on a limited basis, the Codes Enforcement
Assistant. The Receptionist/ Office Assistant prepares the deposit for the Recycling Center and Transfer Station.
The Transfer Station Attendant and the Recycling Center Manager also handle cash receipts.
These procedures apply to all persons who prepare deposits.
Electronic Deposit of Cash Receipts
Effective August 10, 2012, all checks received by the Town will be deposited electronically by the receipting
office, either in one or multiple batches. Each batch should be accompanied by a print-out of the checks
processed. A second print-out should be retained with the day’s work. The day’s work will be reconciled at the
end of the day to the sum of all check batches and cash. The day’s work total is equal to the contents of the
cash drawer less the amount of the change fund issued to that person.
Once the amount of the day’s work is determined, it must be reconciled to the totals on the computer generated
receipts journals, except for the receipts of the Transfer Station and Universal Waste fees which are reconciled
to the manual pre-numbered receipts. Each cash handler reconciles their own day’s work.
Any difference between the total amount of the check batches and cash and the recorded amount should be
investigated. Any unresolved difference must be reported to the bookkeeper promptly.
At no time should a shortage be made up with employee funds and no overage should be set aside for future
resolution. If an overage exists, it must be included in the day’s deposit.
Upon completion of the day’s reconciliation, cash will be placed in an envelope, with the date, cash amount,
total receipts for the day and office marked on the envelope. A deposit slip, dated the day the office received
the cash, should be completed and placed inside the cash envelope. The cash envelopes and all checks with the
batch reports should be given to the Deputy Town Administrator (“DTA”) or, in her absence, to the Town
Treasurer for safe-keeping. If neither is available, the cash envelope and checks should be placed in the vault
overnight. The cash in the envelopes will be verified by the DTA or Treasurer in the presence of the person who
reconciled the day’s work and a written receipt provided.
The Deputy Town Administrator or Treasurer will assure that the cash envelopes and checks are secured.
Checks will be destroyed on a regular basis.
When the amount of cash on hand is relatively significant (as determined by the Treasurer), all cash previously
reconciled will be transported to the Bank. At this time, the person going to the bank will also see if any of the
offices need small bills.
35
These procedures apply to all persons who handle cash receipts.
The issuance of Treasurer’s or Tax Receipts is a key control. Treasurer’s or Tax Receipts should be generated
at the time of the transaction. Transactions should not be set aside for batch recording. The only current
exception to the immediate generation of a Treasurer’s Receipt is in the Town Clerk’s office where 2 people
could be receiving monies, but only one can access the computer. In these instances, the second receipt should
be entered into the computer as soon as the computer becomes available.
At the Transfer Station, the use of pre-numbered weigh slips is the key control. These slips should be used in
sequential order and a copy of the day’s slips should be submitted to the Office Assistant with the day’s deposit.
Sales of reclaim are documented on these same weigh slips but submitted on a separate day sheet. Universal
Waste receipts received at the Transfer Station are documented on a separately sequenced receipt book. In
entering the cash receipt, the cash handler must use their own initials. All checks should be immediately
endorsed using the cash handler’s stamp.
No personal checks are to be cashed. No checks are to be accepted in amounts greater than that of the
transaction.
No monies should be taken from the change fund for any purpose other than to make change, except for the
funds of the Receptionist which are used to reimburse petty cash vouchers
Any exception to the above procedures must be authorized in writing by the Town Administrator, the Deputy
Administrator or the Treasurer.
Amended by the Town Treasurer and established as policy by the Town Administrator on September 14, 2006.
Amendments adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012
CELL PHONE USE ALLOWANCE POLICY
The Town has certain employees who perform work in the field and are not near an office phone on a regular
basis. The Town will provide an allowance to such employees for use of his/her cell phone for Town business
based on the type of cell phone: $50 allowance per month for a smart phone on a taxable basis and a nominal
allowance per month of $25 for a regular cell phone. The employee agrees: 1) that his/her cell phone number
will be made available to the public; and 2) to comply with any possible freedom of access request that may
include his/her cell phone records, text messages, photos and emails. Pursuant to this policy, the following
employees are authorized to seek an allowance for using personal phones for Town business:
• Road Commissioner
• Animal Control Officer and Alternate Animal Control Officer
• Code Enforcement Officer and Alternate Code Enforcement Officer
• Recycling Center/Transfer Station Manager
• Recreation Director
• Harbormaster
• Fire Administrator
• Other positions as determined by the Town Administrator
Approved by the Board of Selectmen August 21, 2014
Amended by the Board of Selectmen July 20, 2017
36
CONTINGENCY POLICY
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen February 22, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen February 5, 2009
The Town should maintain a contingency account in the event that certain expenditures may exceed
appropriated amounts due to special or unforeseen circumstances. Such an account should be maintained at a
level that is determined by the five-year average of the historical experience of the contingency account
multiplied by a certain factor which allows for future needs outside the historical norm. The year end balance in
the contingency account should be increased only to the extent that the balance does not correlate with the
Town’s historical experience.
The Board of Selectmen by majority vote may cover an overage of a warrant article appropriation from the
contingency reserve account. The Board at its discretion may seek an advisory recommendation from the
Budget Advisory Committee whenever such overage of a given warrant article exceeds or is expected to exceed
$5,000.
Note: The 2006 Budget Advisory Committee recommends using a factor of 125%.
COMPETITIVE BID POLICY FOR GOODS AND SERVICES VALUED AT $4,000 OR MORE .
Adopted November 20, 1997 Re-Titled June 25, 1998
1. For all purchases of goods and services of a value of $4,000 or greater, the Town shall use competitive
bidding and shall solicit offers by advertising, direct mail or any other means appropriate to obtaining the
largest number of offers.
2. For all other purchases, the Town shall use competitive bidding as the Selectmen may deem appropriate.
3. The Selectmen may use sole source selection when the supplier of goods and services has previously been
selected through a competitive bidding process, has performed satisfactorily and where the interest of the
Town would be served by having the same supplier continue to provide the same goods or services. The
Selectmen may also use sole source selection when they determine that the supplier is the only reasonably
possible source.
4. The competitive bid process shall be conducted on a sealed bid basis with a fixed deadline at which time the
bids will be opened by staff. Bidders shall be notified of the time and place of the opening of the bids and
are welcomed to attend. The bid shall specify the Town's requirements and evaluation criteria. To the
degree that any proposal is not subject to protection as containing proprietary information or trade secrets,
all bids will be public. In any case, the price quoted shall be public information.
5. In general, the Town shall use, for purposes of guidance in conducting competitive purchasing, the rules and
procedures of the State of Maine, Bureau of Purchases.
6. The Town may require a supplier of goods and services to enter into a contractual agreement. .
7. This policy does not apply to purchase of goods and services required for routine office operation even if, in
the aggregate, a specific supplier provides such goods and services in an amount exceeding $4,000 in any
one year.
Amended by the Board of Selectmen September 23, 2010
Amended by the Board of Selectmen August 18, 2011
37
CREDIT CARD FEE REFUND POLICY
The Town may accept in-person payments using VISA, MasterCard and American Express. These payments
will be processed by InforMe using the State of Maine's merchant account. InforMe will assess a fee for these
payments to the cardholder on a per item basis. In the event a cardholder requests a refund of a payment made
by credit card, the Town may at its discretion refund the payment of the item itself, however, it is the policy of
the Town not to refund the fee charged by Informe, except in instances where a representative of the Town
made a clear error.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 15, 2009
DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY
Background
The Town of Harpswell invests in capital assets, including buildings, roads and other infrastructure assets, land
and landings, vehicles and equipment. The Town has a 5 year capital plan for the maintenance and replacement
of existing assets. In preparing the capital plan, consideration was given to future needs and projects. To
finance these plans The Town may borrow or it may fund them from reserves established over a number of
years and periodically increased through appropriations from taxpayers.
Generally, the Town has participated in Maine Municipal Bond Bank issues to fund long-term projects,
although on occasion the Town has requested bids from other financial institutions. None of these individual
borrowings have exceeded $1.5 million at the time of issuance and each has been or is scheduled to be repaid
within 10 years.
Purpose
The goal of this policy is to provide a guide for managing debt levels. This includes evaluating the need for
capital investment versus the capacity to pay for financing the costs of meeting those needs. The focus of the
policy is to measure debt secured by the full faith and credit of the Town (General Obligation Bonds) which
support the debt service. This Policy also covers lease purchases as they are similarly secured.
The Town shall maintain an outstanding General Obligation debt level that complies with State law, which
currently limits outstanding long-term debt to 15% of the State assessed valuation of the Town, however, the
target debt level of the Town will be of 1% of this valuation.
The Town shall not issue long-term debt to fund current or ongoing operations of the Town. Those operations
may be funded by Tax Anticipation Notes issued in compliance with State law and in conformance with
Internal Revenue Service regulations.
The Town shall not lend its borrowing capacity to or guarantee debt of any other entity.
Maturity of debt obligations must be no more than the useful life of the capital investment being financed, but in
no case more than 20 years.
To the extent reasonably possible, new issuances of debt will take advantage of the scheduled declines in
existing debt principal. Planning for new capital investment will include analysis of the impact on the debt
service schedule. If a significant new borrowing is identified for the near future, other capital needs will be
evaluated relative to existing reserves and the capacity to appropriate funds considered. Further, lower priority
capital investments may be deferred or down-sized.
38
Debt Limitations
Borrowing capacity will be evaluated using a number of factors:
Need – The Capital Plan will identify most needs, however unforeseen opportunities may arise which require
capital investment
Capacity – The maximum amount to be borrowed at any time will be determined by evaluating the following
factors:
Current and projected annual debt service
Market conditions, including interest rates
Economic conditions, including construction costs
Opportunities for participation in low interest financing programs, grant opportunities or other situations
beneficial to the Town
Affordability – Annual debt service impacts for each borrowing will be projected, both in terms of the municipal
budget and the impact on the taxpayer. Debt service payments should not exceed 8% of general fund
expenditures. Total outstanding long-term debt should not exceed 1.0% of the State assessed valuation of the
Town.
Term – Financing should be secured with the goal of paying it back over a term that is of the greatest benefit to
the Town. It may be equal to the expected life of the asset, but may also consider the benefit gained by future
taxpayers.
Payments – Payments will generally be structured with level principal and declining interest over the term,
except where other structures may offer economic benefit to the Town. – Opportunities for refunding will be
considered in light of changes in the economic environment.
Direct Issuances
As the Town identifies larger capital projects, it may wish to issue Town of Harpswell bonds directly to the
public market.
Bond Ratings – As the Town considers bond issues whose magnitude may provide opportunity for cost savings
to the Town if direct issuance is chosen, the Town will be rated by agencies specializing in the analysis of
organizations’ abilities to repay their debt. It is the goal of the Town to obtain the highest possible rating, so
that favorable interest rates and ease of entry to the market may be obtained. This policy in conjunction with
other fiscal policies of the Town, overall fiscal management and reliable reporting are critical in achieving a
beneficial rating.
Debt Issuance – The Town may rely on the sale of bonds for certain large borrowing needs. These sales will be
conducted through the use of financial advisory firm and quality bond counsel. This allows the Town continued
access to the bond market and ensures compliance with Securities and Exchange Commission, Municipal
Securities Rulemaking Board and IRS regulations. The Town will comply with the ongoing disclosure
requirements of the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 22, 2017
39
DISPOSITION OF TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY POLICY
Adopted March 12, 1998
Amended September 17, 2009
Article 1. General
1.1 The purpose of this policy is to establish procedures for the management, administration and disposition of
real property acquired for non-payment of taxes by the Town of Harpswell. Nothing in this policy, however,
shall limit or restrict the rights of the Board of Selectmen to manage or dispose of tax-acquired property in the
best interests of the Town.
Article 2. Pre-Foreclosure Procedures regarding Liened Property
2.1 By statute, foreclosure of a tax lien mortgage occurs 18 months after the date of the filing of the tax lien
certificate, provided that the assessed party and any other mortgage holder(s) have been notified of the
impending foreclosure at least 30 days, but no more than 45 days, prior to the end of the 18 month redemption
period. It is the Town’s policy to attempt to contact assessed parties prior to the mailing of the notices of
impending foreclosure by mail and/or telephone so as to increase the awareness of the assessed party as to the
consequences of non-payment of taxes, interest and costs by the expiration of the redemption period. This
contact may be made by the Treasurer or by another member of the Town staff.
Article 3. Management of Tax Acquired Property Pending Final Disposition
1.1 Following the foreclosure of the tax lien mortgage, the Treasurer, by certified mail return-receipt, shall notify
the last known owner of record that his or her right to redeem the property has expired. The notification shall
advise the last known owner of record that the property will be disposed of in accordance with this policy, a
copy of which shall be included with the notification.
3.2 The Treasurer shall prepare a list of properties acquired and forward a copy to the Selectmen.
3.3 The responsibility for the management of tax-acquired property rests with the Selectmen. Pending the
Selectmen's decision regarding the final disposition of property, they shall:
3.3.1 determine because of potential liability inherent in owing the property whether the Town's best
interest would be served by immediately disposing of the property.
3.3.2 determine and obtain, if necessary, a level of insurance required to protect the Town's interest in
the property and to protect the Town from liability.
3.3.3 determine if and when any occupants of tax acquired property shall be required to vacate the
property.
3.3.4 determine whether a rental fee should be charged to any occupants of the property. A rental fee
shall not be imposed unless the Town has acquired sufficient liability insurance.
3.4 In the event the property is vacated for 60 consecutive days, the Selectmen shall obtain
appropriate liability coverage for the property.
3.5 If, because of potential liability, the Selectmen determine it is in the Town's best interest to
immediately dispose of the property, they may do so on terms it deems advisable without regard to any
other provisions of this policy.
Article 4. Review of Tax-Acquired Properties
4.1 The Selectmen may also retain a property on a temporary basis if, in their judgment, the immediate sale
would cause the occupants to be placed on public assistance or to become homeless.
4.2 Selectmen shall make the final determination regarding property disposition. The Selectmen shall also
determine the conditions, if any, for property sales.
40
Article 5. Redemption and Sale Dates
5.1 The Selectmen may establish a final redemption date for the re-acquisition of the property by the prior
owner and, if necessary, a sale date. The redemption date shall be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
sale date.
5.2 The Board of Selectmen may vote to allow the former owner(s) to repurchase the tax-acquired property.
Except as otherwise provided in Article 5, the party from whom the property was acquired has until the
final redemption date to redeem the property by paying all outstanding taxes, including estimated taxes for
the current tax year if the conveyance is after April 1 and the exact amount of tax has not been determined,
interest, lien costs and any other costs relating to the property including, but not limited to insurance,
notice and advertising costs. The Town may also require the payment of any other delinquent taxes or
obligations due the Town. It is not the Town’s policy to enter into land purchase installment contracts
with the party from whom the property was acquired.
5.3 It is hereby understood that Article 5 shall not obligate the Board of Selectmen to allow the former
owner(s) to repurchase and no action of the Board under this Article shall be deemed to set precedent with
respect to any other past, present or future foreclosure and property disposition by the Town of Harpswell.
Article 6. Property to be Retained
6.1 If the Selectmen deem it to be in the Town's best interest, they may retain the acquired property without
offering the opportunity for redemption. By way of example, but not limitation, the Selectmen may deem
it to be in the Town's best interest to retain the property without offering the prior owner the opportunity
to redeem the property where:
6.1.1 the property has or will have recreational value or economic value to the Town.
6.1.2 the property has or will have potential for a public facility or additions to public facilities.
If the Selectmen deem it to be in the Town's best interest to offer the prior owner the opportunity to
redeem the property, that party has until the final redemption date under the conditions specified in
Article 5 to redeem the property.
6.2 If the property is retained for public use, the Selectmen may pursue an action for equitable relief as a
means of securing clear title to the property.
6.3 The Selectmen shall cause the tax-acquired property retained for public use to be managed 64and insured
as it would any other municipal property.
Article 7. Property to be Sold
7.1 The Selectmen shall cause to be published a notice of the sale of the tax acquired property in a local
newspaper. Said notice shall be published at least three (3) times with the last publication at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the sale. The notice shall also be posted within the Assessing and Tax
Collection Departments and in at least one other conspicuous place within the Municipal Building. The
notice shall specify the time and date bids are due and the general terms of the bid. It shall also contain
the following information for each piece of property:
7.1.1 Brief description of the property, i.e. land, building, mobile home, etc.
7.1.2 Location of the property.
7.1.3 Brief description of the conditions of the sale.
7.1.4 The minimum bid.
The Selectmen shall also notify the party from whom the property was acquired of the sale and the bid
requirements.
41
7.2 Unless the Selectmen stipulate otherwise, the minimum bid for any tax acquired property shall be the total
of all outstanding taxes, including estimated taxes for the current tax year if the conveyance is after April
1 and the exact amount of tax has not been determined, interest, lien costs and any other costs relating to
the property including, but not limited to insurance, notice and advertising costs. The Town may refuse to
award the bid to the party from whom the property was acquired unless all other obligations due from that
party are also paid.
7.3 All interested bidders shall be provided with a copy of the notice of sale and bid forms. All bids shall be
submitted on forms prescribed by the Selectmen in an envelope clearly marked "Tax-Acquired
Property Bid" and accompanied by a cashier's or certified check equal to the minimum bid.
Bids shall be publicly opened and read on the date and at the time specified.
7.4 The Selectmen shall review all bids and determine the successful bidder.
7.5 The Selectmen shall notify the successful bidder by certified mail.
7.6 The Town of Harpswell reserves the right to reject any or all bids, accept other than the highest bid and
waive any of the requirements of this policy should the Selectmen, in their sole determination, judge such
actions to be in the best interest of the Town of Harpswell. Instances where this right may be invoked
include, but are not limited to:
7.6.1 The Selectmen may wish to sell the property to an abutting property owner rather than the highest
bidder.
7.6.2 The Selectmen may prefer a use proposed by a party other than the highest bidder.
7.7 The disclaimer contained in the first sentence of section 7.6 shall be included in the notice of sale and bid
forms.
7.8 Should the Selectmen reject all bids, the property may again be offered for public sale without
notification to the prior owners.
7.9 The bid deposit of the successful bidder shall be retained as a credit towards the purchase price. All other
deposits shall be returned to the bidders.
7.10 The Selectmen shall require payment in full from any successful bidder within thirty (30) days from the
date the bids are opened. Should the bidder fail to pay the full price within thirty (30) days, the Town
shall retain the bid deposit and title to the property. The Selectmen may offer the property to the next
highest bidder who shall also have thirty (30) days to make payment in full.
7.11 Title to tax-acquired property shall be transferred only by means of a Quit Claim deed.
7.12 The successful bidder shall be responsible for the removal of any and all occupants and contents of
purchased tax-acquired property.
42
Policy re Establishing Municipal Fees and Charges
Background
Fees may be charged for a particular service that benefits the party paying the fee in a manner not shared by
other members of the public. In other words, a fee may not be charged for general services that are mandatory
or supplied to the public at large.
A fee is paid by choice. The person paying the fee must have the option of not using the service and thereby
avoiding the charge. Any fee, however, may be waived by the Board of Selectmen in the event of special
circumstances.
A fee cannot be used to raise revenues generally, but to compensate the Town for its expenses in providing the
service.
The Town of Harpswell assesses fees for certain services which benefit certain users more than taxpayers
generally. Historically, these services involve the Harbormaster (supported by the Town Clerk’s office), the
Codes Enforcement Office, the Planner and the Transfer Station. The services provided include the
management of moorings, the issuance of land use (including wharf applications) and plumbing permits,
planning board and board of appeals reviews and the disposal of materials not considered to be general
household waste. Additionally, shellfish harvesters are charged a fee to obtain a shellfish license and those who
use the Pott’s Point float to tie up their dinghy pay a fee.
Further, the Recreation Department charges those who participate in its programs and fees are charged for the
use of certain Town properties.
Establishing Fees
The Town establishes fees by first estimating the amount of time the respective department(s) spend on the
identified services. The second step is to estimate the portion of that time directed to specific parties rather than
the general taxpayer. In addition to wages and salaries, the Town includes the associated employee benefits,
certain other items in the department’s budget and, if applicable, a portion of the capital costs associated with
the service. Additionally, a general overhead estimate is applied. Generally speaking, the Town’s fee levels do
not cover 100% of the cost of the service. On a case by case basis, the Town estimates what general benefit of
the service should be covered by the taxpayer rather than a user.
The resulting costs are compared to the Town’s existing fee schedule and to fees charged by other Towns for
these services.
This information is reviewed with the Budget Advisory Committee and then submitted to the Board of
Selectmen for decision making.
The process is completed at least once every five years or when circumstances change.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 28, 2018
43
FIXED ASSET POLICY
This policy establishes the minimum cost value (capitalization amount) that shall be used to determine the
capital assets, including infrastructure assets, that are to be recorded in the Town’s annual financial statements
in order to comply with the requirements of GASB Statement No. 34.
This policy also addresses other considerations for recording and depreciating fixed assets.
Capital Asset Definition:
Capital assets will be defined as tangible and intangible assets that have initial useful lives in excess of 1 year.
Capitalization Method:
All capital assets will be recorded at historical cost as of the date acquired or constructed. If historical cost
information is not available, assets will be recorded at estimated historical cost derived as current replacement
cost deflated by a price-level index. Donated capital assets will be recorded at their estimated fair market
values at the date of acquisition.
Capitalization thresholds:
The Town establishes the following minimum capitalization thresholds for financial reporting purposes:
Land and improvements $5,000
Building and improvements $5,000
Machinery/equipment/vehicles $5,000
Infrastructure:
Roads $25,000
Dry Hydrants $5,000
Thresholds will be reviewed by the Board of Selectmen every 5 years to determine if they remain appropriate.
Adjustment may be required to reflect the effects of inflation on asset prices or changes in the level of Town
operations.
Infrastructure assets:
The Town will record “major” infrastructure assets (as defined in Statement 34) that were acquired, constructed
or significantly reconstructed, or that received significant improvements after June 30, 1980. Other
infrastructure assets may be capitalized as deemed appropriate.
Depreciation and useful life:
An estimated useful life will be assigned to all fixed assets whose costs exceed the capitalization thresholds, in
most cases using the attached schedule of “Suggested Useful Lives”. Asset lives will be adjusted as necessary
depending on the present condition and use of the asset and based on how long the asset is expected to meet
current service demands. Reasons for adjustments will be documented.
Capitalized amounts less the asset’s expected salvage value will be depreciated using the straight line method
and the half-year convention (in the years of acquisition and disposition).
Accountability for fixed assets:
Capitalization thresholds for financial reporting purposes are established as set forth above. The Town will
track its fixed asset purchases using a $5,000 threshold. “Tracking” for this purpose means keeping a record of
acquisition cost, date of acquisition, expected useful life, location of asset and whether such purchase represents
the replacement of an existing asset. Periodically, but not more frequently than once a year, the existence of the
assets listed in these tracking records will be verified.
44
Schedule of Suggested Useful Lives
Asset Type Examples Depreciable Life (in years)
Land Improvements Ball field, landscaping 15
Buildings:
Long-lived components Foundations, frame, enclosure 50
Medium-lived components Electrical, mechanical, roof 20
Short-lived components Carpeting, appliances 5
Building Improvements 20
Vehicles (including Emergency Services Vehicles 5 to 20
Boats 10
Equipment 5 to 20
Infrastructure Roads 50
Dry Hydrants 20
Revised by the Board of Selectmen February 1, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen February 7, 2008
Revised by the Board of Selectmen January 24, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen January 14, 2016
FUNDING FOR INDEPENDENT NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
The Town may be asked to provide financial assistance to certain not-for-profit, local organizations that provide
services to the Town and its citizens. In deciding whether to provide such support, the following factors will be
included in the consideration:
1. A need for services has been identified. Services that duplicate or compete with existing services may
not warrant consideration.
2. Groups seeking Town funding should demonstrate fiscal sustainability going forward before Town
financial support is authorized. Sustainability should not be based exclusively on Town support.
3. Organizations should have a corporate or other legal status or be affiliated with same to enable the Town
to deal with a legally accountable entity. Should such status be pending or revoked or should the
organization not be able to fulfill its mission, the Town shall reconsider whether to recommend funding.
4. The Town should consider both current and future implications before recommending funding.
Adopted by the Board Selectmen December 3, 2015
45
INTEREST POLICY ON TRANSFER STATION CHARGES
The Town of Harpswell assesses interest on unpaid balances at the Transfer Station. Interest will be charged at
the same rate that is charged on delinquent property taxes (see note) and will be assessed retroactively to the
billing date if unpaid by the subsequent month billing cycle.
Note: Interest rate is currently 8% until September 15, 2010 at which time it will decrease to 6%.
The Town reserves the right to pursue in small claims court charges which have not been paid for more than six
months once notice of such intention is provided to the delinquent user.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen April 26, 2007
Revised by the Board of Selectmen June 3, 2010
INVESTMENT POLICY
1. The Town of Harpswell hereby establishes this Investment Policy to ensure that the Town’s funds are
invested in a manner which in general provides safety, liquidity and return and is in conformance with
applicable regulations.
2. This investment policy shall apply to all cash, cash equivalents and investments of the Town of Harpswell.
3. The Town’s investment activity shall be governed by all applicable state and federal laws and regulations
concerning the investment of public funds. The Town will look to professional consultants for counsel to
ensure that any policy adopted conforms fully to such laws and regulations.
4. The Town’s investment portfolio will be managed in a manner that seeks to attain a market rate of return
considered reasonable under generally accepted market principles, throughout budgetary and economic cycles,
while preserving and protecting Town capital in the overall portfolio, thus affording prudent use of public funds
and preservation of the public trust.
5. The principal objectives of the Town’s investment activities, stated in the order of their importance, shall be
as follows:
A. Safety of principal.
Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the Town investment program. Investments of the Town
shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure preservation of capital.
An investment will be deemed to be safe if it can meet its maturity without jeopardizing cash flow
objectives. No investment will be deemed safe if there is a reasonable chance it may have to be
liquidated, for any reason that was foreseeable at the time of the investment, at a loss of principal.
It is recognized and not in contradiction with this policy that the Town may on occasion realize a loss of
principal on an investment when premature liquidation is necessary to meet an unforeseen demand on
Town resources.
The objective will be to minimize credit risk and interest rate risk.
46
i. Credit Risk (Custodial Credit Risk and Concentration Credit Risk)
a. The Town will minimize Custodial Credit Risk, which is the risk of loss
due to the failure of the security issuer or backer, by limiting investments to the
types of securities listed in Section 9 of this Investment Policy; and by prequalifying
the financial institutions, broker/dealers, intermediaries and advisors
with which the Town will do business.
b. The Town will minimize Concentration of Credit Risk, which is the risk of
loss attributed to the magnitude of the Town’s investment in a single type of
investment or in a single issuer, by diversifying the investment portfolio so that
the impact of potential losses from any one type of security or issuer will be
minimized.
1. Not more than 20% of the total amount of the Town funds available for
investment will be invested in any single type of investment.
2. The Town will not hold more than 10% of the total investments in any single
investment, unless in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen conditions warrant
otherwise.
3. Provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) investments in U.S. Government obligations
(2) certificates of deposit that are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation
(3) cash balances held at depository banks which are fully collateralized either by
insurance or by letters of credit from a federal agency.
ii. Interest Rate Risk
The Town will minimize Interest Rate Risk, which is the risk that the market value of securities
in the portfolio will fall due to changes in market interest rates, by: structuring the investment portfolio so that
securities mature to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to sell securities
in the open market; and, investing operating funds primarily in shorter term securities, liquid asset funds, money
market mutual funds, or similar investment pools and limiting the average maturity in accordance with the
Town’s cash requirements.
B. Liquidity of Funds.
The Town investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the Town to meet daily and projected
cash flow demands, as well as all operating requirements.
To the extent possible, the Town shall attempt to match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements.
Unless matched to a specifically recognized and identified future cash flow need, the Town will not invest in
securities maturing more than 2 years from the date of purchase.
47
C. Rate of return on investment
The Town’s investment portfolio will be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return
considered reasonable under generally accepted market principles, throughout budgetary and economic cycles,
taking into account constraints on Town investment risk and the cash flow characteristics of the portfolio.
D. Diversification
The potential for market change and other conditions introduce the element of risk to investment of all types.
Portfolio diversification is traditionally employed as a means to control risk. The Treasurer shall exercise
prudence in the selection of securities as a means to minimize risk of loss.
6. Standard of Prudence
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which a person of
prudence, intelligence and discretion might exercise in the management of his/her own affairs, not for
speculation but for investment, with due consideration taken of the probable safety of capital as well as the
probable income to be derived.
7. Ethics and Conflict of Interest
A. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer and staff members in positions of authority in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that may in fact or appearance conflict with
proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment
decisions.
B. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer, staff members and employees of external
investment management firms, shall disclose any material financial interest in financial institutions under
consideration, and shall further disclose any meaningful or significant personal financial and/or investment
positions that could relate to performance of the Town’s investment portfolio.
C. Members of the Board of Selectmen, the Town Treasurer and all staff are prohibited from participating
in the decision to invest or withdraw Town funds in any instrument or institution in which he/she directly or
indirectly has any material financial interest that might affect or be affected by the Town’s investment, nor shall
he/she accept any gift, free service, or payment of any kind for performing their duties under this policy.
8. Personal Responsibility
A. It is anticipated and expected that investment officials and/or advisors will act in good faith, with due
diligence, that deviations from and exceptions to the investment policy will be reported in timely fashion and
that appropriate action will be taken timely to control adverse developments.
B. Investment officials and/or advisors acting in such a manner, and in accordance with this investment
policy, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for individual security performance and fluctuations in
market price.
9. Authorized Investments.
Town funds may be invested in the following types of securities:
Obligations of the U.S. government and its agencies
Fully insured or collateralized certificates of deposit at commercial banks and savings
and loan associations
Repurchase agreements collateralized by U. S. Treasury securities, and accompanied by
executed master repurchase agreements;
48
Money market mutual funds whose portfolios consist of U.S. government securities or
broadly diversified money market instruments whose purpose is to maintain a
stable principal dollar value, and which invest exclusively in short- and
intermediate-term investments;
10. Collateralization
A. Collateralization shall be required on two types of investments:
Certificates of deposit, for amounts which exceed insurance
Repurchase agreements
B. To anticipate market changes and provide the required security for all funds, the collateralization
level will be 102% of market value of principal and accrued interest.
C. Collateral will in all instances be held by an independent third party with whom the financial
institution has a current custodial agreement.
E. A clearly marked evidence of ownership must be supplied by the custodial entity to the financial
institution and retained by it while the investment is in force.
11. Delegation of Authority
The Town Treasurer is responsible for the day-to-day management of the Town’s funds consistent with the
provisions of this policy. The Treasurer will obtain authorization from the Board of Selectmen before investing
in any instrument other than fully collateralized bank deposits, including certificates of deposit.
ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN MAY 28, 2009
RECYCLING CENTER & TRANSFER STATION MATERIAL REMOVAL POLICY
Removal of certain materials from the Recycling Center & Transfer Station by Harpswell residents and
employees is permitted. Prior to removing any material, residents and employees must obtain permission from
the Recycling Center & Transfer Station manager or manager designee. After permission is granted, the
manager or designee will record the following information on the Material Removal Log: name, date, material
removed and where the material is being removed from, i.e., Recycling Center or Transfer Station. No material,
which the Town could otherwise sell, may be removed including but not limited to aluminum, brass, copper, or
stainless steel.
MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT
Elected officials of the Town shall be reimbursed for mileage based upon submitted documentation consistent
with the reimbursement method for other Town employees. The reimbursement rate per traveled mile is
adopted annually by the Board of Selectmen and generally corresponds with the rate established by the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).
Adopted: February 22, 2007 by the Board of Selectmen
Effective Date: April 1, 2007
49
50
PETTY CASH POLICY
Petty cash accounts in specific amounts, as determined by the Town Administrator and not to exceed $2,500 in
total, have been established and are maintained by the:
Tax Collector
Deputy Tax Collector
Town Clerk
Deputy Town Clerk
Receptionist
Transfer Station Attendant
Recycling Center Manager
Deputy Treasurer
Only the Receptionist’s petty cash fund is to be used for the reimbursement of expenses and only purchases less
than $25 may be reimbursed. This account shall be balanced daily and replenished as necessary upon
submission of receipts to the bookkeeper for inclusion in the warrant.
Adopted February 16, 2006 by the Board of Selectmen.
Revision adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 25, 2009
Revised by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012 and August 8, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 18, 2014
51
POST ISSUANCE COMPLIANCE POLICY RELATING TO BONDS ISSUED BY THE TOWN
This policy is being adopted by the Town of Harpswell (the "Town") in order to assure that the Town
complies with the requirements of federal and state law and the covenants in its bond documents that apply
following the issuance of Bonds by the Town. For purposes of this policy, the term "Bonds" means any
obligations of the Town incurred for the purpose of borrowing money, including, without limitation, bonds,
notes, and equipment lease-purchase agreements.
1. Responsibility for Post-Issuance Compliance: The Town Treasurer (the "Treasurer") is
responsible for monitoring compliance with this Policy. The Treasurer may designate employees to carry out
their duties under this Policy.
2. Compliance with Covenants in Bond Documents: The Treasurer shall ensure compliance with all
covenants made by the Town in the Bond documents, including, but not limited to, financial reporting,
restrictions on the use and disposition of property, restrictions on the use and investment of Bond proceeds, and
arbitrage and rebate compliance.
3. Continuing Disclosure Compliance: The Town will comply with any applicable continuing
disclosure requirements of Rule 15c2-12 under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and
officially interpreted from time to time and the terms of any continuing disclosure agreement or certificate
entered by the Town (each, a "Continuing Disclosure Agreement"), including submission of annual financial
information and operating data to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board or any successor thereto
(“MRSB”) established under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended and notice of the
occurrence of material events with respect to the Bonds.
4. Federal Tax Law Compliance: The Town will comply with the terms of each arbitrage and use of
proceeds certificate or tax compliance certificate (each, an "Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate") for each
issue of Bonds issued by the Town and with the applicable provisions of federal tax law. Without limitation of
the foregoing, the Town shall take the following actions:
(a) Proper Use of Proceeds — The Treasurer shall ensure that bond proceeds are expended and
allocated to expenditures in a manner that is consistent with the purpose for which each bond issue is
undertaken, as set forth in any Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate or agreement related to each bond
issue.
(b) Investment of Bond Proceeds — The Treasurer shall ensure that bond proceeds are invested in
investments that are permissible under the terms of Maine law, the bond documents, and applicable federal tax
laws.
(c) Arbitrage and Rebate — The Treasurer shall ensure that the Town complies with the arbitrage,
rebate and yield restriction requirements of Section 148 of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto and that the Town completes all necessary arbitrage rebate calculations, payments
and filings in a timely manner or confirms that the Bonds are exempt from rebate.
(d) Administration of Direct Pay Bonds — The Treasurer shall ensure the proper administration of
each issue of Bonds qualifying for the payment by the Federal government of a credit equal to a percentage of
interest on such Bonds, including the timely completion and filing of any forms required by the Internal
Revenue Service to maintain or establish the applicable status of the Bonds for purposes of federal income
taxation.
52
(e) Use of Bond-Financed Facilities — The Treasurer shall consult with Bond Counsel for the Town
before entering into any agreement or other arrangement for the sale, lease, management or use of bondfinanced
property, including, but not limited to, service, vendor, and management contracts, research
agreements, licenses to use bond-financed property, agreements granting special rights or entitlements to private
parties or naming rights agreements. The Treasurer shall review such agreements for compliance with federal
tax laws.
(f) Post-Issuance Transactions — The Treasurer shall consult with Bond Counsel for the Town
before making any modifications or amendments to the bond documents for a bond issue, including, but not
limited to, entering or modifying investment agreements; making any change in security for the Bonds;
engaging in post-issuance credit enhancement transactions (e.g., bond insurance, letter of credit) or hedging
transactions (e.g., interest rate swap, cap); terminating or appointing successor trustees; releasing any liens, or
reissuing or refunding the Bonds.
(g) Remedial Action — In the event that is determined that any use of bond proceeds or bondfinanced
facilities is inconsistent with the character of the status for federal income tax purposes of the Bonds,
the Treasurer shall consult with the Town's Bond Counsel for the purpose of determining the nature and extent
of any remedial action necessary or proper for the Town to take with respect to such Bonds or bond-financed
facilities. If the Town takes any action after the issuance of Bonds that causes the conditions of the private
business tests or the private loan financing test to be met, then the Town shall take timely remedial actions in
accordance with the federal Treasury Regulations section 1.141-12 as necessary in order to preserve the taxexempt
status of the Bonds.
5. Record Retention: The Town shall maintain all records relating to the issuance of Bonds and the
requirements of the Internal Revenue Code and the representations, certifications and covenants set forth in the
Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate relating to the issuance of Bonds until the date six years after the last
outstanding Bonds have been retired. If any of the Bonds are refunded by tax-exempt obligations, the Town
shall maintain all records required to be retained by this section until the later of the date six years after the last
outstanding Bonds have been retired or the date three years after the last refunding obligations have been
retired. The records that must be retained include, but are not limited to (a) basic records and documents
relating to the Bonds (including any loan agreement, Arbitrage and Use of Proceeds Certificate and the opinion
of Bond Counsel); (b) documentation evidencing the expenditure of Bond proceeds; (c) documentation
evidencing the use of the project(s) financed by the Bonds by public and private sources (i.e., copies of
management contracts, research agreements, leases, etc.); (d) documentation evidencing all sources of payment
or security for the Bonds; and (e) documentation pertaining to any investment of Bond proceeds (including the
purchase and sale of securities, SLGS subscriptions, yield calculations for each class of investments, actual
investment income received from the investment of proceeds, guaranteed investment contacts, and rebate
calculations).
6. Annual Policy Review and Education: On an annual basis, or sooner if deemed necessary or appropriate
by the Treasurer, the Treasurer shall review this policy and assess the Town's compliance with this Policy. The
Treasurer shall recommend changes to this Policy as appropriate to ensure compliance with any covenants in
the bond documents or the requirements of federal tax and securities law and any other applicable law. The
Town will also implement a program, including appropriate instruction and education of personnel, for purposes
of ensuring compliance with the terms of this Policy.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen December 15, 2011
53
PURCHASING POLICIES
Effective June 14, 1998
Amended March 29, 2007, August 18, 2011, March 3, 2016, and May 12, 2016
Authorization for purchase of ALL supplies, services, furniture, equipment, books and subscriptions to be paid by
the Town of Harpswell must be obtained BEFORE a commitment to purchase is made. Contractors and subcontractors,
operating under a duly-authorized, current Town contract are excepted.
All purchase requests must be submitted to the Town’s Administrator or specified delegate—NEVER directly to
the company. If you order without an approved Purchase Requisition, you will be liable for payment. Purchase Order
Requisition Form, Exhibit 1, must be filled out for any item or service to be purchased. This form must be signed by the
person requesting the purchase, countersigned by a Department Head or Committee Chair, and given to the Administrator.
A Purchase Order, Exhibit 2, will be authorized—if purchase is determined to be appropriate and funds are
available—and issued by Administrator’s office. The Administrator will secure Selectmen’s authorization as needed. A
copy of the Purchase Order will be forwarded to the supplier, a copy will be given immediately to the requesting party and
the third copy shall be kept by the Receiving/Billing Agent and attached to the bill when received.
Procurement of all items will be accomplished in the most expeditious manner that will provide necessary
materials to accomplish the objectives of Town’s activities in a timely manner. Supply sources will be explored to obtain
best price. All reasonable methods shall be used including bids for lease versus purchase arrangements and sole source
contracts. Town may require a supplier to enter into a contractual agreement.
Energy efficient products and practices reduce energy cost without comprising quality. Accordingly, the Town of
Harpswell shall employ the most efficient energy conservation practices in the design, construction, renovation, operation
and maintenance of Town facilities. Furthermore, when replacing or purchasing new energy-consuming equipment, shall
purchase only ENERGY STAR labeled equipment unless such equipment is not available, appropriate or cost effective on
a life cycle basis.
EXPENDITURES
The Town Administrator is authorized to approve budgeted expenditures for goods and services including
supplies, furniture and fixtures up to $4,000 in cost. In addition, the Town Administrator is authorized to approve any
expenditure for winter road materials consistent with budgeted amounts.
All purchases with a cost more than $4,000 require the approval of the Selectmen prior to purchase. This
approval shall be secured by the Administrator after an appropriately signed Purchase Requisition has been received.
All purchases with a cost more than $2,500 or more shall be placed on a Town property inventory list at year-end.
This inventory is to be maintained by the Administrator’s office and one copy shall be maintained offsite. Each item must
be appropriately documented and shall be inventoried no less than annually by each Department.
54
PURCHASE ORDER REQUISITION FORM
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
PO Box 39
Harpswell, ME 04079
DATE: ____________________ PO#______________
Item having a unit cost of $4,000.00 or more, must be submitted for competitive bids.
Indicate vendor if selected under completive bid basis.
VENDOR: _____________________________________ Check Needed: ___________
______________________________________ Vendor will Bill: ___________
______________________________________
DEPT-ACC# QUANITY DESCRIPTION UNIT COST TOTAL COST
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
_________ _______ _________________________ ___________ _____________
REASON REQUEST: __________________________________________________________________
REQUESTED BY: ___________________________________________________________________
APPROVALS DATE
Town Administrator ________________________ _______________________________
Department Head ________________________ _______________________________
Committee Chair ________________________ _______________________________
Selectmen ________________________ _______________________________
_______________________ _______________________________
_______________________ _______________________________
55
POLICY RE: SPECIAL REVENUE FUND FOR RECREATION
Adopted by Board of Selectmen on March 29, 2007
Introduction: Since the Town has authorized recreation revenues to be dedicated for recreation programs
(including operational and maintenance costs associated with Trufant-Summerton Field), it maintains a Special
Revenue Account for Recreation. Such account is the result of surpluses accumulated over time.
General Operation: While it is the objective to operate recreational programs and Trufant-Summerton Field in a
manner as revenue neutral as possible, it is recognized that total expenditures may exceed total revenues in any
given year. In the event that this occurs, the Special Revenue Reserve Account will decrease. In a year when
total revenues exceed total expenditures, the Special Revenue Account will increase.
These increases and decreases occur on a program by program basis and in the aggregate. The Town’s general
ledger system includes the Special Revenue Account in fund balance in the aggregate and internal worksheets
are maintained which account for the Special Revenue Account by program. These worksheets contain
information necessary for the successful management of the Recreation programs.
Special Authorization: In addition to the Special Revenue Account for Recreation functioning as described
above, the Board of Selectmen may authorize the use of these Special Revenue funds for the following
recreational purposes: (1) capital items; (2) special equipment; and (3) specific identified operational expenses.
Such funding requests shall be initiated by the Recreation Director after consultation with the Recreation
Committee. The intent of the Special Authorization is to ensure that funds collected for recreation purposes are
expended for recreation purposes.
TOWN DEVELOPMENT FEES WAIVER
The Town of Harpswell undertakes land use activities and development projects from time to time. Given that
the Board of Selectmen has authority to determine the fee schedule for such activity and development, the
Board shall exempt applications initiated by the Town of Harpswell for projects on Town-owned property from
the terms listed in the Harpswell Development Fee Schedule, including but not limited to, land use permit fees,
septic fees and Planning Board fees.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen June 13, 2013
56
POLICY ON TREASURER’S DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS FOR EMPLOYEE WAGES AND
BENEFITS
Purpose. This policy allows designated municipal officers (selectmen or councilors), acting on behalf of the full
board of municipal officers, to review, approve, and sign municipal treasurer’s disbursement warrants, for wages and
benefits only.
This policy is additional to, not in lieu of, majority power. Nothing in this policy is intended to replace the
authority of the full board of municipal officers, acting by majority vote, to act on any treasurer’s warrant, including
warrants for wages and benefits.
Delegation of authority. Pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 5603(2)(A)(1), the following authority is granted with respect
to treasurer’s disbursement warrants for municipal employee wages and benefits only:
Current municipal officers. The municipal officers in office at the time of execution of this policy are:
______________________ (Chair), and _______________________________,
_________________________________.
?Any one of the municipal officers named above, acting alone, may review. approve, and sign such
warrants.
?Either ____________________ or ___________________, acting alone, may review, approve,
and sign such warrants.
?__________________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
Effective date. This policy becomes effective on the date indicated below. Copies. The Chair of the
municipal officers will furnish copies of this policy to the municipal clerk and to the municipal treasurer. If the clerk
and the treasurer are the same person, a copy shall nonetheless be provided to that person in each capacity.
Lapse. This policy lapses one year after its effective date, if not sooner amended or cancelled.
Renewal. This policy may be renewed at any time before its lapse. Thereafter, it may be readopted at
any time. Any renewal is valid for one year from its effective date, unless a sooner date of expiration is
specified.
Reminder. If the municipal treasurer is an appointed official, the treasurer shall remind the municipal officers to
consider renewing this policy annually before it lapses. If the municipal treasurer is an elected official, the treasurer
is requested to provide such an annual reminder.
Original. The Chair of the municipal officers will maintain the original of this policy on file unless the municipal
clerk is an appointed official, in which case the clerk shall maintain it on file, if requested to do so by the Chair.
Dated: __________________, 20_____
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
____________________________________
____________________________________
____________________________________
57
POLICY ON TREASURER’S DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS FOR STATE FEES
Purpose. This policy allows designated municipal officers (selectmen or councilors), acting on behalf of the full
board of municipal officers, to review, approve, and sign municipal treasurer’s disbursement warrants for payment of
state fees only.
This policy is additional to, not in lieu of, majority power. Nothing in this policy is intended to replace the
authority of the full board of municipal officers, acting by majority vote, to act on any treasurer’s warrant, including
warrants for payment of state fees.
Delegation of authority. Pursuant to 30-A MRSA § 5603(A)(3), the following authority is granted with respect to
treasurer’s disbursement warrants for payment of state fees only.
Current municipal officers. The municipal officers in office at the time of execution of this policy are:
________________________________ ______________________________
??Any one of the municipal officers named above, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
??Either _____________________or _____________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such
warrants.
??___________________________, acting alone, may review, approve, and sign such warrants.
Effective date. This policy becomes effective on the date indicated below.
Copies. The Chair of the municipal officers will furnish copies of this policy to the municipal clerk and to the
municipal treasurer. If the clerk and the treasurer are the same person, a copy shall nonetheless be provided to that
person in each capacity.
Lapse. This policy lapses one year after its effective date, if not sooner amended or cancelled.
Renewal. This policy may be renewed at any time before its lapse. Thereafter, it may be readopted at any time. Any
renewal is valid for one year from its effective date, unless a sooner date of expiration is specified.
Reminder. If the municipal treasurer is an appointed official, the treasurer shall remind the municipal officers to
consider renewing this policy annually before it lapses. If the municipal treasurer is an elected official, the treasurer
is requested to provide such an annual reminder.
Original. The Chair of the municipal officers will maintain the original of this policy on file unless the municipal
clerk is an appointed official, in which case the clerk shall maintain it on file, if requested to do so by the Chair.
Dated: ________________________,
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS:
________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
58
POLICY FOR USE OF MBNA CREDIT CARD
The Town has a credit card issued by MBNA primarily for the purpose of accessing the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds online.
The credit card may be used by the Assessing, Codes Enforcement, Tax Collector’s and Treasurer’s offices and
for those purposes where previously a request of the Registry was made by telephone or a search was performed
at the Registry itself.
It is expected that Assessing and Codes will use the card to download property deeds on an occasional basis in
connection with new subdivisions, property transfers or problems with existing deeds (Assessing) and building
permits (Codes). The Tax Collector and Treasurer will use the card to perform searches for mortgagors in
connection with the filing of tax lien mortgage certificates and notices of impending automatic foreclosure.
Each search costs $.50 and the viewing of each document costs $.25. In the event that any office undertakes a
project expected to incur more than $10 in fees, the Town Administrator must be notified of the nature of the
project in advance.
Searches will only be conducted by the Town staff for the Town’s benefit. Deed research for individuals should
not be performed. Assessing and Codes may provide copies of deed at the appropriate charge to property
owners.
The Treasurer receives an e-mail from the manager of the Registry of Deeds website each time the credit card is
charged and therefore will be responsible for monitoring the usage of the credit card.
Effective September 4, 2008, the credit card may also be used for certain purchases, that have been preapproved
by the Town Administrator, not to exceed $1,000, where the vendor will not accept a purchase order
and the purchase is needed in a timely fashion. An annual list will be maintained and submitted to the Board
regularly, at least annually.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen Thursday, July 6, 2006.
Revised policy adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 4, 2008.
59
Abandoned/Recovered Property Policy
Any vehicles, vessels, equipment, fishing gear, etc. herein referred to as property or items, known to be
stored in violation of Town property ordinances, land use rules, right of ways, easements, etc., or
deemed to be a hazard to navigation, the environment or the wellbeing of others may be recovered by
the Town of Harpswell. Every effort will be made to establish ownership and contact said owner
before removal, except in an emergency situation. Items that are in violation will be considered
abandoned until ownership can either be established, or after all efforts have failed, the owners cannot
be determined.
All property or items removed by the town will be taken to the Transfer Station for storage or disposal.
Upon arrival at the Transfer Station the removed property will be weighed and recorded to establish a
disposal cost and date of arrival for the item.
All property deemed to have real value will be stored within the secured facility until the owner can be
reached or determined. Upon arrival the property will be tracked for 21 days. All attempts to locate an
owner will be documented. At the end of said period, if ownership cannot be established, or the owner
has been contacted and not responded, said item will be deemed abandoned and will become Town
property. The item will then be properly disposed of. Special consideration will be taken, concerning
the period of time an item is stored before disposal if:
• It is believed that the recovered property belongs to a non-resident and is recovered out of
season.
• If the property or item is suspected of being stolen, in which case the Sherriff’s office or
Wardens service will be contacted.
• If the owner has been identified and is making a considerable effort to recover said property.
• If owner has been identified and is claiming a legitimate hardship that prohibits recovery.
If property is claimed by the owner or an owner’s representative, certain fees will need to be paid to
facilitate the items recovery and return. Removal of claimed items will not be permitted until all
associated fees have been paid. Fees to be assessed include but are not limited to:
• Any and all recovery and transportation fees incurred by the Town.
• The value of a third-party contractor hired or sent by the Town to remove the item or cleanup
the affected area of abandonment. (Note: Town employee time may be considered if extensive
time and effort is involved).
• Any and all environmental or hazardous waste cleanup costs either at the site of the affected
removal site or Transfer Station holding area.
• A Transfer Station storage fee of $5 per day.
Proof of payment will be required before any item can be physically removed from the facility.
Owners wishing to recover items or materials from a recovered property will be allowed to remove
said items after the following conditions are met:
• Any and all associated Town fees as mentioned above pertaining to the recovery,
transportation, storage etc. of said property are paid.
• The initial disposal cost established when item arrived has been paid.
• Proof of payment will be required before parts, pieces, materials, miscellaneous items, etc. can
be removed from the recovered property or facility.
60
All charges, billings or fees associated with the removal of the property from the Transfer Station or
items taken from the recovered property, from within the Transfer Station will be the responsibility of
the owner or owner’s representative.
The Town reserves the right to bill any owner who has been identified, but who doesn’t claim their
property. Billing may include but is not limited to:
• Recovery and transportation fees
• Any and all storage fees
• Any and all disposal fees
• Any hazardous waste recovery fees associated with the disposal
• Any fees that the Transfer Station cannot handle on site. (i.e. asbestos, etc.).
Nonpayment of above said billing may result in the Town taking certain actions including but not
limited to legal action.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 1, 2019
BOAT OPERATOR QUALIFICATIONS Adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 6, 2012
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to provide a clear understanding of the skills and abilities
required for boat operators to operate Town-owned vessels.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Town of Harpswell will operate Town-owned
vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell recognizes that to operate a boat in the coastal marine
environment poses unique challenges that require specialized skills and abilities.
These skills and abilities include but are not limited to: marine navigation, seamanship
and boat operation in adverse weather & sea conditions. They also include the
trailering, launch and retrieval of the boat during use. In addition the operator should
develop a working knowledge of the coastal waters of the Town.
Responsibility: The Town will require that boat operators provide documentation to show that they
possess
the minimum qualifications and experience to safely operate Town-owned vessels.
The Town may require a demonstration of those skills and abilities as witnessed by
the Town’s agent. The Town will maintain the records of approved operators.
61
BOAT MAINTENANCE POLICY Adopted by the Board of Selectmen on September 20, 2012
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to ensure an “operational readiness” for the boat as well as to
provide for necessary repairs and required annual maintenance.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Harbormaster of the Town of Harpswell, who shall
keep a list of all authorized users, will operate Town-owned vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell has a substantial investment in its boats, motors and trailers.
Proper maintenance will ensure the overall safety, reliability and longevity of service of
the vessel.
Responsibility: “operational readiness”
The boat operators will complete a visual survey of the boat and trailer prior to each use to
identify any damage or defects which would create a hazard to its use.
The safety equipment and electronics will be inspected for serviceability and compliance with
the United States Coast Guard.
Deficiencies will be recorded on a maintenance checklist to include a plan for correction.
The boats will be placed “out of service” if the vessel cannot be operated safely until repairs are
completed.
“Annual Maintenance and Repair”
The Town will be responsible to see that the boats are brought to an authorized service center
on an annual basis for an overall inspection. This inspection shall include the boat, motor and
trailer. The maintenance schedule as recommended by the manufacturer shall be followed as
applicable.
FACILITY CLOSURE POLICY FOR EMERGENCIES
Certain emergencies may require closure of a municipal facility in order to provide appropriate
emergency response and/or to maintain the safety of employees and the public. Those emergencies
may include but are not limited to major medical crises, public health or safety threats, fires, serious
workplace injuries, vehicular and pedestrian accidents. The Town Administrator or his/her designee
shall have the discretion to close a municipal facility for such emergencies. The Town Administrator
or designee may choose to consult with Selectmen and/or other officials in making closure
determinations. Any closure expected to continue for 4 or more hours shall require notification of
members of the Board of Selectmen.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen December 29, 2016
62
FUTURE ACQUISITION OF LAND POLICY
Regarding the potential acquisition of land, the Town, acting through its Board of Selectmen, may give
priority consideration to properties that:
a) are adjacent to or near existing Town properties;
b) provide public waterfront access;
c) enhance parking for waterfront access;
d) are located on the Mountain Road corridor;
e) provide acquisition in areas of the Town where there may not be much publicly accessible land;
f) are identified as Focus Areas in the Town’s Open Space plan;
g) enable accommodations that improve or expand access for commercial fishing and/or for other
waterfront activities –such accommodations might be parking for vehicles and boat trailers,
boat ramps that are sized for larger vessels.
Note: Only the Town Meeting is authorized to acquire land on behalf of the Town.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 1, 2014
FOCUS AREAS From the OPEN SPACE PLAN
Focus Area 1: Long Reach, Great Island
Focus Area 2: Brickyard Watershed, Great Island
Focus Area 3: Bethel Point, Cundy’s Harbor
Focus Area 4: Sandy Cove, East Cundy’s Point
Focus Area 5: Ice Pond, Gun and Long Points, Great Island
Focus Area 6: Wilson’s Pond Orr’s Island
Focus Area 7: Cedar Beach, Bailey Island
Focus Area 8: Otter Brook Corridor, North Harpswell
Focus Area 9: Wilson & Widgeon Coves, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 10: Lookout Point, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 11. Allen Point Road Corridor, Harpswell Neck
Focus Area 12 Basin Cove, South Harpswell
63
58
64
POLICY REGARDING LEASE OF TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY AT THE
ORR’S ISLAND BRIDGE
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 12, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen June 14, 2007
Amended by the Board of Selectmen June 22, 2017
The Board of Selectmen shall decide on an annual basis whether to enter into annual lease agreements
with certain individuals who historically have had commercial wharves attached to Town-owned
property at the Orr’s Island Bridge. The Board shall determine the annual lease fee, require proof of
insurance including to name the Town as additional insured when appropriate, and make final
determinations about with whom the Town should enter into lease agreements.
The following provisions shall apply with respect to the Board’s final determination about with whom
the Town should enter into lease agreements.
1. The Town shall not enter into a lease agreement with anyone who has outstanding unpaid prior year
taxes relating to the wharf property.
2. The lessee shall have 75 days, from the date that the Town sends a proposed lease agreement to the
lessee, to return a signed agreement to the Town or the lease agreement shall be deemed invalid.
3. Only property related to the commercial fishing operation of a properly authorized lessee may
remain on-site. All other items and debris must be removed. There shall be no property left on-site that
is owned by anyone other than a properly authorized lessee. The Town reserves the right to withhold
the assignment of a lease for non-compliance with this provision.
65
Town of Harpswell
George J. Mitchell Field & Harpswell Bandstand
Use Policy
This policy applies to:
Mitchell Field: Groups over 50 attendees Harpswell Bandstand: Any size group
Mitchell Field, including the Harpswell Bandstand, is the property of the Town of Harpswell.
The Board of Selectmen administers this Policy. The Selectmen may waive any provision of this
policy if they determine that such waiver is consistent with the intent of this policy and in the public
interest.
1. Mitchell Field
a. This Use Policy shall apply to all groups, entities including but not limited to any not-for-profit
organizations or assemblage which exceeds or is expected to exceed 50 people, and requires
Selectmen approval A streamlined approval process may be utilized for repeat group use applicants
previously approved by the Board of Selectmen, for the Town’s three fire departments and for
private functions such as weddings, reunions, and birthday parties that have more than 50 guests but
less than 125. For these applicants, a one-page Mitchell Field Group Use form shall be used and
staff shall have the authority to approve the request as long as it is consistent with the policy and
rules.
b. While this policy does not apply to not-for-profit organizations or groups expecting fewer than 50
people, reserving a specific area through the Town is recommended.
2. Harpswell Bandstand
a. A Group Use application must be submitted for groups of any number, including not-for-profit
groups, whether they are public or private.
b. The Bandstand is solar powered and electricity can be provided up to 2800 watts.
c. Bandstand events are scheduled in half or full day increments. A half day is six hours or less. A
full day is more than six hours, but less than 12 hours.
3. General
a. Applicant: The applicant may be an individual, organization (not recognized by government) or a
non-profit (recognized by government) or for profit organization. All groups must adhere to the
rules regarding use of Mitchell Field, a copy of which is attached. All groups must comply with
applicable laws and regulations prohibiting discrimination. All activities conducted at Mitchell
Field shall comply with all State and federal laws and regulations and with all local ordinances.
Activities that pose a threat to persons or property are prohibited. The use of Mitchell
Field/Bandstand may be denied if the proposed event is inconsistent with the nature and location of
the property. The Town reserves the right to refuse the use of Mitchell Field/Bandstand to any
group. All applications must specify those areas of Mitchell Field for which the application is being
made.
b. Reservation: The applicant must complete a Group Use application form requesting use for the
event. The Town reserves the right to limit the number of events per day at Mitchell Field. First
priority will be given to Town-sponsored events.
c. Duration: For any events lasting more than 12 hours, a double fee may be charged.
66
d. Security Deposit: A $50 refundable security deposit beyond the facility fee will be collected at the
time of approval. This deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 30 business days of the
event if all conditions of the Use Policy have been met.
e. Fees: Functions sponsored by the Town of Harpswell and school groups are exempt from fees.
Applications proposed for use of both Mitchell Field and Bandstand will be charged full price for
the principal use and .5 fee for the secondary use. Applicable fees are as specified below and are
due upon approval of use:
f. Payment: Payment may be made in cash, check or credit card at the Harpswell Town Office.
g. Insurance: The applicant must provide a certificate of public liability insurance for the event. The
Town of Harpswell must be named as an additional insured in the amount of $400,000.
h. Parking: All event parking must take place in designated areas approved by the Town.
i. Restrooms: Two handicap accessible portable restrooms are on premises from April through
November. Applicant must provide additional restrooms, to be sited by the Town, at his/her
expense for events with greater than 100 people (1 additional per 50 persons above 100). Portable
restrooms must be removed immediately after the event.
j. Tent(s): If a tent(s) is to be used it must be sited by the Town and the applicant must provide the
tent(s) at his/her own expense. Any tent(s) must be removed immediately after the event.
k. Barbecues/Cook Stoves: The applicant must provide his/her own barbecues or cook stoves and fuel.
They must be approved for use in Mitchell Field by the Town and may be sited by the Town. No
barbecues or cook stoves may be used inside the Bandstand or on the brick walkway.
l. Water: Drinking water is not available in Mitchell Field.
m. Electricity: Limited electricity is available in Mitchell Field. If the applicant requires electricity for
an event, the event will be sited in an area where electricity is available. However, the applicant
will be responsible for all associated costs. Solar powered electricity is available at the Bandstand.
n. Private Equipment: Utilization of private equipment within the facility is permitted with prior
approval by the Town.
o. Noise: Amplified sound is allowed for an approved use provided it does not constitute a nuisance to
the surrounding property owners. All amplified sound will cease not later than 10:00 pm.
p. Sub-Contractor: The applicant is responsible for adherence to all regulation by any subcontractor,
employee or volunteer including but not limited to: caterers, musicians, etc.
Mitchell Field: Bandstand:
Resident, taxpayer, Harpswell based organization
or benefit to Harpswell residents or taxpayers .5 day $100 / full day $200 .5 day $100 / full day $200
Individual or organization - not Harpswell based
or no benefit to Harpswell residents or taxpayers .5 day $200 / full day $400 .5 day $200 / full day $400
Not-for-profit (recognized by government)
Harpswell based or benefit to Harpswell None .5 day $100 / full day $200*
Not Harpswell based or not benefit to Harpswell .5 day $100 / full day $200 .5 day $200 / full day $400*
For Profit entity (use approved by Board of Selectmen)
up to 200 people $500*+ $500*+
201-500 people $1000*+ $1000*+
over 500 people $2000*+ $2000*+
*requires Selectmen approval regardless of size
*+ fees listed are minimum fees and may be subject to change during Selectmen review
67
q. Decorations: No physical changes may be made to the property in any way. No staples, screws,
tacks, tape or any other material that may cause permanent damage shall be used to fasten or affix
anything to the Bandstand, brick walkway, fence or to any structure.
r. Damage: Mitchell Field/Bandstand grounds must be left as found. This means no damage to or
collecting of animals or plants, no refuse left behind and no damage to roads, trails, and structures.
Violators will be responsible for restoring the facility to the condition it was in prior to the approved
use.
s. Access: An event and its participants shall not interfere with the concurrent use and enjoyment of
Mitchell Field by others and there shall be no entry charge for non-event users. Participants in
events sponsored by non-profit organizations may be asked for voluntary donations.
t. Security: Groups exceeding 200 must provide private security covering the event.
u. Trash: Each applicant is responsible for providing trash receptacles that must be emptied at his/her
own expense and removed immediately after the event.
v. Intoxicating Beverages: Prohibited on the premises.
w. Waterfront: Swim at your own risk – no lifeguard on duty.
x. Picnic Tables: Picnic tables may be used for events, all but two that must be left near the waterfront
for use by others. Picnic tables must be returned to the waterfront area immediately after use.
4. Vendors
a. See Policy on Sale of Food Items at Mitchell Field by Nonprofits and Non-Profit Entity Request
Form for Use of Mitchell Field to Sell Food Items.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen March 6, 2014
Fees amended by Board of Selectmen October 4, 2018
68
RULES FOR GEORGE J MITCHELL FIELD
Mitchell Field is open from sunrise to sunset.
For your safety and to protect this resource:
• Remain on the trails when in the forested area.
• Stay off the bluff on the southwest perimeter. It is unstable.
• The buildings and water tower, which are safety hazards, are off limits.
• Leave the soil undisturbed.
• No fires are allowed.
• Leave flowers and other vegetation for others to enjoy.
• Carry out what you carry in – all trash.
Prohibited Items:
• Intoxicating beverages
• Hunting
Animal Control:
• Pets must be under owner’s control. From 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. daily, dogs must be
leashed.
• Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by their pets.
• Feeding or touching wild animals is dangerous and forbidden.
• Report unusual animal behavior to the Animal Control Officer at 1 (800) 501-1111.
Vehicles:
• Automobiles are allowed when the gate is open.
• All-terrain vehicles are not allowed.
ALL USES OF THIS FACILITY ARE AT THE USER’S RISK.
THERE ARE NO LIFEGUARDS
FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL THE TOWN OFFICE AT 833-5771
FOR AN EMERGENCY CALL 911
69
Town of Harpswell
Request for Use of Mitchell Field and/or Harpswell Bandstand
Group Making Request:
[ ] Resident or taxpayer [ ] Non-Resident [ ] Organization, Harpswell based [ ] Non-Profit,
Harpswell based [ ] Organization, not Harpswell based [ ] Non-Profit, not Harpswell based
[ ] For Profit If a benefit, for who or what purpose ________________
Contact Person_______________________________________________ Phone__________________
Address___________________________________________Email____________________________
I hereby request permission to use an area within Mitchell Field: ___________(include diagram)
Bandstand: [ ] Half Day [ ] Full Day [ ] Other ______________________________________
Date(s) requested______________________________________ Time: Start________ End________
Purpose of activity___________________________________________________________________
Special needs or requests__________________________________________ Number of
Guests_______
The Group Representative who will be present at all times and in charge of this event is:
Name______________________________________________________ Phone__________________
Electricity Needed_______ Amplified Sound_______ Diagram included showing use areas &
parking_____ Insurance_______ Sub-Contractor_______
Our group hereby acknowledges that it has received a copy of the Rules and the Group Use Policy
applicable to Mitchell Field/Bandstand. It agrees to adhere to these Rules and to the Group Use Policy.
Our group will leave the facilities in the same condition in which it found them, and agrees to pay the
full costs of repairing any damages incurred and/or clean up necessitated by this event.
The Town of Harpswell shall be held free and harmless from any liability for accidents, personal
injuries and damage to property caused by the activities and/or participants in this event.
Signature of Applicant______________________________________________ Date______________
[ ] The applicant has received a copy of the Rules.
[ ] The applicant has received a copy of the Group Use Policy.
Application received by____________________________________________Date_______________
Request: Approved [ ] Disapproved [ ] Group Notified [ ] Proof of Insurance [ ]
Total Fee: $________________ Paid [ ] Deposit Received [ ] Deposit refunded [ ]
By _____________________________________________________________Date______________
70
POLICY ON SALE OF FOOD ITEMS AT MITCHELL FIELD BY NONPROFITS
Mitchell Field is the property of the Town of Harpswell. It is maintained for the benefit and use of
Harpswell property owners, renters and their guests. At times the Board of Selectmen is requested to
permit the sale of food items at Mitchell Field by nonprofit organizations. Granting such permission
shall be based on the following:
1. The organization shall be clearly identified and shall be non-profit in nature. For instance, the
organization may include but not necessarily be limited to educational, charitable or governmental in
purpose.
2. The organization shall provide proof of liability insurance consistent with the Town’s Group Use Policy
for Mitchell Field.
3. The organization must clean up any debris resulting from its use, and ensure that the property is returned
to its condition prior to the sales activity.
4. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to limit the number of organizations selling food items at any
one event.
5. Staff shall review and make a determination on applications. If staff is unable to reach a determination,
the final determination as to the granting of permission for the sale of food items by nonprofits rests
with the Board of Selectmen, and in making such determination, the benefit to the general community
shall be considered.
6. The organization shall be responsible for obtaining any necessary food license required by the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services. The organization shall submit a copy of the license or
evidence that one is not required.
7. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to charge a fee to the organization for permitting the sale of
food items.
8. The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to set any other limitations it deems necessary or appropriate.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen June 27, 2013
POLICY REGARDING POLITICAL SIGNS ON TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY
Signs bearing political messages relating to an election, primary, referendum or warrant article are
prohibited on Town-owned property and buildings, excluding Town roads, outside the travelled way;
provided however that political signs are prohibited on Community Drive and all ways at Mitchell
Field.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen September 9, 2010
71
Potts Point Town Dock Policy
The Town of Harpswell owns and maintains a public wharf and float system on Potts Point providing
public access to Casco Bay.
The purpose of this policy is to (1) foster an organized and orderly use of the Town’s float system at
the Town Dock; and (2) adopt rules and regulations governing the use of a Town Wharf, Dock or Float
that establish a systematic approach for the Harbormaster to grant permission for vessels to exceed the
thirty (30) minute tie-up limit, pursuant to Section 8.1.11 of the Harbor and Waterfront Ordinance..
This policy applies only to long-term dinghy registration. Owners of transient and temporary boat tieups
shall still contact the Harbormaster for use of the Town float as stated in the Harbor and
Waterfront Ordinance (section 8.1) A Town-issued registration and number shall be required for
keeping a dinghy, or skiff on designated float space at the Town Dock. A current registration
application form will be available on January 15 of each year (on April 1st in 2013) from the
Harbormaster, the Town Clerk’s Office or on the Town website (http://www.harpswell.maine.gov/).
Applications may be submitted to the Town Clerk, by mail, in person or by email addressed to
harbormaster@town.harpswell.me.us.
Upon receipt of a dinghy registration application, the Town Clerk shall affix the day’s date and at the
end of the day, forward the applications to the Harbormaster for processing. A permitted dinghy space
shall be assigned a location at the Town Dock by the Harbormaster on a first-come first served basis as
space permits and assigned in accordance with the priority list, allowing 10% of the available spaces to
be assigned to non-residents:
Priority List:
Residents and Non-Resident Taxpayers (25);
Non-Resident (3)
Note: the terms Resident, Non-Resident Taxpayer and Non-Resident are defined as set forth in Section
4, Definitions, of the Town of Harpswell’s Harbor and Waterfront Ordinance:
Resident: An individual who maintains a legal residence in the Town of Harpswell.
Non-Resident Taxpayer: A non-resident who pays real estate taxes to the Town of
Harpswell.
Non-Resident: Any individual who does not maintain a legal residence within the Town of
Harpswell.
All applications received on the day the number of applications exceeds the number of unassigned
spaces available at the dock will be entered into a lottery and, based on the priority list, the remaining
spaces will be assigned. Applicants will not be granted more than one dinghy registration in any given
year.
Following review of the applications the Harbormaster shall inform the applicants of the success or
failure of their application and issue registration numbers specific to the dinghy or skiff noted on the
application form. The applicant will have fifteen (15) business days to complete the registration
process pick up registration number and pay the registration fee. Failure to meet this deadline will
result in the voiding of his or her application and that space will go to the next applicant on the priority
list. The priority list shall be maintained from the current year’s application period until the next
application period. At which time, the priority list will begin again based on current year applications.
72
The issuance of a registration number specific to the dinghy or skiff allows the dinghy or skiff to be
secured at the designated float space and left unattended at the Town Dock for more than 30 minutes.
By virtue of the acceptance of a registration number by a dinghy or skiff owner or operator by the
Harbormaster, the owner/operator agrees to the following:
a. Each dinghy or skiff, shall be marked with the dinghy or skiff registration number, which shall be
assigned by the Harbormaster.
b. All dinghies and skiffs shall be properly secured and maintained, but shall not be secured with
chains or wire, or padlocked to the Town Dock.
c. No dinghy or skiff exceeding 12 feet in length, shall be registered for a designated float space at
the Town Dock.
The sale, lease, rental, transfer or assignment of a registration number is prohibited. The registration
numbers shall expire December 31 of each year. No vested rights to the issuance of a registration
number at a later date or a priority space assignment are obtained by the owner/operator by virtue of
the issuance of a registration number by the Harbormaster
POTTS POINT TOWN DOCK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
1. It shall be unlawful to leave a vessel at a Town Wharf, Dock or Float for a period exceeding
thirty (30) minutes without the permission of the Harbormaster.
2. No person shall create a public nuisance or consume alcoholic beverages on the Town Dock.
3. The storage of dinghies or skiffs, fishing gear, bait or personal items on the Town Dock is
prohibited.
4. No person shall leave any trash, garbage or waste on the Town Dock.
5. The refueling (either diesel, gasoline or otherwise) of boats, outboard motors or auxiliary
motors is prohibited on the Town Dock.
6. The Harbormaster may remove, or cause to be removed, to Town-owned property, any
unattended dinghy, or skiff obstructing use of designated areas after due effort has been made
by the Harbormaster to notify the owner or operator of said dinghy, or skiff of the violation.
The vessel owner shall be responsible for all associated costs of removal.
7. The Harbormaster shall have the general authority to supervise use of the Town Dock and shall
be responsible for the neat and orderly use of the Town Dock and for the assignment of float
space.
8. Any dinghy or skiff filled with water to the seat level shall be considered unattended.
Contact information
Town Office: 207 833-5771
Registration fee: Resident/Non-Resident Taxpayer: $50.00
Non-Resident $100.00
ADOPTED BY HARPSWELL BOARD OF SELECTMEN March 6, 2013
Amended June 25, 2015
Amended March 28, 2019
73
Town of Harpswell
RULES FOR TOWN TRAILS
Adopted November 4, 2004
1. Do not dig or disturb the soils.
2. Everything carried in must be carried out. This is the trash
disposal policy.
3. NO fires are allowed.
4. Intoxicating beverages are not allowed.
5. Do not pick any living thing. Leave everything for others to enjoy.
6. Pets must be under owner’s control.
7. Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by
their pets on the trail.
8. Report any unusual animal behavior to the Town of Harpswell’s
Animal Control Officer at 1-800-266-1444.
9. NO motorized vehicles allowed, other than wheelchairs and
authorized vehicles.
10. Users should wear safety orange clothing during hunting season.
All uses of the Town trails are at the user’s risk.
74
Management of Trails on Town Lands
Personnel and Responsibilities
1. Recreation Department Director (RDD)
The RDD Director shall oversee the maintenance of the trails on Town lands:
Cliff Trail
Devil’s Back Trail
Giant Stairs Trail
Mitchell Field Trails
And any future trails to be established on Town lands
Responsibilities include:
a. Appoint Trail Monitors
b. Produce trail maps and signage
c. Maintain a list of community volunteers who are interested in doing trail work and/or
have special skills (i.e., chainsaw, trucks and trailers for hauling, etc.). and organizing
community-wide work parties when more extensive maintenance is required
2. Trail Monitors (TM)
Each trail on Town lands shall have a designated Trail Monitor. The TM need not be a member of
the Recreation (RC) or Town Lands (TL) Committees but should be a person committed to monitoring and
seeing to the maintenance of the trail. Ideally this person may be the Town Land Steward.
Responsibilities include:
a. Clearing the trail of fallen trees, branches, and litter
b. Trimming back the sides of trail to allow for clear and easy passage
c. Maintaining trail blazes, signs and replenishing maps
d. Walking trail and reporting condition back to RC at least twice a year
e. Notifying the RDD when additional volunteers are needed for major
remediation and other trail improvements
3. Volunteers
All volunteers shall sign a Town Volunteer Liability Release form (Appendix A).
4. Work Party Safety
If power equipment (chainsaws, trimmers, etc.) is to be used, all members of the work party are
required to follow the procedures outlined in Appendix B.
Unofficial Trails
The TM shall identify unofficial trails (often referred to as Bootleg trails) and monitor their
effect on the town trail. If it leads hikers off the town trail, the TM shall take actions to block the trail
with brush or logs, establish new signs and blazes, or other appropriate means to prevent hikers from
getting lost. If the problem persists (i.e., the “bootlegger” removes the barriers or cuts new trails) the TM
shall bring the issue to the RDD. From there the matter will go as high as needed (Administrator, BOS).
Public Input and Communication
At each trailhead and exit a sign shall read: “To report a downed tree or other trail problem, please
notify the Recreation Department Director” and shall include the phone number and email.
Town Rules
The Town, through whatever appropriate means, shall establish that ONLY designated parties such
as the TM, RC, and TL have the authority to create, alter or discontinue sections of trails on Town lands.
Furthermore, these parties, under the direction of the Recreation Director, have authority for maintenance of
the trails and for re-routes for safety and convenience. Any new or major trail construction shall go through
the established process of plans to be brought before the Board of Selectmen
75
APPENDIX A
Town of Harpswell Recreation Department
P.O. Box 39
Harpswell, Maine 04079
Volunteer Liability Release
Name: Phone:
Address: E--mail:
City/St/Zip:
I would like to participate in the following activity: Trail Clearing & Construction Operations
Site of the activity:
Duration of the activity:
Specific hazards and restrictions:
This activity will involve clipping & cutting trees & bushes, and mowing grass. These operations will involve
the use of hand tools, power lawn mowers and chain saws. There is always potential danger of injury associated
with falling limbs and trees.
Anyone operating a lawn mower or chain saw does so at their own risk, with the understanding that the
operator will comply with all safety and equipment procedures and guidelines governing correct use, proper
clothing attire and any other safety procedures as stated in the equipment operating manual.
Release from Liability
In consideration of the permission granted to the undersigned by the Town of Harpswell to participate in the
above stated volunteer support activities during the Spring, Summer and Fall of (year), the undersigned hereby
releases and discharges the Town of Harpswell, its agents and officers, from all actions, causes of action,
damages, claims or demands which the undersigned, the undersigned’s heirs, executor, administrators and
assigns may have against the aforementioned parties, for all personal injuries, known or unknown, which the
undersigned has or may incur by participation in the above mentioned activities. The undersigned realizes
he/she must provide his/her own health accident insurance for injuries that they may sustain while participating
in the above-mentioned activities. The undersigned gives the supervisor permission to obtain whatever medical
treatment may be necessary in the event of an injury which renders the undersigned unable to make a conscious
decision of their own.
I have read and understand the description of activity, specific hazards and restrictions, and agree to the Release
from Liability.
Signature of Participant/Guardian ________________ ____ _ _______ ____ ____ _
Date:_________________________
76
APPENDIX B
Use of Chainsaws, Trimmers and other powered tools.
- While the town does not require specific training before a person can use gas or electric powered tools or
equipment on town property when performing trail maintenance, it is assumed that the user is familiar
with the tool or equipment, knows how to operate it in accordance with the operating instructions, and is
familiar with its associated safety requirements.
- Persons utilizing the equipment/ tools are doing so at their own risk.
- At a minimum, the user is required to wear the appropriate Personal Protection
Equipment (PPE) recommended when operating specific equipment.
- Chainsaw:
- Approved hardhat, full brim or cap style
- Wrap-around eye protection (safety glasses or shield)
- Hearing protection
- Long sleeve shirt and long pants
- Gloves
- Boots
- Chain saw chaps
- Trimmer:
- Wrap-around eye protection (safety glasses or shield)
- Hearing protection
- Long sleeve shirt and long pants
- Gloves
- Boots
- PPE is required for all members of the crew who will be working in proximity of powered
equipment:
- Safety glasses
- Hearing protection
- Gloves
- A safety brief must be conducted for the work crew prior to starting the project on required safety
instructions, standoff requirements and safety equipment.
- The work crew must have a first aid kit available when power tools or equipment are in use.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen August 8, 2013
77
TOWN LAND STEWARDS
To create the position of Town Land Steward for each parcel of town owned land. Those
seeking to be Stewards will apply using the Town Committee application forms and will be
appointed by the Select Board for 2-year terms. A Town Land Committee member shall
automatically be considered a Steward with the term to correspond to the member’s term on the
Town lands Committee.
The Town Lands Committee will assign each Steward to one or more parcels of land to monitor and
To report the conditions of those parcels to the Town Lands Committee at least twice per year based
on a schedule developed by the Committee. Stewards are observers and reporters. They are not
managers of town lands.
The Town Lands Committee shall adopt reporting formats for the Stewards and for the Committee
substantially similar to the drafts accompanying this proposal. The Committee shall report annually
to the Select Board on the conditions of each parcel for which they are responsible, along with
recommendations for action, if any.
Approved by Board of Selectmen as revised June 5, 2008
Amended by Board of Selectmen May 25, 2016
(Stewards Form next Page)
78
79
Town of Harpswell Tobacco-Free Resolution
The Town of Harpswell in the State of Maine in order to promote the health and safety of residents, visitors
and recreation participants establishes a Tobacco-Free Campus at the following Town owned properties or
facilities: Trufant-Summerton Ballfield property, the Old Town Meeting House property, Recycling Center
and Transfer Station facilities. Employees and other visitors shall not smoke or use any tobacco products
within 30 feet of any entranceway to any building at the Town Office.
Whereas the Town of Harpswell, Maine has set a goal that Town property be a safe and healthy place to
recreate, live and work; and
Whereas tobacco use is the single most preventable cause of death and disease in the United States, as well
as in the state of Maine; and
Whereas secondhand smoke contains many harmful chemicals and cancer causing agents, and is a serious
health risk to humans, especially infants, children, and pregnant women; and increases a nonsmokers’ risk of
asthma, heart disease, and lung cancer; and
Whereas chewing tobacco contains many harmful chemicals and cancer-causing agents, and its use is
associated with concerns of the mouth, gums, tongue, and throat; and
Whereas vaping products are electronic nicotine delivery devices such as e-cigarettes, e-pipes, e-hookahs
and hookah pens that are battery operated devices that are used to inhale a vaporized liquid solution that
frequently contains nicotine and also contains additional ingredients that are suspected of being harmful to
humans; and
Whereas the purpose of the recreation program is to provide quality recreation and leisure experiences that
enhance the quality of life of the citizens of Harpswell, including providing a safe environment for these
experiences; and
Whereas the tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke are contrary to enhancing the quality of life
and providing safe environments; and
Whereas the staff and coaches are important role models for the youth who participate in community
recreation activities and whereas what coaches promote is respected and imitated by youth; and
Whereas the intent of this Policy is to create a tobacco-free environment for all residents and visitors in
certain public areas of Harpswell;
Now therefore, be it resolved that the above-mentioned Town-owned properties are to be tobacco-free or
tobacco restricted, including but not limited to cigarettes, non-FDA approved electronic nicotine devices,
cigars, and chewing tobacco.
Be it further resolved that:
• Neither tobacco free company sponsorship nor their resource will be accepted and participants and
staff will be discouraged from wearing clothing or using gear that advertises tobacco products.
• Tobacco-free signage, provided at no expense by the Health Maine Partnership, will be posted in
appropriate areas.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen October 2, 2008; Amended by the Board August 3, 2017
80
TOWING OF DISABLES VESSELS
Purpose: The intent of this policy is to provide a clear understanding of boat operator responsibilities in
assisting disabled vessels.
Operation: Only personnel authorized by the Town of Harpswell will operate Town owned vessels.
Policy: The Town of Harpswell recognizes that in the operation of the Marine Patrol Boat, it may be
necessary to provide assistance to disabled vessels. This assistance should explore all
reasonable remedies that do not necessitate the towing of the disabled vessel.
Exception: In the event that an operator of the Marine Patrol Boat encounters a disabled vessel that is in
immediate danger or presents a life safety risk to the occupants, the operator is authorized to
take the appropriate action (within their skills and abilities) to tow the vessel to a safe position
clear of the hazard.
Responsibility:
The operator of the Marine Patrol Boat will require the disabled vessel occupants to don
personal flotation devices.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen August 9, 2012
81
Town Of Harpswell
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field Use Policy
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field is the property of the Town of Harpswell. The Recreation Director administers this
Policy. The Recreation Director may waive any provision of this policy if determined that such waiver is consistent
with the intent of this policy and in the public interest.
It is the policy of the Town of Harpswell and its Recreation Department to allow the use of Trufant Summerton
Athletic Field to:
• Residents and non-resident taxpayers
• Non-profit organizations and businesses that reside in Harpswell or pay taxes in Harpswell
• Youth organizations in Harpswell and the greater Harpswell area that provide services for Harpswell residents
• Other organizations that have a significant participation rate of Harpswell residents or provide services for
Harpswell residents
All groups must comply with applicable laws and regulation prohibiting discrimination. All activities conducted shall
comply with all State and federal laws and with all local ordinances. Activities that pose a threat to persons or
property are prohibited. The use of the facility may be denied if the proposed event is inconsistent with the nature
and location of the property. The Town reserves the right to refuse the use of the facility to any group.
1) The scheduling of the Athletic Field shall be done on the following premise with Harpswell groups taking
precedence over others:
• Recreation Department programs, activities and functions
• Youth programs
• All others listed above on first come, first served basis
2) The applicant must complete a Group Use application requesting use for the event.
3) Facilities:
Water – There is water available in the concession stand.
Electricity – Electricity is available at the facility. However, the applicant will be responsible for all associated
costs.
Restrooms – There are two restrooms in the garage.
4) Tents, barbeques/cookstoves, and private equipment are permitted. Applicants are responsible for providing
their own equipment at their expense. All equipment must be removed immediately after the event.
5) Use of sports equipment owned by the Town of Harpswell may be permitted if equipment is available and
approved by the Recreation Director.
6) No use of the concession stand for profit will be permitted.
7) The Town of Harpswell reserves the exclusive right to either deny/cancel use of the facility based upon
condition, weather, and the wear of the impending activity on the facility for any reason at any time.
8) Any group using the facility is responsible for costs of any damages or missing property which occur during
the time of their use. Costs that are incurred for additional clean up/maintenance time may be charged.
82
9) An event and its participants shall not interfere with the concurrent use and enjoyment of the facility by
others and there shall be no entry charge for non-event users. Participants in events sponsored by non-profit
organizations may be asked for voluntary donations.
10) No physical changes may be made to the property in any way. No staples, screws, tacks, tape or any other
material that may cause permanent damage shall be used to fasten or affix anything to structures or fencing.
11) The Trufant Summerton Athletic Field is an alcohol, drug, tobacco, vape, e-cig, etc. free facility.
12) Dogs are not permitted inside the fenced areas.
13) Each applicant is responsible for providing trash receptacles that must be emptied at his/her own expense
and removed immediately after the event.
14) A $25 refundable security deposit beyond the facility fee will be collected at the time of approval. This
deposit shall be returned to the applicant within 30 business days of the event if all conditions of the Use
Policy have been met.
15) Functions sponsored by the Town of Harpswell and school groups are exempt from fees. Applicable fees are
below and are due upon approval of use.
Fee Schedule:
Residents and non-resident taxpayers (groups over 25) $10 per hour
Businesses and non-profit organizations within Harpswell $15 per hour
Youth organizations $5 per child under 18
Other organizations significant Harpswell attendance/providing services $20 per hour
16) Payment may be made by cash, check or credit card at the Harpswell Town Office.
17) The applicant must provide a certificate of public liability insurance for the event. The Town of Harpswell
must be named as an additional insured in the amount of $400,000.
Rules for Trufant Summerton Athletic Field
• Open from sunrise to sunset
• Leave the soil undisturbed
• No fires or fireworks allowed
• Carry In – Carry Out trash policy
• No bicycles or motorized vehicles permitted on field
• No dogs permitted inside the fenced areas
• No climbing on dugouts or fences
• No alcohol, drugs, tobacco, vape, e-cigs, etc.
Animal Control
• Dogs permitted outside the fenced area only
• Pet owners must immediately clean up any fecal deposits left by their pets
• Feeding or touching wild animals is dangerous and forbidden
• Report unusual animal behavior to the Animal Control Officer at 1-800-501-1111
All uses of this facility are at the user’s risk
83
Trufant Summerton Athletic Field
Group Use Application
Date of Event___________________________________ Day _________________________________
Time______________________________ Alternate Date_____________________________________
One-time Event On-going Use (end date_________)
Name of Event or Activity ______________________________________________________________
Sponsoring Group/Club __________________________Contact Name __________________________
Phone _______________________________ Email _________________________________________
Address ________________________ Town/Zip____________________________
Event Director if different from above _____________________________________________________
Proposed Activity or Activities ____________
Estimated Attendance ____________ Will admission fees be charged? __________________________
Specify area to be used_________________________________________________________________
Specific Equipment or Set up Requested ___________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS: General Liability Insurance coverage required in the amount of
$400,000 with the Town named as additional insured. Company name, policy number and certificate of
coverage will be required upon approval.
The Town of Harpswell shall be held free and harmless from any liability for accidents, personal injuries and
damage to property caused by the activities and/or participants in this event.
[ ] I have received a copy of and agree to all terms of the Use Policy.
[ ] I agree to pay any facility usage fees and/or any fees incurred due to electricity usage, damage, missing
items, or excessive clean up.
Signature of Applicant _________ ________________ Date ______________
Request: Approved [ ] Denied [ ] Group Notified [ ] Proof of Insurance [ ] Fees $______
Comments ___________________________________________________________________________
Signature _________________ ______________________________________________________
Recreation Director Date
84
POLICY FOR USE AND OPERATION OF MOWER
The Town of Harpswell has purchased a mower for use only by authorized volunteers*
at Mitchell Field. When not in use, the mower shall be stored on-site in the garden building where an
activity/incident log shall be maintained indicating the date and time of use, the area mowed, the volunteer
responsible and note any incidents. This log shall be submitted to the Town Office on a monthly basis.
Issues related to maintenance shall be brought to the immediate attention of Town administrative staff. The
purchase of fuel shall be authorized by Town staff and payment shall be made directly by the Town to the
vendor from whom the fuel was purchased.
*An authorized volunteer must at least 18 years of age and sign a waiver which shall be kept on file at the
Town Office.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen April 25, 2013
Revised by the Board of Selectmen September 19, 2013
TOWN OF HARPSWELL POLICY FOR USE OF TOWN OFFICE MEETING FACILITIES
Adopted May 26, 2011
Purpose: The purpose of this policy is to outline the circumstances under which the Town Office meeting
facilities may be used. It is the intent of this policy to give priority for use of meeting rooms to the Board of
Selectmen, its appointed Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces, Town-sponsored recreational
programs and staff.
Policy: It is the general policy that the Town Office meeting facilities shall be used primarily by the Board
of Selectmen, its appointed Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces, Town-sponsored
recreational programs and staff. Additionally, the meeting facilities shall be made available for use by other
government agencies and officials, groups and organizations receiving direct funding from the Town and
not-for-profit and civic organizations when such uses can be accommodated during regular business hours
without interfering with the needs of the Town or with citizens wishing to transact business. For priority
uses 5, 6 & 7 below, after hours use may be allowed for special circumstances as authorized by the Town
Administrator. The use of the Town Office Building meeting space by for-profit entities is not authorized.
Priorities for Use:
1. Meeting of the Board of Selectmen
2. Meeting of Town Boards, Committees, Commissions and Task Forces
3. Recreational Program
4. Meeting of Town staff
5. Meeting requested by agencies or officials of County, State or Federal Governments
6. Meeting of Groups & Organizations receiving direct funding from the Town
85
7. Meeting for Not-for-Profit Organizations where the meeting is open to the general public and
intended to provide information to the general public.
A schedule for use of the Town Office meeting rooms shall be maintained at the Front Desk. The Town
Administrator should be contacted in the event of a scheduling conflict or if a question arises regarding
priority uses.
VEHICLE USE POLICY
Adopted March 2, 2000 by Board of Selectmen
The Town vehicle is for the use of the Codes Enforcement Office, the Assessing Office and such
other Town uses as the Town Administrator may determine. The operation of the Town vehicle will be for a
one-year period, beginning January 1, 2000, to determine its economic feasibility. If continued, it is
expected that the 2000 vehicle will be sold and replaced by the next vehicle turned back by the Sheriff.
A log book will be maintained in the vehicle and kept current each time the vehicle is used. The
following information shall be recorded in the log book:
1. Purpose of usage, user and mileage for each use
2. All purchases of gasoline, lubricants and other consumables showing their amount and
cost
3. A description and cost of all repairs and upkeep
4. A description of any damage to or by the vehicle
5. Any operating comments the driver may submit
The Town Administrator shall see that these records are kept, analyzed and the results presented to
the Selectmen prior to the return of the next vehicle.
Use of vehicle shall be within Harpswell town limits unless prior approval has been received from
Town Administrator or his/her delegate.
86
BOSTON POST CANE POLICY
Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to provide for the preservation of the tradition of the Boston Post Cane which
seeks to recognize and show appreciation for the oldest resident of Harpswell.
Requirements
To be nominated to receive the distinction, a person must:
1. be the oldest identified resident,
2. have been a resident in Harpswell for a minimum of 25 years including the most recent 10 years,
3. be 90 years of age or older, and
4. be willing to receive the honor in person or through a family member or friend.
Resident is defined as someone who is currently on the voter registration list or would qualify to be on the
voter registration list. Persons living outside the town on a temporary basis with the intent to return or in an
area nursing home may be eligible.
The Harpswell Board of Selectmen shall make the final decision about who shall receive the award and
provide for public acknowledgment of such resident.
Method of Search
The Town shall endeavor to determine the oldest resident by means such as review of voter registration list,
advertising, inquiry of civic groups, general public knowledge, or nomination by family or friends. The
Board of Selectmen shall establish a nomination period of not more than 60 days. Nomination forms will be
available online or at the Town Clerk’s Office.
Presentation
The Chair of the Harpswell Board of Selectmen or his/her designee shall present Harpswell’s oldest resident
with a plaque and pin signifying the honor. The location of the presentation will be determined according to
the circumstances of the honoree. If practicable, there shall be a photograph taken of the honoree with the
cane, however, the cane shall be returned for display at the Harpswell Town Office. Once awarded, the
subsequent discovery of an older resident or the relocation of another older person to the community shall
not invalidate the honor or designation.
The recipient shall retain the honor as long as he or she remains in Harpswell or in a nearby nursing home or
residence. The Town Clerk’s Office upon knowledge or notification that the recipient has died, changed
residency, or otherwise refused the honor, shall so inform the Board of Selectmen that a new search should
begin.
This policy shall be administered with reasonable flexibility by the Board of Selectmen.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 14, 2015
87
BOSTON POST CANE NOMINATION FORM
Harpswell, Maine
Name of Nominee: ___________________________________________________________
Nominee’s address:
___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Nominee’s Date of Birth: _______________Telephone #:____________________
Year Nominee became a Harpswell resident: _______________
Please attach proof of date of birth and residency when submitting form.
Name of Person Making Nomination:
_____________________________________________
Address: ___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________
Telephone #:
___________________________________________________________
Email Address:
___________________________________________________________
Please forward form and attachments to:
Town Clerk’s Office
P.O. Box 39
Harpswell, Maine 04079
Fax: 207-833-0058 or
rknight@town.harpswell.me.us
If you have any questions please call Roz Knight, Town Clerk, at 207-833-5771.
88
COMMITTEE GUIDELINES---TOWN OF HARPSWELL
Effective April 15, 1998
Amended February 3, 2000, Amended September 27, 2001
Amended July 30, 2009, Amended May 6, 2010
Amended May 26, 2011, Amended December 13, 2012
Amended July 9, 2015
The role of most committees is to advise the Selectmen of the Town. Their mandate is to make recommendations and to draft
policies, if appropriate, for consideration and possible implementation by the Selectmen. Some committees have specific authority
vested in them by Maine Statute and Harpswell ordinance such as the Board of Appeals, Planning Board and Conservation
Commission. The following guidelines apply to all Town committees.
1. Committee members are appointed by the Selectmen as specified by law or ordinance, or at the discretion of the
Selectmen. Appointments terminate on April 30 of the appropriate year or 60 days from date of appointment should the
appointee not accept appointment by failing to execute a committee oath form on file at the Town Clerk’s Office.
2. Reasonable attendance at committee meetings is expected. Continued absence will result in replacement.
3. A quorum of a committee, required for a formal meeting, is a simple majority of all members.
4. The Selectmen may appoint the committee Chairman or authorize the committee to elect its own Chairman. When such
election is not made, the Selectmen shall designate the Chairman. The committee may elect its Secretary.
5. Minutes of all committee meetings shall be filed with the Selectmen no later than five days after the committee meeting at
which the minutes are accepted. Minutes are available for public review and should contain an account of all subjects
discussed and any recommendations and votes taken or other actions.
6. All committees are subject to the Freedom of Access law and to the Town’s Freedom of Access Policy. All meetings
must be open to the public and held on public property; however, the Chairman may determine the amount of public
participation allowed.
7. Only committee members who have accepted appointments or re-appointments may vote. In case of a tie vote, the vote
shall be considered negative.
8. A committee may take or approve actions, hold votes or authorize recommendations to the Board of Selectmen (BOS) or
take other actions only at official meetings when a quorum (more than half the members) is present. (Alternates acting in
the absence of a member are counted as members for the purpose of establishing a quorum.)
In the absence of a quorum, the committee may hold informal discussions. Any new information shared at an informal
meeting should subsequently be shared with members who are absent.
Recommendations to the BOS must be authorized by majority vote at an official meeting and in presenting a
recommendation to the BOS, the number of yeas & nays shall be reported.
Committees may not make decisions on behalf of the Town except as specifically provided by Maine statute or Harpswell
ordinance.
9. The Chair of the Board of Selectmen, or the Chair’s designee, should be consulted about any proposed media coverage.
All documents issued by a committee to the media or to any agency, other than the Town, must first be cleared by the
Chair of the Board of Selectmen, or the Chair’s designee. Media contacts on behalf of the committee should only be
made by the Chairman. No committee or committee members should represent that it/he/she is speaking on behalf of the
Town unless officially authorized to do so.
10. No committee or committee member may commit Town funds. The expenditure of funds, within amounts appropriated,
must be approved by the Selectmen. Town purchasing policies must be followed. Committees in needing to make a
purchase should consult the Town Administrator.
11. Notice should be given to the Town Administrator well in advance of any meeting dates to allow for adequate public
notice. Committees should try to avoid scheduling meetings at the same time as other meetings. No meetings may be
held at the same time as Selectmen’s Meetings or Town Meetings.
12. Upon acceptance of appointment to a committee, a person shall sign a copy of these Committee Guidelines and deposit
the signed copy with the Town Administrator.
I have received a copy of these guidelines
_____________________________________ _____________________
Signature Date
_____________________________________
Please Print Name
89
ENHANCED 911 ROAD NAME POLICY
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 10, 2001.
1. A property owner (owning property that is accessed from the proposed road) submits three
proposed road names, in the order of preference, and signed by a majority of the property owners
on the road to be named.
2. The 911 Addressing Officer reviews the three choices and selects the most appropriate name
following the State of Maine guidelines and the Harpswell 911 Ordinance guidelines. Generally
speaking, the road name choice selected would NOT be similar in name or sound to an existing
road name and would NOT include a number in the name (such as Sky Lane One) and would
NOT have special characters in the name (such as hyphens, apostrophes etc.)
3. The 911 Addressing Officer submits her recommendation to the Board of Selectmen for their
review and final approval at a Selectmen’s meeting.
4. If property owners are unable to submit road names that meet the above criteria, the Board of
Selectmen will determine the name.
5. Renaming roads will ONLY be considered if The Board of Selectmen determines that there is a
public safety concern.
90
STREET LIGHTING POLICY
Public places should have street lighting sufficient to protect public safety. Lighting should be located on the
nearest pole to the entrance of the building or the nearest pole to the entrance/exit of the parking area. Public
places include, but are not limited to, schools, churches, libraries, fire departments, community halls, grange
halls, playing fields and municipal areas.
The Selectmen should, consistent with public safety, limit the proliferation of street lights to minimize the
effect of lighting on energy consumption, on light pollution, and to protect the rural character of the Town.
Intersections of Town or state aid roads with side roads having significant traffic capacity, as well as areas
with sharp or otherwise dangerous curves, should be lighted in order to draw a driver’s attention to the
potential hazard.
Congested areas having speed limits of 25 MPH or slower should be lighted where absolutely needed based
on evidence of pedestrian traffic on or near the roadway. Pedestrians are expected to carry flashlights and/or
other forms of lighting to make presence known to drivers.
The Town should consult with Central Maine Power to ensure that new street lights are installed with a
minimum of glare and light trespass while lighting the desired area with a non-irritating, pleasant and safe
light spectrum. Lights should be the most energy efficient and cost effective lighting available.
The Town shall provide a form on which residents, and non-resident property owners, may request addition,
retention, or removal of street lights. The form shall include the following:
• Name, address and contact information of the requesting resident,
• General location of the light or proposed light (nearest street address)
• Specific utility pole by identifying numbers, letters or other means
• Aspects of the Street Lighting Policy that support the request
• Other basis and evidence that support the request
• Incidence of accidents or other events that support the request
• Names and addresses of other residents of the area who support the request
Town staff shall evaluate requests, including obtaining information from law enforcement that may have a
bearing on the requests, and shall refer them to the Select Board with or without recommendations.
For effective administration of this policy, the Select Board shall review requests not more than once per
calendar year.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen May 20, 2010
Revised by the Board of Selectmen April 12, 2012
Revised by the Board of Selectmen December 2, 2015
91
SPONSORSHIP POLICY
Periodically, the Town is asked to sponsor an event. In deciding whether the Town should be a sponsor, the
Board of Selectmen shall consider the following:
Question 1. Is the event occurring on Town or public property?
Question 2. Is the event under the control, in whole or part, of the Town? Does the Town have a role in
organizing, directing or coordinating the event?
Question 3. Is the event consistent with identified goals of (1) the Board of Selectmen, (2) any advisory
committee or (3) the Town’s Comprehensive Plan as determined by the Board of Selectmen?
Question 4. Is there any fundraising activity associated with the event? If so, is it for a non-profit purpose
consistent with Question 3?
Question 5. Is there any high-risk activity occurring at the event for which the Town’s insurance carrier has
advised that the Town should prohibit?
The Town shall be considered a sponsor of an event only upon majority vote of the Board of Selectmen at a
publicly held meeting.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen April 22, 2010
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE POLICY
The Town Administrator’s designee shall be the Deputy Town Administrator, except in those instances
where another designee is specified. This designation is consistent with the Deputy Town Administrator’s
job description which requires the Deputy Town Administrator to assume the duties and responsibilities of
the Town Administrator in his/her absence.
Approved by the Board of Selectmen March 2, 2017
92
TOWN OF HARPSWELL RECREATION DEPT. VOLUNTEER BACKGROUND CHECK
The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation value the safety of those who use our and take part in our
programs, either as participants, employees or volunteers. To this end, we will take sound measures to
attempt to protect our employees, volunteers and those we serve from potential harm.
We have special regard for children, who trust in our ability to provide them with wholesome, safe
recreational experiences. One specific measure will be to perform background checks on volunteers and
independent contractors who have the potential for regular or intermittent contact with children.
In order to protect the participants in Harpswell Recreation children’s programs and protect the integrity of
the Town the following Volunteer Background Check Policy has been established.
Prospective volunteers/independent contractors will complete an application with a Criminal History
Background Check Authorization and Release form. The following information will be collected from
volunteers to initiate the screening process:
1. First Name, Last Name, Middle Initial
2. Any alternate or maiden names
3. Date of Birth
4. Current Address, if less than 3 years, previous address
5. Signature authorizing permission to run the background check
6. Response (Yes or No) to Have you ever been convicted of a criminal offense
7. Response (Yes or No) to Have you ever been charged with a crime against a child
8. Response (Yes or No) to Are there any charges currently pending against you
9. All volunteer and independent contract applicants (of legal age) will be screened.
Screening Process
Upon receipt of the Criminal History Background Check authorization form, the background screening will
be conducted by authorized staff.
Disclosure information is only used for the specific purpose for which it was requested and for which the
volunteer’s full consent has been given.
Any crime, misdemeanor or felony where the applicant is the perpetrator, involving children as either a
victim or an accomplice is cause for exclusion. Having a criminal record will not necessarily bar someone
for working with us. This will depend on the nature of the application and the circumstances and
background of the offenses.
The following disqualifiers will be used as a guide in determining the volunteer’s eligibility:
Guilty or plea of guilty or no contest to the following:
1. All Sex Offenses (no time limit)
2. All Felony Violence (no time limit)
3. All Felony Offense (past 5 years)
4. All Misdemeanor Violence (past 3 years)
5. Any other Misdemeanor (past 3 years)
The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation want to be sure that every decision made about an
individual’s eligibility to volunteer is correct. The Town of Harpswell and Harpswell Recreation will
carefully consider all the information before any decisions are made that affect an individual’s eligibility.
Upon finding a record that may result in an ineligible determination, Harpswell Recreation will contact the
volunteer to make certain all information provided is accurate.
93
If a volunteer’s background check includes a charge set forth on the list of disqualifiers above, Harpswell
Recreation shall immediately disqualify that individual from volunteering.
Retention of Records
Volunteer Background Check record will be retained for 60 years if accepted as a volunteer or otherwise for
2 years.
Repeat Background Checks
Any volunteer/independent contractor that has served previously but three years has passed since serving,
will subject to a current Criminal Background Check.
Prepared by: Gina Perow, Interim Recreation Director
December 30, 2008
Revised on January 14, 2009
WEBSITE LINKS POLICY
The Town of Harpswell may include links on the Harpswell web site to organizations funded by the Town;
to quasi-governmental entities; and to certain information that is considered to be of interest to Harpswell
residents. The presence of a link on the Harpswell web site does not imply or indicate Town support for the
product, organization or point of view expressed on the linked site or supported by the sponsoring
organization. While reasonable efforts are made to include accurate information, appearance of a link is not
a guarantee of accuracy. The Town will not link directly to businesses, unless considered in a category
previously stated. All decisions as to what links appear on the Harpswell web site are the responsibility of
the Harpswell Board of Selectmen or its designee.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen October 13, 2011
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
P.O. Box 39
Harpswell, ME 04079
PROPERTY TAX ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Reimbursement for the 2017 State Property Tax Fairness Credit
Application Deadline – October 15, 2018
Name:
Property Address:
Home Phone Number: _______________________ Map and Lot Number (on Property Tax Bill):_____________
If different from property address please provide mailing address below:
Please answer the following questions:
YES NO
1. Has the applicant owned or rented a home in the Town of Harpswell at the
time of application and for the entire year prior to the date of application?
2. Has the applicant filed Form 1040ME and the Property Tax Fairness Credit
(PTFC) for 2017? If yes, provide confirmation of credit.
You can contact the State at 626-8475 to obtain proof or give permission for the Town to obtain proof.
Please provide the Town of Harpswell, on my behalf, confirmation that I applied for and
of the amount of credit I received from the State of Maine 2016 Property Tax Fairness Credit.
Signature Social Security #
3. If the applicant is a Harpswell homeowner, has he/she applied for a homestead?
4. Has the applicant (if owner) paid the 2017 property taxes in full?
5. If you paid rent in 2017, list your landlord’s name and telephone number and provide a copy of lease or, if
no lease, other evidence of rental:
I declare that I have examined this application and to the best of my knowledge and belief, it is true,
correct and complete.
Signature of Applicant Date
If you need any assistance with the completion of this form please contact the Deputy Town Administrator
Terri Sawyer at 833-5771.
1
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
PROPERTY TAX ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Amended March 14, 2015
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a program pursuant to Chapter 907-A of
Title 36 of the Maine Revised Statutes to provide property tax assistance to qualifying
persons who reside in the Town of Harpswell. Under this program, the Town of
Harpswell will provide supplemental cash refund payments to those individuals who
qualify as Harpswell resident beneficiaries of the State of Maine Residents Property Tax
Fairness Credit pursuant to Chapter 822 of Title 36 of the Maine Revised Statutes, as may
be amended from time to time, and meet the criteria established by this Ordinance.
Section 2. Definitions
Homestead: A homestead is a dwelling owned or rented by the person seeking tax
assistance under this Ordinance or held in a revocable living trust for the benefit of that
person. The dwelling must be occupied by that person.
Property Tax Assistance Program: The program established by the Town of Harpswell
under this Ordinance. Also referred to as the “Program.”
Property Tax Fairness Credit Program: The property tax credit established by the State of
Maine pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. §§ 5219-II, 5219-KK, as may be amended from time to
time.
Qualifying applicant: A qualifying applicant is a person who is determined, after review
of a complete application under Section 4 of this Ordinance, to be eligible for a refund
payment under the terms of this Ordinance.
Town Administrator: The Town Administrator or his/her designee.
Section 3. Criteria for Participation
In order to participate in the Property Tax Assistance Program, an applicant must
demonstrate all of the following:
a. That the applicant has a homestead in the Town of Harpswell at the time of
application and for the entire year prior to the date of application.
b. That the applicant has received a tax credit under the provisions of the State of
Maine Residents Property Tax Fairness Credit Program.
c. That the applicant has paid property taxes in full for the year for which the
refund is requested.
2
Section 4. Application and Payment Procedures
Persons seeking to participate in the Property Tax Assistance Program shall submit a
written request to the Town Administrator no later than October 15 of each year.
Applications are required every year to participate in the Program. The Town
Administrator shall provide an application form for the Program, which shall include, at a
minimum, the applicant’s name, homestead address and contact information. As part of
the application to the Town, the applicant shall authorize the Town to seek
documentation from Maine Revenue Services of proof and dollar amount of State
Property Tax Fairness Credit received by applicant. The Program is based on the State
Property Tax Fairness Credit and relates to property taxes assessed and paid or rent paid
in the preceding calendar year. The Town Administrator shall review and determine if
the application is complete and accurate and if the applicant is otherwise eligible to
participate in the Program. The Town Administrator shall notify an applicant if an
application is determined to be incomplete or inaccurate. The Town Administrator’s
decision on eligibility to participate in the Program shall be final.
Section 5. Determination of eligibility and amount of eligibility
If the Town Administrator determines that the applicant is eligible to participate in the
Program, he/she shall determine the total amount of such eligibility. Eligibility shall be
the lesser of the following amounts but in no case shall the Town’s refund exceed the
property taxes assessed and paid less the State Property Tax Fairness Credit:
a. The amount of credit qualified for under the Property Tax Fairness Credit
Program;
b. A pro rata share of available monies in the Program Fund based on the amount
of one’s State Property Tax Fairness Credit ; or
c. $800.00.
The Town Administrator shall report to the Board of Selectmen each year the projected
payments and number of eligible applicants requesting assistance from the Program fund.
Section 6. Program Fund – Limitations upon payments
Payments under this Ordinance shall be conditioned upon the existence of sufficient
monies in the Program Fund for the fiscal year in which participation is sought. If there
are not sufficient monies in the Program Fund to pay all qualifying applicants in full
under this Ordinance, payments shall be limited to the amounts available in the Program
Fund on a pro rata basis to each eligible participant based on the amount of one’s State
credit under the Property Tax Fairness Credit Program. In the event that a lack of
funding results in no payment or less than the full payment to a qualifying applicant, the
request will not carry over to the next year.
3
Section 7. Creation of the Program Fund
The Program Fund from which payments shall be made under the terms of this Ordinance
shall be created as follows:
As funds are available, the Board of Selectmen shall propose to the annual town meeting
an appropriation of monies from the general fund or other sources to support this
Program. Any surplus monies available after all payments have been made shall remain
in the dedicated reserve account hereby established for this Program and shall not lapse
into the Town’s undesignated fund balance.
Section 8. Timing of Payments
A person who qualifies for payment under the Program shall be mailed a check for the
full amount (or pro-rated amount if inadequate funds are available) no later than
December 1 for the year in which participation is sought.
Section 9. Limitations upon payments
Only one qualifying applicant per homestead shall be entitled to payment under this
Program each year. The right to file an application under this Ordinance is personal to
the applicant and does not survive the applicant’s death, but the right may be exercised on
behalf of the applicant by the applicant’s legal guardian or attorney-in-fact. If an
applicant dies after having filed a timely complete application that results in a
determination of qualification, the amount determined by the Town Administrator shall
be disbursed to another member of the household as determined by the Town
Administrator. If the applicant was the only member of a household, then no payment
shall be made under this Ordinance.
Town of Harpswell Ordinance Restricting Vehicle Weight on Posted Ways
Adopted February 2, 2006
Amended March 4, 2010
Amended March 14, 2018
Section 1. Purpose and Authority
The purpose of this "Ordinance Restricting Vehicle Weight on Posted Ways" (hereinafter, the
"Ordinance") is to prevent damage to town ways and bridges in the Town of Harpswell which
may be caused by vehicles of excessive weight, to lessen safety hazards and the risk of injury to
the traveling public, to extend the life expectancy of town ways and bridges, and to reduce the
public expense of their maintenance and repair. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3009 and 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 2395 and 2388.
Section 2. Definitions
The definitions contained in Title 29-A M.R.S.A. shall govern the construction of words
contained in this Ordinance. Any words not defined therein shall be given their common and
ordinary meaning.
Section 3. Restrictions and Notices
The municipal officers or their duly authorized designee may, either permanently or seasonally,
impose such restrictions on the gross registered weight of vehicles as may, in their judgment, be
necessary to protect the traveling public and prevent abuse of the highways, and designate the
town ways and bridges to which the restrictions shall apply.
Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person may thereafter operate any
vehicle with a gross registered weight in excess of the weight limit during any applicable time
period on any way or bridge so posted unless otherwise exempt as provided herein.
The notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: the name of the way or
bridge, the gross registered weight limit, the time period during which the restriction applies, the
date on which the notice was posted, and the signatures of a majority of the municipal officers
(or facsimile thereof). The notice shall be conspicuously posted at each end of the restricted
portion of the way or bridge in a location clearly visible from the traveled way.
Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the notices shall be removed wherever posted.
Whenever a restriction is revised or extended, existing notices shall be removed and replaced
with new notices. No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any notice so posted
except as provided herein.
Section 4. Exemptions
A. The following vehicles are exempt from this Ordinance:
1. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight of 23,000 pounds or
less;
2. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of 23,000
pounds and traveling without a load other than tools or equipment necessary for the
proper operation of the vehicle. This exemption does not apply to special mobile
equipment;
3. Any vehicle while engaged in highway maintenance or repair under the direction of the
State or Town;
4. Any emergency vehicle (such as firefighting apparatus or ambulances) while responding
to an emergency;
5. Any school transportation vehicle;
6. Any public utility vehicle while providing emergency service or repairs;
7. Any wrecker towing a disabled vehicle;
8. Any septic tank truck on an emergency pump, not to exceed 13, 275 pounds maximum
payload or 40, 275 pounds maximum permitted gross weight;
9. Any vehicle whose owner or operator holds a valid permit issued by the municipal
officers as provided herein; and
10. Any vehicle, including a vehicle transporting home heating fuel, whose gross vehicle
weight does not exceed the listed gross vehicle weights for the truck type and tire widths
as outlined on Attachment A.
B. The weight limitation as indicated on a posted notice does not apply when the closed section
of the roadway is solidly frozen, which is defined as (i) an air temperature of 32 degrees or
below; and (ii) no water showing in the cracks of the road (if paved) or less than 1/2" of “thaw”
on the road (if gravel surface).
Section 5. Permits
The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as provided herein may apply in
writing to the municipal officers for a permit to operate on a posted way or bridge
notwithstanding the restriction. The municipal officers or their duly authorized designee may
issue a permit only upon all of the following findings:
(a) no other route is reasonably available to the applicant; and
(b) it is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience that the applicant use the way
or bridge.
Even if the municipal officers or their duly authorized designee make the foregoing findings,
they need not issue a permit if they determine the applicant’s use of the way or bridge could
reasonably be expected to create or aggravate a safety hazard or cause substantial damage to a
way or bridge maintained by the municipality. They may also limit the number of permits issued
or outstanding as may, in their judgment, be necessary to preserve and protect the highways and
bridges.
In determining whether to issue a permit, the municipal officers or their duly authorized designee
shall consider the following factors:
(a) the gross registered weight of the vehicle;
(b) the current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge;
(c) the number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed;
(d) the cost and availability of materials and equipment for repairs;
(e) the extent of use by other exempt vehicles; and
(f) such other circumstances as may, in their judgment, be relevant.
The municipal officers or their duly authorized designee may issue permits subject to reasonable
conditions, including but not limited to restrictions on the actual load weight and the number or
frequency of vehicle trips, which shall be clearly noted on the permit.
Section 6. Administration and Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be administered and may be enforced by the municipal officers and their
duly authorized designees (i.e., Road Commissioner and law enforcement officers).
Section 7. Penalties
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of not less than
$250.00 nor more than $1000.00. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition
to any fine, the municipality may seek restitution for the cost of repairs to any damaged way or
bridge and reasonable attorney fees and costs. Prosecution shall be in the name of the
municipality and shall be brought in the Maine District Court.
Section 8. Amendments
This Ordinance may be amended by the municipal officers at any properly noticed meeting.
Section 9. Severability; Effective Date
In the event any portion of this Ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. This Ordinance shall
take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal officers at any properly noticed
meeting.
Attachment A
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO OPERATE ON A POSTED WAY
An application is hereby made to the Town of Harpswell for permission as provided by the
“Ordinance Restricting Vehicle Weight on Posted Ways” to operate on a posted Town Way or
Bridge in accordance with the following:
Vehicle Owner:
Address:
Telephone: Fax No:
Type vehicle:
GVWR:
Destination of Vehicle:
Name of Posted Way(s):
Or: Entering Harpswell via: Ending Location:
Est. total No. of Trips: Max. No. of Trips/Day:
Date(s) for Permit:
Signature of Authorized Representative:
Print Representatives Name:
(Below for Office Use Only)
Amount of Financial Security: Date Paid:
? The above request is hereby approved subject to the following conditions:
? The above request is hereby denied for the following reasons:
Date:
Chair, Board of Selectmen, duly authorized
1
HARPSWELL ROAD ORDINANCE
Effective Dates
Harpswell Town Road Ordinance adopted March 10, 1984
Replaced by -
Harpswell Town Road Ordinance Adopted March 16, 1996
Amended March 15, 1997
Repealed and Replaced by -
Harpswell Road Ordinance Adopted March 16, 2002
Amended May 18, 2002
Amended March 8, 2003
Amended March 13, 2005
Amended March 10, 2007
Amended March 12, 2011
Amended March 15, 2014
2
Contents
Contents .............................................................................................................................. 2
Section 1. Purpose ............................................................................................................... 3
Section 2. Authority, Applicability and Administration ..................................................... 3
Section 3. Definitions.......................................................................................................... 4
Section 4. Construction Standards for New Roads ............................................................. 5
Section 5. Road Names ....................................................................................................... 7
Section 6. Subdivision Roads ............................................................................................. 7
Section 7. Notice of Permits ............................................................................................... 8
Section 8. Enforcement and Appeals .................................................................................. 8
THIS UNOFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS IS NOT A PART OF THE ORDINANCE AND IS PROVIDED
FOR CONVENIENCE ONLY.
3
Harpswell Road Ordinance
Section 1. Purpose
1.1 The purpose of the ordinance is to set construction standards for certain classes of
roads, protect the safety and welfare of the citizens, provide for convenient travel, and
minimize future maintenance costs.
Section 2. Authority, Applicability and Administration
2.1 This ordinance is adopted pursuant to home rule powers as provided for in article
VIII, part 2 of Maine Constitution and 30-A Maine Revised Statues Annotated (M.R.S.A)
2.2 The ordinance is known as the Harpswell Road Ordinance and shall govern the
construction of all collector roads, local roads, and driveways. All roads shall be
constructed in accordance with this ordinance and Maine Department of Transportation
(MDOT) standards. This ordinance repeals and replaces the Town Road Ordinance
adopted March 16, 1996 and amended March 15, 1997.
Except as provided in Section 6 of this Ordinance or as may otherwise be required by
law, roads in existence as of March 9, 2002 do not need to be upgraded for development.
2.3 Private roads may be proposed for acceptance at a Town meeting by a majority vote
of the selectmen or by petition signed by a number of registered votes not less than 10%
of votes cast in the town in the last gubernatorial election.
All roads to be presented for acceptance by the Town must meet the major local road
standards and be paved, a minimum of 18 feet in width, with 2 1/2 inches of modified B
binder hot bituminous concrete.
2.4 The Codes Enforcement Officer shall administer this ordinance.
4
Section 3. Definitions
Driveway - A private vehicular access way connecting a house, garage or other structure
on a single lot to a road.
Road – any one of the following vehicular access ways:
Arterial Road - A road that is functionally classified by the Maine Department of
Transportation as an arterial, with controlled access, traffic signals at important
intersections and/or stop signs on side roads.
Collector Road - A road that is functionally classified as a collector by the Maine
Department of Transportation, and that collects traffic from local roads and connects with
arterial roads.
Local Road – A public road or private road, other than arterial or collector roads.
Private Road – A road that is privately owned, built, and maintained, but not including a
driveway.
Citizen’s Note: The town may not, under Maine law, spend public funds to construct,
repair, maintain or plow privately owned roads.
Public Road – A public easement or town way.
Public Easement - An easement held by the municipality for purposes of public access
to land or water not otherwise connected to a public way, and includes the rights enjoyed
by the public with respect to private ways created by statute prior to July 29, 1976,
pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 3012 (2).
Town Way - An area of land designated and held by a municipality for passage and use
of the general public by motor vehicle; all town or county ways not discontinued or
abandoned before July 29, 1976; and all state or state aid highways, or both, which are
classified town ways as of July 1, 1982, or thereafter, pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 53.
5
Section 4. Construction Standards for New Roads
4.1 Construction Standards for New Roads*
TYPE OF ROAD
COLLECTOR
ROAD
LOCAL ROAD
serving
5 or more lots or
dwelling units
LOCAL ROAD
serving
3 or 4 lots
or dwelling units
Minimum Right of Way Width 50’ 33’ 33’
Minimum Traveled Way 22’ 18’ 16’
Minimum Shoulder Width 9’ 3’ 3’
Minimum Grade 0.5% 0.5% n/a
Maximum Grade (may be increased up to
16% for a distance of 200’ or less)
10% 10% 10%
Minimum Radius of Center Line Curves 200’ 150’ 100’
Minimum Tangent Between Reverse Curves
(May be waived by the Planning Board for
extreme conditions within sub-divisions)
200’ 100’ 100’
Roadway Crown ¼”/’ ¼”/’ ¼”/’
Minimum Angle of Intersection 60° 60° 60°
Minimum Distance Between Intersections
Same Side
Opposite Side
400’
250’
300’
150’
300’
150’
Maximum Grade within 50’ of Intersections 3% 3% 3%
Traveled Way Radii
90° Intersection
60° to 90° Intersection
90° to 120° Intersection
20’
30’
40’
15’
30’
30’
15’
30’
30’
Minimum Property Line Radii at
Intersections
10’ 10’ 10’
Minimum Radii at Cul de Sac with Island
Property Line N/A 60' 50'
Outer Traveled Way or Pavement Edge N/A 50' 40'
Inner Traveled Way or Pavement Edge N/A 25' 20'
MDOT Approved Aggregate Sub–Base 12” 12” 12”
MDOT Approved Finish Gravel 6” 6” 6”
* Subdivisions are required to build a road according to the number of lots served.
6
Note 1: The Planning Board may approve a new local road in a Flexible Lot Size
Subdivision that has a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and/or that has rightangle
L-turns, subject to the approval of the appropriate Fire Chief, in order to
encourage slow speed vehicular movement within the subdivision.
4.2 Other Requirements: In addition to the above requirements, the following
requirements shall also be met:
4.2.2 The area to be used for the traveled portion of roads, including shoulders and
side slopes must be cleared, grubbed and excavated to a depth of at least twelve (12)
inches.
4.2.3 Where adequate drainage can not be obtained using twelve (12) inches of subbase
material, the road must be completed using designs consistent with the
engineering standards approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
4.2.4 Where new pavement joins existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be
cut along a straight line or series of straight lines and shall form a neat, even vertical
joint.
4.2.5 Curbing may be required when it is necessary, as determined by the Codes
Enforcement Officer, for pedestrian or vehicle safety, storm water control, or to
minimize long-term maintenance costs for the Town.
4.2.6 Unless otherwise approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer all roads shall
have side slopes shall be no steeper than 3:1. Back slopes shall not exceed 3:1, except
that for stream and/or wetland crossings may have a slope of up to 1.5 to 1 in
accordance with Department of Environment Protection (MDEP) standards. In ledge
cuts, back slopes may be as steep as 1:10, with the approval of the Codes
Enforcement Officer. Side slopes and back slopes shall be graded, loamed, fertilized
and seeded, following recommendations in the latest edition of the MAINE
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY HANDBOOK prepared by the Maine Soil and
Water Conservation Commission.
4.2.7 Guard Rails may be required when slopes exceed 2:1 as determined by the
Codes Enforcement Officer, for pedestrian or vehicle safety. Guard Rails may be
constructed out of any material MDOT approved, including but not limited to wood.
4.2.8 Shoulders shall be measured from the edge of the traveled way to the bottom of
the drainage ditch.
4.2.9 Erosion control measures for all roads must meet MDEP standards.
4.2.10 No new stone walls, retaining walls, or solid fences shall be constructed within
8’ of the edge of the pavement of any traveled way maintained by the Town;
7
provided, however, that no such walls or fences shall be located within the right of
way of a State road or a public road.
Section 5. Road Names
5.1 All roads shall be named by the Town in accordance with the Harpswell Enhanced
911 Ordinance and any subsequent ordinances related to it.
5.2 Only town approved roads signs may be used at the intersection of any roads. These
sign must be compliant with the Harpswell Enhanced 911 Ordinance and approved by the
Board of Selectmen before installation.
Section 6. Subdivision Roads
6.1 Individual lots within subdivisions shall have no more than one two-way access
driveway per one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage and no more than two access
driveways per lot.
6.2 Subdivisions with roads connecting directly to State arterial roads shall obtain
entrance permits from Maine DOT. Final approval of a subdivision shall not be granted
until entrance permits are obtained and a copy submitted to the Planning Board.
6.3 New subdivisions connecting directly to existing private road(s), must upgrade the
existing private road(s) to the local road standards, from the point of entrance from a
public road onto the existing private road to the point of intersection with the new private
road. Where the right-of-way of the existing road is less than thirty three (33) feet, the
applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant, a waiver of the right-of-way
requirement as long as all other construction standards are met.
6.4 New subdivisions connecting directly to existing public road(s) must upgrade the
public road(s) to the applicable road construction standards if it is determined by the
Planning Board that the subdivision will have a detrimental effect on the condition of the
public road(s), the level of service at nearby intersections impacted by the subdivision
and the carrying capacity of existing public road(s).
6.5 Cul-de-sacs and dead end roads that provide the sole vehicular access to improved or
improvable land in the subdivision shall be provided with a suitable turning circle or
turnaround, as applicable, at the closed end.
6.5.1 A hammerhead turnaround, whether temporary or permanent, shall be
constructed to specified road standards for a distance of fifty (50) feet and shall be
located at a ninety degree (90°) angle to the road it serves.
6.5.2 A T-shaped turnaround, whether temporary or permanent, shall be constructed
to specified road standards for whatever minimum distance is necessary for each lot
that it serves to meet frontage requirements.
8
6.5.3 All turning circles shall be constructed to the standards set forth in Section 4 of
this Ordinance.
6.5.4 Temporary turning circles may be allowed where future road extensions are
planned, provided that all lots are designed to provide the required frontage along the
road extension after the removal of the turning circle.
Section 7. Notice of Permits
7.1 Copies of any MDEP applications and permits for stream or wetland crossings must
be provided to the Codes Enforcement Office before construction of any road or
driveway.
7.2 A road or driveway connecting to an arterial or collector road must obtain entrance
permits from MDOT. A copy of the application must be submitted to the Codes
Enforcement Officer before construction may begin.
Section 8. Enforcement and Appeals
8.1 This ordinance shall be enforced in accordance with the enforcement provisions of
the Town’s Basic Land Use Ordinance.
8.2 Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal
such a decision to the Board of Appeals in accordance with the appeal provisions in the
Basic Land Use Ordinance.
1
ROBINHOOD ROAD PARKING ORDINANCE
I. AUTHORITY. This parking ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3009(C).
II. PURPOSE. This Ordinance is intended to protect public health, safety and welfare
by regulating the parking of motor vehicles on Robinhood Road. Unrestricted parking of
motor vehicles on the Town road creates traffic congestion, prevents the passage of
emergency equipment, impedes winter maintenance and is dangerous to pedestrians and
motorists. The purpose of this Ordinance is to reduce these dangers and to regulate
parking as necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
III. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
Motor vehicle shall be defined as set forth in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101(42), as may be
amended from time to time.
Night, weekend or holiday release hours means weekdays between the hours of 5:00
pm and 7:00 am, Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
Storage and release facility means the real property and any structures thereon to
which Tow Operators tow or transport motor vehicles for storage until the vehicle owner
claims the vehicle.
Towing List means a list maintained by the Town Administrator containing the names
of those tow operators approved by the Town Administrator to respond to requests for the
towing of motor vehicles made by those persons authorized to enforce this Ordinance.
Tow Operator means a person engaged in the business of, or offering the services of,
a wrecker vehicle or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and
designed for that purpose.
Wrecker vehicle means a motor vehicle intended to be used to tow or otherwise
transport other motor vehicles.
IV. REGULATED AREA. When signs are erected giving notice that parking is
prohibited and violators will be towed, no person shall park any motor vehicle in
regulated areas on Robinhood Road at any time. From Harpswell Islands Road (Route
24), the regulated areas of Robinhood Road are the north (left) side of Robinhood Road
for its entire distance and the south (right) side of Robinhood Road for the first 445 feet
2
more or less from its intersection with Route 24, and also 625 feet more or less from
same intersection continuing for 229 feet more or less and also 1014 feet more or less
from same intersection to the end of the Town-maintained way. No vehicle shall be
parked in a regulated area such that it prevents or obstructs passage of emergency
services vehicles.
V. AUTHORITY TO TOW AND IMPOUND. Any illegally parked motor vehicle on
Robinhood Road may be towed. Those persons authorized to enforce this Ordinance are
authorized to order the removal and impounding of any motor vehicle parked on
Robinhood Road in violation of this Ordinance by a Tow Operator on the Towing List.
VI. TOWING LIST. The Town Administrator is authorized to approve Tow Operators
who meet the objective standards set forth in Sections VII, VIII and IX herein to be listed
on the Towing List. The Town Administrator shall remove Tow Operators who fail, on a
single incident basis and/or a continuing basis, to meet the objective standards set forth in
Sections VII, VIII and IX herein from the Towing List. Notice of any changes to the
Towing List shall be provided to the affected Tow Operator(s) and those persons
authorized to enforce this Ordinance.
VII. APPROVED STORAGE AND RELEASE FACILITIES. Every Tow Operator
on the Towing List shall provide and maintain a single storage and release facility for the
storage of at least five (5) full sized automobiles and a building capable of housing and
securing at least one (1) other motor vehicle. Such facilities shall be within the limits of
the Town of Harpswell. All motor vehicles towed under the provisions of this
Agreement shall be stored within Town limits, upon or within the storage and release
facility maintained by each Tow Operator.
VIII. TOW OPERATOR INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Every Tow Operator on the Towing List shall maintain, at its own expense, and
provide a copy to the Town, such policies of insurance as follows:
(1) Garagekeeper’s legal liability policy covering the storage and release
facility, including fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion, in the amount
of at least Twenty Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00), with each motor vehicle
suffering damage or loss being deemed a separate claim.
(2) Towing/wrecker service commercial liability policy covering the operation
of the Tow Operator’s business, equipment or other motor vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount of Four
Hundred Thousand Dollars ($400,000.00) combined single limit for personal
injury and property damage, or such other amount as may be required by the
3
Maine Tort Claims Act (14 M.R.S.A. § 8001 et seq.), as amended from time to
time, whichever amount shall be greater. Each wrecker vehicle insured shall be
identified by make, model and vehicle identification number (VIN).
(3) Road service liability coverage for the lifting, hoisting and towing of motor
vehicles must be included in the Tow Operator’s garagekeeper’s legal liability
policy.
(b) Each policy required above shall name the Town as an additional insured and the
certificate evidencing the same shall be in a form satisfactory to the Town
Administrator. The Tow Operator shall maintain such insurance at all times it is
on the Towing List, and the Tow Operator shall provide the Town Administrator
with not less than thirty (30) days’ advance written notice of the cancellation,
expiration or non-renewal of said insurance.
(c) The lapsing or cancellation of any policy as required hereinabove shall result in
the immediate removal of the Tow Operator from the Towing List without any
action on the part of the Town.
(d) Tow Operators shall defend, indemnify and hold the Town harmless from all claims
for damages to property and injuries to persons resulting from the Tow Operator’s
negligence or intentional misconduct in the towing or storage of vehicles pursuant
hereto.
IX. TOW OPERATOR SERVICE CHARGES. The maximum rates for services
performed by Tow Operators on the Towing List pursuant to this Ordinance shall be as
follows:
(a) Tows: $85.00 per tow.
(b) Storage fee: $30.00 per day, which begin to accrue 24 hrs. after the vehicle is
towed.
(c) Vehicle release fee: When an owner requests release of the vehicle during
night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein, an additional charge
of $25.00 may be assessed. If a vehicle is released outside of night, weekend
or holiday release hours as defined herein, no charge shall be assessed for the
release.
(d) Minimal call out fee: In the event that a Tow Operator has been requested to
perform service and, upon arrival at the scene, the situation has changed and
towing services are no longer required, $15.00 fee if call out is outside of
night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein and $20.00 fee if call
4
out is during night, weekend or holiday release hours as defined herein.
X. NOTIFICATION TO OWNERS. Within 24 hours from the time of the removal of
any motor vehicle under authority granted by this Ordinance, notice of the fact that the
motor vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by a person authorized to enforce this
Ordinance to the owner of record of that motor vehicle. Such notice shall be sent by
regular first-class mail and shall contain the following information:
(a) registration number and a brief description of the motor vehicle;
(b) name and address of person or company who performed the tow;
(c) location from which the motor vehicle was removed;
(d) location where the motor vehicle is stored and may be claimed;
(e) the provisions of the Ordinance that were violated and led to the tow; and
(f) the maximum towing, storage and release fees pursuant to this Ordinance.
Any person seeking release of a motor vehicle towed pursuant to this Ordinance
must first (a) pay all towing, storage and release fees; and (b) present satisfactory
evidence of his or her right to possession and sign a receipt for the motor vehicle.
If any motor vehicle has not been claimed, the Tow Operator shall comply with the
procedures set forth in 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 1851-1861, Abandoned Vehicles, as may be
amended from time to time. In the event of an unclaimed or abandoned vehicle, the Town
Operator’s sole remedy shall be as outlined in said State statute.
XI. RECORDS OF MOTOR VEHICLES TOWED. The Town’s duly authorized law
enforcement provider shall keep a record of all motor vehicles towed and impounded and
shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners thereof
with information as to the place of storage of such motor vehicles.
XII. LIABILITY FOR FINE OR PENALTY. The payment of towing, storage and
release fees to the Tow Operator shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any
motor vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of any law or
ordinance on account of which the motor vehicle was towed and impounded.
XIII. UNLAWFUL REDEMPTION. No person shall move a motor vehicle after it
has been towed to an approved storage and release facility without payment of all
applicable towing, storage and release fees.
XIV. FINES AND PENALTIES. A violation of this Ordinance is a civil violation
punishable by a fine of Fifty Dollars ($50.00). Any person charged with a violation of
this Ordinance may waive court action by paying a waiver fee of Twenty Five Dollars
($25.00) to the Town Clerk within 14 days of the violation. All fines and waiver fees
shall accrue to the benefit of the Town. Whoever moves a motor vehicle after it has been
5
towed to an approved storage and release facility without payment of the towing, storage
and release fees shall be subject to a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first
offense and Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent offense.
XV. ENFORCEMENT. This Ordinance may be enforced by the Town’s duly
authorized law enforcement provider (currently Cumberland County Sheriff’s
Department), a constable of the Town of Harpswell, and any person specifically
authorized by formal vote of the Board of Selectmen to enforce this Ordinance.
XVI. SEVERABILITY. In the event that any portion of this Ordinance is found by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall continue in
full force and effect.
XVII. REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE. Upon adoption of this Ordinance, any
prior Robinhood Road parking ordinance is repealed.
XVIII. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall become effective when adopted by
a majority of the Board of Selectmen.
Adopted July 17, 2003
Revised May 29, 2014
Revised June 19, 2014
1
HARPSWELL SHELLFISH ORDINANCE
ADOPTED DECEMBER 2, 1981 ARTICLE # 9
AMENDED MARCH 5, 1983 ARTICLE #29
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 10, 1984 ARTICLE #40
AMENDED MARCH 16, 1985 ARTICLE #29
AMENDED MARCH 15, 1986 ARTICLE #39
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 28, 1987 ARTICLE #36
AMENDED MARCH 19, 1988 ARTICLE #25
AMENDED MARCH 18, 1989 ARTICLE #54
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 10, 1990 ARTICLE #39
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 9, 1991 ARTICLE #35
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 13, 1993 ARTICLE #35
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 12, 1994 ARTICLE #44
AMENDED JUNE 10, 1994 ARTICLE # 5
AMENDED MARCH 11, 1995 ARTICLE #50
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 26, 1996 ARTICLE # 3
AMENDED MARCH 15, 1997 ARTICLE #33
AMENDED MARCH 14, 1998 ARTICLE #13
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 6, 1999 ARTICLE #18
AMENDED OCTOBER 23, 1999 ARTICLE # 5
AMENDED MARCH 11, 2000 ARTICLE #17,18 & 19
AMENDED MARCH 10, 2001 ARTICLE #50
RE-ENACTED & AMENDED MARCH 9, 2002 ARTICLE #55
AMENDED NOVEMBER 23, 2002 ARTICLE # 8
AMENDED MARCH 8, 2003 ARTICLE #70
AMENDED MARCH 13, 2005 ARTICLE #20
AMENDED MARCH 10, 2007 ARTICLE#30
AMENDED MARCH 14, 2009 ARTICLE# 7
AMENDED MARCH 20, 2010 ARTICLE #5
AMENDED MARCH 10, 2012 ARTICLE#7
AMENDED MARCH 9, 2013 ARTICLE#8
AMENDED MARCH 14, 2015 ARTICLE#13
AMENDED MARCH 11, 2017 ARTICLE#11
AMENDED MARCH 9, 2019 ARTICLE #6
2
CHAPTER 1. AUTHORITY, TITLE PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 101 Authority
This Ordinance is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. § 6671, as may be amended from
time to time. The title of this Ordinance is the Harpswell Shellfish Ordinance.
Sec. 102 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is as follows:
102.1 To regulate the harvesting of shellfish in the Town of Harpswell.
102.2 To provide management programs in Harpswell for the conservation of
shellfish in a manner consistent with the production of a reasonable yield to
shellfish harvesters.
Sec. 103 Conservation and Management of Shellfish Resources
It is hereby determined as follows:
103.1 The clam flats of the Town are a very valuable shellfish resource which is
important to the local economy.
103.2 These flats are not an inexhaustible resource, and therefore, they must be
prudently managed in order to remain viable.
103.3 As part of the management process it is deemed vitally necessary to restrict
the taking of shellfish by limiting shellfish licenses; restrict the size and
quantity of shellfish which may be harvested; and, take the other measures
outlined in the Ordinance.
Sec. 104 Definitions
104.1 “Clam flats” mean the area between high and extreme low water.
104.2 “Harvest” means to dig or take by hand implements only.
104.3 The term “resident” refers to a person who has physically resided at a fixed,
permanent and principal home in the town for at least six months next prior to
the date of application for a license under this Ordinance and for the duration of
the license period or, in the case of student, to a student living temporarily
outside of Harpswell while enrolled in a College, university or post-secondary
school, provided such student maintains his/her fixed permanent principal
home in Harpswell.
104.4 “Non-resident” means a person who does not qualify as a resident.
104.5 “Shellfish” means soft shell clams (Mya arenaria), quahogs (Mercenaria
mercenaria), American oysters (Crassostrea virginica), European oysters
(Ostrea edulis), and razor clams (Ensis directus).
104.6 “Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden” means the law enforcement officer
appointed by the Board of Selectmen to enforce this Ordinance.
104.7 “Bulk Pile” means any pile or the contents of any box, barrel or other
container.
104.8 “Possession” means to have in one’s custody or control, either personally or by
another who is under one’s control.
104.9 “Conservation License Fee Reduction” means a license fee reduction that a
commercial license holder or applicant may qualify for by reporting for and
3
completing three (3) Conservation Time projects during three scheduled tide
cycles per calendar year.
104.10 “Conservation Time” means projects approved by the Marine Resources
Committee from time to time that serve to preserve and protect the Town’s
clam flats for the purpose of taking, propagating, harvesting, or cultivating
shellfish therefrom.
104.11 “Personal Use” means for consumption or use by oneself, by members of the
immediate family or by invited guests.
104.12 “Suspension” means the temporary withdrawal of a license or privilege to
obtain a license through the Harpswell Town Office.
104.13 “Adjudication” means formal, final pronouncement of a judgment in a court or
administrative proceeding.
104.14 “Student” means an individual actively enrolled in school or who is receiving
approved home instruction, who is at least ten (10) years of age but less than
twenty (20) years of age as of the date of license application, and who
continues to be actively enrolled in school or receiving approved home
instruction to maintain his/her student status. Student status shall terminate
upon the earlier of the individual’s graduating from high school; the
individual’s dropping out of school or discontinuance of home instruction; or
the individual’s reaching his/her twentieth (20th) birthday.
104.15 “Period of Issuance” means the first ninety (90) days during which the Town
issues shellfish harvest licenses each calendar year.
CHAPTER 2. MARINE RESOURCES COMMITTEE
Sec. 201 Marine Resources Committee
There is hereby established a Marine Resources Committee consisting of seven (7)
members and two alternate members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. At least
four (4) of the Committee members shall be holders of Town-issued commercial shellfish
licenses. The alternate members shall be available to fill a vacancy and vote when
necessary to meet the quorum requirement of 4 members present and voting. Each
Committee member shall have been a resident of the Town for at least three years
immediately preceding his/her appointment and shall continue as a resident during his/her
term. The term of office of the members of the Committee shall be for three years and shall
terminate on April 30 of the applicable year; three shall be for a term of three years, two
shall be for a term of two years and two shall be for a term of one year. Any Committee
member with three consecutive unexcused absences from the regularly scheduled meetings
may be replaced by the Board of Selectmen. Upon conviction for violation of any sections
of the Harpswell Shellfish Ordinance, a standing member of the Committee will be subject
to censure, suspension or any other lawful penalty determined to be appropriate by the
Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a person to fill a vacancy for
the unexpired term. The Committee shall choose a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and
Secretary. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Committee. The Vice
Chairman shall preside in the Chairman’s absence; and the Secretary shall record and keep
minutes of each meeting. A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk or his/her designee as soon as they are approved by the Committee.
4
Sec. 202 Powers and Duties of Committee
The Marine Resources Committee has the following powers and duties.
202.1 To administer and coordinate the shellfish conservation programs and any
other duties required under this Ordinance.
202.2 To recommend to the Board of Selectmen how the money appropriated for
shellfish conservation programs should be spent.
202.3 To administer and coordinate a survey of all clam flats to obtain and maintain
current information on shellfish resources, including:
202.3.1 The determination of size frequency.
202.3.2 The determination of growth rate.
202.3.3 The estimation of the available standing crop.
202.3.4 The estimation of the potential yield.
202.3.5 The identification of sources of harmful pollution.
202.3.6 The identification of other resource problems, such as green crab
predation and mussel competition.
202.3.7 To determine the current level of use of the shellfish resources.
202.3.8 To conduct a conservation program for Licenses as follows:
202.3.8.1 The Marine Resources Committee shall, for the months of April
through August, develop and approve a list of conservation
dates and hours during which harvesters can qualify for their
Conservation License Fee Reduction. Such list of conservation
dates shall be completed by the Marine Resources Committee
and forwarded to the Town Clerk on or before April 1st of each
year. The Marine Resources Committee shall, for the months of
September through December, develop and approve a second
list of conservation dates and hours during which harvesters can
qualify for their Conservation License Fee Reduction. Such list
of conservation dates shall be completed by the Marine
Resources Committee and forwarded to the Town Clerk on or
before July 1st each year. Existing Harpswell commercial
license holders and all applicants for a commercial license,
exclusive of student license holders, may sign up for three (3)
conservation dates only. Effective April 1 of the following year,
holders of Harpswell commercial licenses and all applicants for
a commercial license, exclusive of student licenses, will be
eligible to qualify for a Conservation License Fee Reduction as
established by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Section 302.
Conservation Time performed by a license holder or applicant is
eligible for qualification for the Conservation License Fee
Reduction only until the award or renewal of the next
commercial license. A maximum of twenty-five (25) people
will be allowed to participate in each conservation date. The
Conservation Time requirements to qualify for a Conservation
License Fee Reduction for licensees age seventy (70) and over is
waived if the licensee has held a Town-issued commercial
shellfish license for at least the previous two (2) years.
5
202.3.8.2 At least one (1) Shellfish Conservation Warden or a qualified
person designated by the Committee and approved by the
Selectmen shall be present during each Conservation Time
period and shall determine that each harvesters requirements to
qualify for a Conservation License Fee Reduction has been
fulfilled.
202.3.8.3 The Shellfish Conservation Warden shall maintain records of
compliance with this program for each conservation date. The
Shellfish Conservation Warden shall fill out a 3-part receipt for
each participant. A receipt shall be considered valid only if it
contains the following items: the name of the participant; the
date and time of the conservation activity; the type and location
of the conservation activity; the legible signature of the issuing
official; and the serial number preprinted on each part of the 3-
part receipt. The Shellfish Conservation Warden shall be
responsible for managing the attendance sheet and overseeing
the distribution of each part of the 3-part receipt booklet. One
part of the receipt shall be issued to the conservation participant;
one part of the receipt shall be retained by the Shellfish
Conservation Warden and filed with the Town Clerk’s Office
within two (2) weeks following the conservation date; and one
part of the receipt shall be filed by the Marine Resource
Administrator with the permanent records of the Marine
Resources Committee. Credit toward the fee for a commercial
license is contingent upon satisfaction of the requirements for
the Conservation License Fee Reduction prior to December 31st
of the preceding year. The Marine Resources Administrator is
responsible for compiling and forwarding to the Town Clerk’s
Office an annual listing of all Conservation Time performed
each calendar year on or before January 1st of the following
year in preparation for the annual licensing process.
202.3.8.4 It shall be the responsibility of the Commercial Licensee to sign
up for Conservation Time. Any person signing up must hold
either a Harpswell Resident or Non-resident Commercial
Shellfish License unless an unlicensed person wishes to
voluntarily donate time which may enhance his/her chance of
obtaining a Commercial License. The list will be available at
the Town Clerk’s Office during regular office hours. Pursuant
to Section 202.3.8.1 above, said list shall be available by April
1st of each year.
202.3.8.5 The Marine Resources Committee may waive all or part of the
requirements for a Conservation License Fee Reduction for an
existing Harpswell commercial license holder who provides the
Shellfish Conservation Warden a written statement from a
physician indicating that the existing license holder was not able
to participate in any regularly scheduled Conservation Time due
6
to incapacitation by illness or injury; or, if an illness or
incapacitation of a parent, spouse or child prevented that person
from participating in regularly scheduled Conservation Time;
provided, however, that any waiver granted by the Committee
shall not preclude the Committee from allowing the existing
license holder to perform alternate, less strenuous work.
202.3.8.6 Any member of the Marine Resources Committee, who has
documented attendance at 80% of the regularly scheduled
Marine Resource Committee meetings from January 1st to
December 31st, will earn their full Conservation Time and will
be eligible for a Conservation License Fee Reduction the
following year.
202.4 To cooperate with the Department of Marine Resources in carrying on
experimental shellfish programs.
202.5 To prepare and promulgate a shellfish conservation plan in cooperation with the
Department of Marine Resources based on the results of the clam flat survey,
incorporating recommended levels of harvesting on the various flats as
delineated on maps prepared by the Committee consisting of area rotation,
seeding, predator control, and the opening and closing of clam flats.
202.6 To collect harvest data documenting local values of shellfish resources.
202.7 To make an annual written report to the Town and Department of Marine
Resources detailing funds available, expenditures made, harvest date results of
all conservation and experimental programs, enforcement activities, and sources
of pollution, predation, competition and other resource problems.
Sec. 203 Opening and Closing Clam Flats
The Board of Selectmen with the approval of the Commissioner of Marine Resources has
the power to open and close clam flats. When information in the possession of the Marine
Resources Committee indicated that a clam flat should be opened or closed, it shall
immediately advise the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall call a public
hearing on ten-day’s notice published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
Town, stating the time, place, and subject matter of the hearing; and shall send a copy of
the notice to the Department of Marine Resources. At the hearing, the Committee shall
present evidence obtained from its surveys and other sources, and members of the public
may present evidence in support or refutation of the evidence presented by the Committee.
After the hearing is closed, the Board of Selectmen shall make findings of fact on the
relevant evidence presented. The Board of Selectmen shall then make a conclusion based
on those findings of fact as to whether opening the flat as requested is warranted by the
recovery of the resource; or the freedom from predation, competition, or other resource
problem.
If so, the Board of Selectmen shall order the flat opened and shall set such time limitations
and other harvesting conditions as are consistent with good conservation practice,
contingent upon approval from the Department of Marine Resources (DMR). If the request
is to close the flat, the Board of Selectmen shall make a conclusion based on its findings of
7
fact as to whether closing the flat is warranted by depletion of the shellfish; destruction of
existing seed; or predation, competition, or other resource problem. If so, the Board of
Selectmen, with the approval of the DMR area biologist, shall order the flat closed until
further request for opening by the Committee. Any proposal for opening or closing the
flats shall be approved by the Commissioner of Marine Resources prior to enactment.
CHAPTER 3. LICENSES AND FEES
Sec. 301 Licenses Defined
The types of licenses are as follows:
301.1 Resident Commercial Shellfish License. This license entitles the Licensee to
harvest any amount of shellfish from the tidal waters or clam flats of the Town
where and when it is otherwise lawful to do so. This license may be a renewal
or a non-renewal license pursuant to Section 304.5 or 304.6.
301.2 Non-resident Commercial Shellfish License. This license entitles the
Licensee to harvest any amount of shellfish from the tidal waters or clam flats
of the Town where and when it is otherwise lawful to do. Ten percent of the
number of resident commercial shellfish licenses shall be reserved for nonresident
commercial shellfish licenses. This license may be a renewal or a
non-renewal license pursuant to Section 304.5 or 304.6.
301.3 Resident Recreational Shellfish License. This license is available to
residents of the Town and real estate owners within the Town and entitles the
holder to dig, take and possess no more than one peck of soft-shell clams or
one peck of quahogs or one peck of a combination of shellfish per day for
personal use. This license is not available to, or valid for, holders of a State of
Maine Shellfish License. Use of the recreational license for the purposes of
selling, trading or bartering is a violation of this Ordinance.
301.4 Non-resident Recreational License. This license is available to non-residents
and entitles the holder to dig, take and possess no more than one peck of
shellfish per day for personal use. This license is not available to, or valid for,
holders of a State of Maine Shellfish License. Use of the recreational shellfish
license for the purposes of selling, trading or bartering is a violation of this
Ordinance. Ten percent of the number of resident recreational shellfish
licenses issued shall be reserved for non-resident recreational shellfish
licenses.
301.4.1 Waiting List: A waiting list for non-resident recreational license
applicants shall be maintained by the Town Clerk. Any prospective
applicants for non-resident recreational shellfish licenses who wish to
have their names placed on the waiting list must, beginning on March 15
of each year, report to the Town Clerk’s Office, in person, to have their
name placed on the waiting list. Proof of identification and place of
residence, to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk, shall be provided by the
applicant. Each name on the waiting list shall be assigned a separate
number. Licensees will be selected by a lottery conducted by the Town
Clerk’s Office beginning on April 1 of each year and repeated throughout
the license year as non-resident recreational licenses become available.
8
The lottery shall be conducted by placing all of the numbers
corresponding to the names of applicants on the waiting list into a bin or
hat and by then drawing a number from the bin or hat. Once a new
licensee’s name is selected, that applicant will be contacted by the Town
Clerk’s Office to pick up his/her license. The Town Clerk shall maintain
a record of the date and time of actual or attempted contact with the
selected applicant. If the applicant does not pick up his/her new license
within 72 hours of the date and time of the earliest actual or attempted
contact by the Town Clerk’s Office, the same system shall be employed
to draw another number from the lot and the same practice repeated to
keep the number of non-resident recreational licenses equal to 10% of the
number of resident recreational licenses.
301.5 Lifetime Recreational License. Any Harpswell Resident or Harpswell real
estate owner who is age 65 or older may be issued a one-time license for the
lifetime of the licensee. A licensee under this section is entitled to dig, take,
and possess no more than one peck of shellfish per day for personal use.
301.6 Resident Student Commercial Shellfish License. This license is available to
a resident student and entitles the holder to harvest no more than one (1)
bushel of shellfish per day from the tidal waters or clam flats of the Town
when and where it is lawful to do so.
301.7 Non-resident Student Commercial Shellfish License. This license is
available to a non-resident student and entitles the holder to harvest no more
than one (1) bushel of shellfish per day from the tidal waters or clam flats of
the Town when and where it is lawful to do so. Ten percent of the number of
resident student commercial shellfish licenses shall be reserved for nonresident
student commercial shellfish licenses.
Sec. 302 Fees
Except as expressly provided in this section, no license fees shall be pro-rated for a portion
of a license year. All license fees are non-refundable. The Board of Selectmen may
establish from time to time a Conservation License Fee Reduction for fees imposed under
this section. A non-refundable fee, in such amount as may be established by the Board of
Selectmen from time to time, shall be charged for the following license categories:
302.1 Resident Commercial Shellfish License. License fee is not refundable even
if proven a non-resident. For residents 65 years or older who have such a
license for at least the previous year, the license fee shall be half the regular
fee.
302.2 Non-resident Commercial Shellfish License. For non-residents 65 years or
older who have such a license for at least the previous year, the license fee
shall be half the regular fee.
302.3 Resident Recreational Shellfish License. (License fees will be waived for
residents 65 years or older for this category.)
302.4 Non-resident Recreational Shellfish License. Shall be the maximum fee
allowed by the State; if none, then the fee shall be twice the fee for a Resident
Recreational Shellfish License (except that license fees for ten percent of the
9
number of resident recreational shellfish licenses issued to residents 65 years
or older will be waived for non-residents 65 years or older for this category).
302.5 Resident Student Commercial Shellfish License. License fee is not
refundable even if the student is proven to be a non-resident.
302.6 Non-resident Student Commercial Shellfish License.
Sec. 303 License Expiration Date
All licenses expire at midnight March 31. Exceptions: Resident Recreational Age 65 or
older lifetime licenses are valid for the lifetime of the licensee and Student Commercial
Licenses expire as set forth in Section 304.7.
Sec. 304 Qualifications of License
304.1 An applicant for a Resident Commercial Shellfish License or a Student
Commercial License must be a resident of the Town of Harpswell as defined in
Section 104.3 and whose prior shellfish license is not currently under
suspension pursuant to this Ordinance.
304.2 An applicant for a Non-resident Commercial Shellfish License or a Student
Commercial License is any person who does not meet the residency
requirements in Section 104.3 and whose prior shellfish license is not currently
under suspension pursuant to this Ordinance.
304.3 An applicant for a Resident Recreational Shellfish License must be either a
resident as defined in Section 104.3 or the owner of real estate within the Town
of Harpswell and whose prior shellfish license is not currently under
suspension pursuant to this Ordinance.
304.4 The place of residence of a licensed applicant as stated on any other license is
not determinative of the applicant’s true place of residence. Before issuance of
the license, the applicant shall be required to produce three proofs of his/her
residence of the types outlined in Title 21-A M.R.S.A. Section 112 with the
applicant’s name and physical address clearly stated or written evidence
satisfactory to the Shellfish Conservation Warden before issuance of the
license.
304.5 Commercial Renewal License Criteria
Once received by the Town Clerk and no later than March 1 of each year, all
applications for Resident Commercial Renewal Shellfish licenses and Nonresident
Commercial Renewal Shellfish licenses shall be separated.
Applicants for renewal licenses must have been licensed in the Town of
Harpswell for the previous year, and must have submitted an application form
and paid any applicable fees by March 1 pursuant to Section 305.
Commencing April 2, 2013 and thereafter, applicants for renewal licenses must
have attended two Marine Resources Committee meetings in the previous 12-
month period prior to renewal; provided, however that attendance credit will be
granted to a harvester in the event the harvester attends a meeting at which
there fails to be a quorum of the Committee present. Attendance sheets, signed
by attendees, must be provided by the Marine Resources Committee to the
10
Town Clerk’s Office on a monthly basis. An applicant who has failed to
qualify as a resident in the preceding year is not eligible for a Resident
Commercial renewal license. Reciprocal licenses from previous years do not
qualify as commercial renewal licenses. Renewal licenses will be available
during the last five (5) working days of March and will be limited to the
number of licenses to be issued that year. In case the number of applicants
exceeds the number of licenses available, a seniority system based on the date
of first licensure by the Town shall be employed in order to eliminate the most
recently issued licenses until the required number of licenses is achieved. If
multiple licenses have the same date of first licensure by the Town, a lottery
shall be conducted by the Town Clerk to choose by lot only those few licenses
that shall be eliminated. Nothing in Section 304.5 shall be interpreted to
increase the available number of Non-resident Commercial licenses to more
than ten percent of the available number of Resident Commercial licenses.
304.6 Commercial Non-Renewal License Criteria
Any license holder who does not fulfill all criteria set forth in Section 304.5
does not qualify for a renewal license. Commercial non-renewal licenses shall
be issued pursuant to the following ordered priorities:
304.6.1 Any remaining commercial licenses available after the completion of
the renewal process set forth in Section 304.5 will first be issued to an
applicant who has held a valid Harpswell Commercial license for at
least the previous year, who has satisfied the requirements for a
Conservation License Fee Reduction but who submitted the application
form after March 1 but before the last business day of March. In case
the number of such applicants exceeds the number of licenses available,
a seniority system based on the date of first licensure by the Town shall
be employed in order to eliminate the most recently issued licenses until
the required number of licenses is achieved. If multiple licenses have
the same date of first licensure by the Town, a lottery shall be
conducted by the Town Clerk to choose by lot only those few licenses
that shall be eliminated.
304.6.2 Any remaining commercial licenses available after the completion of
the process set forth in Section 304.6.1 will be issued by the conduct of
a lottery by the Town Clerk’s Office, the time and date to be published
prior to April 1st, with priority given to those who have completed
voluntary Conservation Time in the previous year sufficient to qualify
for a Conservation License Fee Reduction. An individual must be
present at the lottery in order to receive a license or a position on the
waiting list. Even if there are no remaining commercial licenses
available, the annual lottery shall be conducted to determine an
applicant’s position on the waiting list in the event that licenses become
available after the period of issuance. The lottery shall be conducted by
placing all of the names of resident applicants present who have
completed voluntary Conservation Time in the previous year into a bin
or hat and by then drawing a name from the bin or hat until all the
commercial licenses are sold and continued until all names are drawn.
11
The same process shall be repeated with all of the names of the nonresident
applicants present who have completed voluntary Conservation
Time in the previous year sufficient to qualify for a Conservation
License Fee Reduction.
304.6.3 The lottery shall be continued by placing all of the names of resident
applicants present who have not completed voluntary Conservation
Time in the previous year into a bin or hat and by then drawing a name
from the bin or hat until all the commercial licenses are sold and
continued until all names are drawn. The same process shall be
repeated with all of the names of the non-resident applicants present
who have not completed voluntary Conservation Time in the previous
year.
304.6.4 All names shall be drawn in order to assign each applicant present a
priority position on the resident, Conservation Time completed waiting
list; the non-resident Conservation Time completed waiting list; the
resident, no-Conservation Time completed waiting list; or the nonresident,
no-Conservation Time completed waiting list to be maintained
in the Town Clerk’s Office in the event that commercial licenses
become available after the period of issuance.
304.6.5 Commercial licenses that become available after the period of issuance,
whether by voluntarily return, death of licensee or otherwise, may be
reissued by the Town Clerk at the current fee to an applicant of the
same license category (resident or non-resident) as the available license
according to the waiting list priorities established pursuant to this
section. Once a new licensee’s name is selected from the waiting list,
that applicant will be contacted by the Town Clerk’s Office to pick up
his/her license. The Town Clerk shall maintain a record of the date and
time of actual or attempted contact with the selected applicant. If the
applicant does not pick up his/her new license within 72 hours of the
date and time of the earliest actual or attempted contact by the Town
Clerk’s Office, the same system shall be employed to select the next
name on the waiting list of the same license category (resident or nonresident)
as the available license and the same procedure repeated to
keep the number of Non-resident Commercial licenses equal to ten
percent of the number of Resident Commercial licenses.
304.6.6 Nothing in Section 304.6 shall be interpreted to increase the available
number of Non-resident Commercial licenses to more than ten percent
of the available number of Resident Commercial licenses.
304.7 Student Commercial License
Sections 304.5 and 304.6 do not apply to Student Commercial licenses. The
following procedures and requirements apply to Student Commercial licenses:
304.7.1 Applicants must annually submit a completed application form to the
Town Clerk on or before April 30.
304.7.2 Student Commercial licenses shall be available during normal Town
business hours to qualified applicants beginning May 16.
12
304.7.3 Any Student Commercial license issued becomes effective on June 1 of
the year of issuance and expires at midnight on May 31 of the following
year.
304.7.4 A maximum of nine (9) Resident Student Commercial licenses and one
(1) Non-resident Student Commercial license will be issued each year.
Licenses will be issued on a first come, first served basis, except that if
on May 16 the number of applicants exceeds the number of licenses
available, then names shall be drawn from lot until all licenses are
issued. An applicant must be present at the time of the lottery or else be
passed over. All Student Commercial licenses are annual, nonrenewable
licenses. The fact that an individual held a Student
Commercial license in a prior year does not affect his/her eligibility for
a Student Commercial license in a succeeding year.
304.7.5 All Student Commercial licensees must have a legal size measuring
device for clams in his/her possession when engaged in any activity
permitted under such license.
304.7.6 All Student Commercial licensees shall maintain their student status as
defined herein throughout the term of the license. Failure to do so shall
result in the suspension of the license for the remainder of the license
term.
304.8 Any license issued under this Ordinance is subject to the partial or total
closing of the coastal waters or flats.
304.9 No person may hold more than one Town-issued shellfish license at one time.
Sec. 305 Application
All applicants must submit a completed application form to the Town Clerk prior to
issuance of a license to the applicant.
Applicants for a renewal Commercial License must annually submit a completed
application form to the Town Clerk by the 15th day of February. If any portion of the
application form is not filled out in its entirety, the application will not be considered.
Applicants submitting applications after February 15 are subject to a $100 late fee. No
application will be accepted after the close of business on March 1. If a prospective
applicant fails to submit an application by the March 1 deadline, such person shall not be
licensed for that year unless through the “non-renewal” procedure set forth in Section 304.6
of this Ordinance; if a license is issued to such late applicant under Section 304.6 of the
Ordinance, the applicant shall pay a $200 late fee. This paragraph does not apply to student
commercial licenses.
The annual application will be in the form of an affidavit and will include the applicant’s
name, current address, period of residence, date of birth, height, weight and other such
necessary information as the Town Clerk may require. There must also be included the
13
physical location of residence. The application must be signed by the applicant and
acknowledged by the Town Clerk.
The completed application will be reviewed by the Shellfish Conservation Warden(s) for
accuracy and the applicant shall be notified by first class and certified mail of any
discrepancies found. The applicant will have 10 business days from receipt of notice to
respond to any discrepancies that may have been found. After midnight of the 10th day, if
the applicant does not respond to a Shellfish Conservation Warden in writing regarding the
notice received, the application will be deemed denied. If the license has already been
issued before such discrepancy is found, the Selectmen shall suspend or revoke the license
upon notice and hearing (provided that a hearing shall be held only if requested by the
licensee) and until the discrepancy is resolved. If the discrepancy is not resolved in the
licensee’s favor, the license may be revoked pursuant to Section 311.
Any person applying for (or holding) a shellfish license under the Ordinance shall notify
the Town Clerk within 10 days of an address change, regardless of whether the address
change is also a change of residency.
Sec. 306 Possession of License
306.1 Exhibition on demand. When any person is engaged in any activity which is
licensed under this Ordinance, he shall, on request of a Shellfish Conservation
Warden or other authorized person, exhibit a license.
306.2 Prima facie evidence. A failure to exhibit a license within a reasonable time,
when requested, shall be prima facie evidence that the person is not licensed.
Sec. 307 Search, Consent to Inspection; Violation
307.1 Search Powers. Any Shellfish Conservation Warden, in uniform, may search
without a warrant and examine any watercraft, aircraft, conveyance, vehicle,
box, bag, locker, trap, crate or other receptacle or container for any marine
organism when he has probable cause to believe that any marine organism
taken, possessed or transported contrary to law is concealed thereon or therein.
307.2 Consent to Inspection. Any person who signs an application for a license or
receives a license under this part has a duty to submit to inspection and search
for violations related to the licensed activities by a Shellfish Conservation
Warden under the following conditions.
A. Watercraft or vehicles and the equipment located on watercraft or
vehicles which are used primarily in a trade or business requiring a
license under this part may be searched or inspected at any time.
B. Any other location where activities subject to this part are
conducted may be inspected or searched during the hours when
those activities occur.
14
C. A location specified in subparagraph B above may be inspected at
any time if a Shellfish Conservation Warden has a reasonable
suspicion of a violation of this part.
D. No residential dwelling may be searched without a search warrant
unless otherwise allowed by law.
307.3 Seizure of Evidence. Any person who signs an application for a license or
received a license under this part has a duty to permit seizure of evidence of a
violation of this Ordinance found during an inspection or search.
307.4 Refusal. Refusal to permit inspection or seizure shall be a basis for suspension
of any license under this Ordinance.
Sec. 308 Limitation of Harvesters
The shellfish resources are limited. A commercial or recreational harvester can be expected
to harvest a certain volume of shellfish per year; therefore, the number of harvesters must
be controlled to preserve the shellfish resource. The number of available Shellfish licenses
of each type may vary from year to year according to the finding and estimates of the
Marine Resources Committee and the DMR area biologist based on data concerning the
resource capabilities and management requirement consistent with proper resource
utilization as determined by surveys conducted pursuant to Section 202 of this Ordinance.
The following procedures will be followed to control Shellfish License availability:
308.1 Prior to the first business day in March the Marine Resources Committee in
conjunction with the DMR area biologist will establish the number of
commercial Shellfish Licenses to be made available. If there is a difference
between the number of licenses recommended by the DMR area biologist and
the Marine Resources Committee, then the Marine Resources Committee will
make a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen, which will make a final
determination of the number of licenses to be issued.
308.2 The Marine Resources Committee will notify the Town Clerk in writing prior
to the first business day in March of the number of Shellfish Licenses, by type,
to be made available for issue. No Shellfish Licenses may be reserved.
Sec. 309 Misrepresentation
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for any person to falsify, or give false
information in connection with a Shellfish License application. In addition to any criminal
penalties which may result from a violation of this Ordinance, the Shellfish License granted
to any person who gives false information on a Shellfish License application shall be void
after notice and hearing by the Board of Selectmen.
Sec. 310 Suspension
310.1 In the event any Shellfish Licensee has two Adjudications, within a thirty-six
month period, for a violation of either this Ordinance and/or State law
regarding shellfish regulation, 12 M.R.S.A. §§ 6601-6681, as may be amended
from time to time, that have taken place within the territorial limits of the Town
of Harpswell, then the licensee shall receive a notice of suspension of the
15
license for thirty (30) days from the Board of Selectmen or its designee. Any
subsequent Adjudication will result in a notice of suspension of the license for
ninety (90) days. Exceptions: Licensee may not be suspended or revoked for
adjudications of Section 306 of this Ordinance.
310.2 A resident recreational licensee whose Shellfish License has been suspended or
revoked pursuant to this Ordinance may reapply for a recreational license only
after the suspension or revocation period has expired.
310.2.1 A non-resident recreational licensee whose license has been suspended
or revoked pursuant to this Ordinance may not reapply for a recreational
license in Harpswell for five (5) years. Whenever a non-resident
recreational license is revoked, that license shall be offered to the next
person on the waiting list maintained by the Town Clerk’s Office pursuant
to this Ordinance.
310.3 The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall send a notice of suspension via
first class and certified mail to the licensee upon learning the License Holder’s
State of Maine Department of Marine Resources License is suspended. This
municipal license suspension shall remain in effect until such time as the
License Holder’s State of Maine Department of Marine Resources License is
reinstated.
310.4 The notice of suspension or revocation shall be sent to the Licensee’s last
known address as recorded at the Town Clerk’s Office. The suspension or
revocation shall become effective if the appeal period as indicated in Section
310.5 of this Ordinance expires or after the Board of Selectmen’s decision
upholding the suspension or revocation is announced. If the licensee does not
sign for the certified mail notice, the Board of Selectmen may appoint a Law
Enforcement Officer to serve a copy of the notice on the licensee.
310.5 Any Licensee who receives notification of a suspension or revocation pursuant
to this Ordinance shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of Selectmen
upon filing of a written Request for Hearing within seven (7) days of receipt of
notification.
310.6 After notice of revocation as described in section 310.4, the license shall
become available to the next eligible person on the waiting list in that license
category. If no waiting list exists, the license shall become available by process
of a lottery on the 10th business day, after public notice from the Town Clerks
Office. The lottery shall be conducted by the same method as described in
section 304.
Sec. 311 Revocation
311.1 Any License that has been suspended pursuant to this Ordinance for at
least 210 consecutive days, upon recommendation of the Marine
Resources Committee, may be revoked by the Board of Selectmen. A
license may also be revoked if it is discovered that the licensee has
provided false information on the application. Licensee shall be notified
pursuant to Section 310.4 and may request a hearing before the Board of
Selectmen as set forth in Section 310.5.
16
CHAPTER 4. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 401 Harvesting Prohibited
A person shall not harvest, take or possess shellfish from the tidal waters or clam flats of
the Town of Harpswell without first obtaining a Shellfish License from the Town Office.
Sec. 402 Clam Size and Possession of Harvest
A person shall not possess soft shell clams that are less than two (2) inches in the largest
diameter to the amount of more than 10% of any bulk pile.
402.1 Quahog size restrictions
It shall be unlawful to take, possess, ship, transport, buy or sell quahogs that
are less than one inch in thickness as measured across the hinge width to the
amount of more than 5% of any bulk pile. Hinge width: Hinge width means
the thickness of a quahog as measured between the convex apex of the
right shell and the convex apex of the left shell. Exception: Quahog size
restriction will apply unless these quahogs are properly identified as raised
by means of aquaculture.
402.2 American Oyster Size Restrictions
It shall be unlawful to take, possess, ship, transport, buy, or sell American
oysters whose shells are less than 2.5 inches in the longest diameter.
402.3 European oyster size restrictions
It shall be unlawful to take, possess, ship, transport, buy, or sell European
oysters that are less than three (3) inches in the longest diameter.
402.4 Razor clam size restrictions
It shall be unlawful to take, possess, ship, transport, buy, or sell Razor
clams that are less than four (4) inches.
Sec. 403 Method of Determining Shellfish Size Tolerance
For Softshell Clams: The tolerance of 10% must be determined by a numerical count of not
less than one (1) nor more than four (4) pecks taken at random from various parts of any
bulk pile.
For Quahogs: the tolerance of 5% must be determined by a numerical count of not less than
one (1) nor more than four (4) pecks taken at random from various parts of the bulk pile.
For American Oysters: Any person may possess American oysters that are less than 2.5
inches if they comprise less than 10% of any bulk pile. The tolerance is determined by
numerical count of not less than one peck nor more than 4 pecks taken at random from
various parts of the bulk pile or by a count of the entire pile if it contains less than one
peck.
For European Oysters: Any person may possess European oysters that are less than 3
inches if they comprise less than 10% of any bulk pile. The tolerance is determined by
numerical count of not less than one peck nor more than 4 pecks taken at random from
17
various parts of the bulk pile or by a count of the entire pile if it contains less than one
peck.
403.1 If the entire bulk pile contains less than one (1) peck, the tolerance must be
determined by a numerical count of the entire bulk pile.
Sec. 404 Stopping for Inspection
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle, boat, vessel, or conveyance of any
kind, or any person:
404.1 Stopping: To fail or refuse to stop immediately upon request of any
Shellfish Conservation Warden in uniform.
404.2 Remaining Stopped: After a person has stopped, to fail to remain stopped
until the Shellfish Conservation Warden has released them.
404.3 Standing By: To fail to refuse to stand by immediately, for inspection
upon request of any Shellfish Conservation Warden in uniform
404.4 Throwing or Dumping Items: Who has been requested or signaled to
stop by any Shellfish Conservation Warden in uniform, to throw, dump or
destroy any type of marine resource, from any type of container, pail,
barrel, or expose to the water or mud, before the Shellfish Conservation
Warden has inspected the product.
Sec. 405 Conservation Area
405.1 Taking From A Conservation Area Prohibited: It shall be unlawful
for any person to harvest, take, or possess shellfish from any areas closed
by the Town of Harpswell in accordance with DMR Regulation, Chapter
7. Harvesting shellfish in a closed area is a violation of this ordinance and
is punishable under Title 12 M.R.S.A. §6671.
Boundaries of conservation closures are explicitly defined in the
conservation closure application submitted by the Town of Harpswell to
DMR and are part of the resulting permit issued by DMR. These permits
are posted at the town office and online:
http://www.maine.gov/dmr/shellfish-sanitationmanagement/
programs/municipal/ordinances/towninfo.html.
405.2 Washing or Holding In A Conservation Area Prohibited: It shall
be unlawful to wash, hold or keep shellfish in any area closed by
regulation or to possess, ship, transport, or sell shellfish so washed, held or
kept.
Sec. 406 Enforcement
The Ordinance shall be enforced by a law enforcement officer appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to be known as the Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden.
Sec. 407 Penalty
A person who violates this Ordinance shall be punished as provided in Title 12 M.R.S.A. §
6671, as may be amended from time to time.
18
Sec. 408 Aiding and Abetting
A harvester holding a commercial license who knowingly helps, assists or facilitates the
harvest of shellfish in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to prosecution for the
same violations and penalties as the person the licensee has assisted.
Sec. 409 Appeals
Except as otherwise provided herein, any decision made by the Shellfish Conservation
Warden shall stand unless appeal is made in writing to the Board of Selectmen within seven
(7) days of the date of the decision.
CHAPTER 5. SEPARABILITY, DURATION AND REPEAL
Sec. 501 Separability
If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid, that declaration does not affect
the remainder of the Ordinance.
Sec. 502 Duration
This Ordinance and any amendments thereto shall remain in effect until Repealed by the
Town or rescinded by the Commissioner of Marine Resources.
Sec. 503 Repeal
Any ordinance regulating the harvesting or conservation of shellfish in the Town that is
inconsistent with this Ordinance is hereby repealed.
1
HARPSWELL SIGN ORDINANCE
Effective Date
March 22, 2010
Amended March 14, 2015
Table of Contents
Page
Section 1. Preamble and Purpose.................................................................... 2
Section 2. Definitions......................................................................................... 2
Section 3. Regulations....................................................................................... 4
3.6 Signs requiring permits............................................................................ 4
3.6.1 Official Business Directional Signs....................................... 4
3.6.2 Display Signs......................................................................... 4
3.6.3 Illuminated Signs................................................................... 4
3.6.4 Name Signs............................................................................ 5
3.6.5 Service Club Signs................................................................. 5
3.6.6 Approach Signs...................................................................... 5
3.6.7 Directory Signs...................................................................... 5
3.7 Signs exempt from permits...................................................................... 5
3.7.1 Real Estate Signs....................................................................5
3.7.2 For Sale Signs.........................................................................6
3.7.3 Temporary Event Signs..........................................................6
3.7.4 Religious Service/Civic Organization Meeting Signs........... 6
3.7.5 Signs Relating to Trespassing and Hunting........................... 6
3.7.6 Interior Window Signs........................................................... 6
Section 4. Standards......................................................................................... 6
Section 5. Severability...................................................................................... 6
Section 6. Enforcement.................................................................................... 7
Section 7. Miscellaneous Sign and Administrative Appeals........................ 8
Section 8. Conflicts with Other Ordinances.................................................. 9
Section 9. Authority........................................................................................ 9
Section 10. Amendments................................................................................... 9
Section 11. Effective Date.................................................................................. 9
2
1.0 Preamble and Purpose
It is the intent of this ordinance to reduce roadside hazards and to provide for the safety
of the motoring public and pedestrians and to preserve Harpswell’s unique scenic beauty
and rural character while providing information and advertising about the goods, services
and other attractions available in the Town of Harpswell.
2.0 Definitions
Approach sign is any sign that advertises a business or other entity whose principal
building, or point of interest, is located on a private road more than 1000 ft from the
nearest public road or is not visible to traffic from the nearest public road.
Business refers to any commercial, retail, wholesale, manufacturing, educational
camping or amusement business located on any public or private road.
Directional Signs are signs which provide only directional information.
Directory Sign refers to a common header-style sign unit, which may include the
location name as a header, as well as individual Display Signs all on one sign unit.
Display Sign is any painted, printed or stenciled advertising device, whether erected
on a frame structure or mounted or painted on a building, conveying a message
promoting a business enterprise of any kind.
Entity is any business, organization, institution or scenic attraction.
Illuminated Sign is any lighted sign with either exterior or integral illumination.
Maximum Dimension shall mean the longer of either height or width, or maximum
perimeter if a sign has more than three visible sides.
Municipal Officers are the members of the Board of Selectmen.
Name Sign is a sign identifying the premises of an entity or a building under
construction by a contractor.
Official Business Directional Sign means a sign erected and maintained in
accordance with 23 M.R.S.A. §§ 1901-1925, as may be amended from time to time to
indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public accommodations,
facilities, commercial services for the traveling public and points of scenic, historical,
cultural, recreational, educational and religious interest. Other information may be
displayed by means of logos authorized pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. § 1910, as may be
amended from time to time.
3
Private Road refers to a road that is privately owned, built and maintained, but not
including a driveway, intended to carry motor vehicles, whether joining a public road
or not, any part of which has land contiguous to it visible from a public road.
Public Road refers to any “public easement” or “town way,” as those terms are
defined in 23 M.R.S.A. § 3021, as may be amended from time to time, intended to
carry motor vehicles.
Sign means any structure, display, logo, device or representation which is designed or
used to advertise or call attention to any thing, person, business, activity, or place and
is clearly visible from any road. It does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of
any nation, state or town, or a flag that only states that the business or other entity is
open with no other text on it and that has a maximum dimension of six feet.
Sign Area shall be determined as the product of the maximum width and maximum
height of the display portion of the sign and shall not include the mounting structure
or frame. If a sign has two sides, only the larger side of the sign shall be counted
when determining the size of a sign. If a sign has more than two visible sides, all
visible sides shall be counted when determining the size of a sign. In cases where
lettering is attached and/or freestanding, or if copy is painted directly on a building,
the square footage of a sign shall be calculated by utilizing the proportions of a
rectangle which would encompass all portions of the lettering and graphics; the area
of this rectangle will be the square footage of the sign. A two-sided sign is
considered to be one sign and a directory sign on one unit is considered to be one
sign.
Window Sign is any sign that is affixed to or within the interior of a window with its
message visible to the outside of the window surface.
4
3.0 Regulations
3.1 No new, additional or enlarged sign shall be erected adjacent to any public or
private road within the Town of Harpswell except as provided in Section 3.6 and 3.7.
3.2 No sign shall be located so that it obstructs the vision of motorists, as determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
3.3 Except as provided in Section 3.4, all non-conforming signs maintained along any
public or private road that are visible from a public road and existing as of the
effective date of this ordinance shall be either (a) removed by the owner no later then
December 31, 2014, or (b) brought into compliance with this ordinance no later than
December 31, 2014. Signs that were in conformance with the ordinance in effect
immediately prior to the effective date of this ordinance in all respects except for the
fact that a required sign permit was not obtained, but that have become
nonconforming as of the effective date of this ordinance by virtue of the adoption of
this ordinance, shall be allowed to remain in place; provided, however, that the sign
owner must seek and obtain the required sign permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer no later than June 1, 2010.
3.4 Existing signs that were in place prior to January 1, 1970 shall not be affected by
this ordinance; provided, however that such signs must be registered with the Code
Enforcement Office prior to April 1, 2012 in order to remain unaffected by this
ordinance. There shall be no fee for registration.
3.5 No person, firm or corporation shall erect or place any sign described in
Section 3.6 without first obtaining a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. The
permit fee shall be an amount as established by the Board of Selectmen from time to
time.
3.6 Signs Requiring Permits. The following types of signs require a permit in
advance from the Code Enforcement Officer for use in the Town of Harpswell:
3.6.1 Official Business Directional Signs Such signs shall be uniform in size
and type of lettering and shall conform to the following specifications: width, 48
inches; height, 12 inches; letter height at least 4 inches. The sign shall be of a
design in conformity with Maine Department of Transportation regulations.
Directional information only shall be provided on each sign.
3.6.2 Display Signs. Such signs shall not exceed two per premises or one sign
facing in each direction from which a vehicle may approach, whichever is
greater, and 32 sq. ft. in total aggregate area, with the maximum dimension not
over 16 ft. Such display signs shall be displayed at the entity’s location
3.6.3 Illuminated Signs. All illuminated signs shall have lights of such
intensity and located in such manner that they are not a hazard to motorists'
5
night vision or objectionable to adjacent homeowners. Flashing, rotating,
animated or changing digital lighting is prohibited.
3.6.4 Name Signs. Name signs are allowed to identify the premises of each
entity or building under construction by a contractor. Such sign shall not exceed
two (2) signs per premise and twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
3.6.5 Service Club Signs. Each service club and fraternal organization may
provide and place a single sign conforming to the requirements of Section 3.6.1
above.
3.6.6 Approach Signs. Any entity whose principal building, or a point of
interest, which is located on a private road more than 1,000 feet from the nearest
public road, or as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, not fully visible
to traffic on the public road, may erect no more than two Approach signs with a
total surface area not to exceed 32 square feet. These signs are to be located
outside the public right-of-way limits within 300 feet of the junction of the
public and private roads.
3.6.7 Directory Signs. For those properties where more than one entity exists, one
directory sign shall be used which provides for multiple entities. For the purposes of
this section, such a directory sign may identify or advertise more than one entity at
the same location, structure or group of structures, sharing a common point of
access. The following conditions apply:
3.6.7.1 A single header framework or mounting structure may be placed, with a
single, display sign allowed for each entity. Such a directory common header
sign may include the location name as well as the individual signs, all on one
sign unit. A directory sign shall not exceed 40 square feet and the longest
dimension shall not be greater than 10 feet.
3.6.7.2 The directory “common header” or location area part of sign unit shall
not exceed 16 sq. ft. per side.
3.6.7.3 Extra signage shall not be placed along the roadside separate and apart
from the directory sign.
3.7 Signs Exempt from Permits. The following types of signs are approved for use
without the need for a permit in the Town of Harpswell:
3.7.1 Real Estate Signs. A single freestanding sign not to exceed 5 square feet
or a single wall sign not to exceed 3 square feet relating to the sale, rental, or
lease of a premise may be displayed on the premise which is available for sale,
rent, or lease. If a premise for sale is not visible from a public road, one Real
Estate Sign is allowed if it conforms to the location requirements of Approach
Signs in Section 3.6.6.
6
3.7.2 For Sale Signs Residences may display a single sign, not over 4 square
feet in area, relating to the good or services, belonging to the residence owner or
tenant, that are for sale on the premises, if such sale does not constitute a
business, or home occupation. Examples of sales falling under this provision
are the sale of a used vehicle, the sale of a used appliance, a yard sale, or other
occasional sales.
3.7.3 Temporary Event Signs. Temporary event signs announcing public and
semi-public occasional events shall not to exceed 32 square feet. Such signs
shall be displayed not more than 2 weeks before the event and shall be removed
with 3 days after the event. Temporary event signs shall be free of any other
advertisement. Signs established more than 2 weeks prior to the announced
event shall be deemed unlawful and are subject to removal under Section 6.3.
3.7 4 Religious Service/Civic Organization Meetings Signs. A religious or
civic organization may erect no more than 4 signs showing the place and time of
services or meetings to be held in Harpswell. No such sign shall exceed four
square feet.
3.7.5 Signs relating to Trespassing and Hunting. Signs relating to trespassing
and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to number, provided that no
such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
3.7.6 Interior Window Signs that indicate opened, closed, hours of operation,
or the name(s) of credit or charge institutions.
4.0 Standards
The following standards apply to all new signs in the Town of Harpswell.
4.1 No sign shall be placed to exceed 20 feet in height as measured from
original grade, except when placed on buildings in which case they may not
exceed 25 feet in height as measured from original grade.
4.2 Roof Signs shall not extend more that 10 feet above the roof line.
4.3 All signs shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the edge of the
traveled way of any public or private road.
5.0 Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
7
6.0 Enforcement
6.1 It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
6.2 Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent, or
contractor who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 4452, as may be amended from time
to time. For purposes of this Section, each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
6.2.1 For Purposes of this Section, each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
6.2.2 If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that provisions of the Town’s sign
ordinance are being violated, he or she shall notify personally and in writing, if
necessary by certified mail return receipt requested, the person responsible for such
violation indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to
correct it. He or she shall order the discontinuance of illegal use of land, structures,
or work being done, removal of illegal structures, or of additions, alterations, or
structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done or
nuisance conditions; or shall take any other action authorized by this Article to
ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of the Town’s land
use ordinances. A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Board of
Selectmen and shall be maintained as a permanent record.
6.2.3 When notification and penalties for actions in violation of the Town’s sign
ordinance do not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance
condition, the Code Enforcement Officer shall advise the Board of Selectmen, who
may institute any and all actions and proceedings either legal or equitable, to
correct the violation, including seeking injunctions of violations, that may be
appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the Town’s land
use ordinances in the name of the Town. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to
enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of the Town’s sign ordinance and recovering fines with Court action.
Such agreements shall not allow an illegal sign to continue unless there is clear and
convincing evidence that the illegal sign was erected as a direct result of erroneous
advice given by an authorized Town official and there is no evidence that the
owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the sign will result in a threat or
hazard to public health and safety or will result in substantial environmental
damage.
6.2.4 In addition to penalties provided herein, the Town may bring an action in the
Superior Court or District Court to enjoin violators of the Town’s land use
8
ordinances, for collection of penalties, and for such other relief as may be provided
by law.
6.3 Removal of Unlawful Signs. The owner of a sign unlawfully erected or
maintained after the effective date of this ordinance shall be in violation of this
ordinance until the sign is removed. The owner of the sign shall remove the sign
within 30 days of receipt of a notice to remove, sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the identity of such owner is not
known or reasonably ascertainable by the Code Enforcement Officer, such notice may
instead be sent to the owner of the land on which the sign is placed. If the owner fails
to remove the sign as required, the Town, may seek a court order to remove the sign.
All removed signs shall be held by the Town for a period of 30 days before they are
disposed of.
6.3.1 Removal of Signs from a Public Road. Notwithstanding the notice-to-remove
provisions of this Section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
immediately remove signs in the public right of way that are deemed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Road Commissioner to constitute a traffic hazard or
impede snow removal. In such cases, notification may be after the fact. Notice-ofremoval
shall be sent by certified, return receipt requested, by the Code
Enforcement Officer. All removed signs shall be held at the Code Enforcement
Office for a period of 30 days before they are disposed of.
6.4 Nothing permitted or outlined herein shall be construed to relieve the proposed sign
owner from statutory licensing or permit requirements of the State of Maine Department
of Transportation prior to erection of any sign permitted under this ordinance.
Section 7.0. Miscellaneous Sign and Administrative Appeals
7.1 Miscellaneous Sign Appeals - The Board of Appeals shall grant a miscellaneous sign
appeal if the applicant demonstrates that all of the following requirements are met:
(1) That the entity in question cannot reasonably convey information or
advertising about the goods, services or other attractions associated with
that entity if the setback or size requirements of this ordinance are applied
to the proposed sign; and
(2) That the need for a miscellaneous sign appeal is due to the unique
circumstances of the property; and
(3) No other feasible alternative is available to the applicant.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete written record of all
miscellaneous sign appeals granted or denied.
7.2 Administrative Appeals – Separate and distinct from miscellaneous sign appeals,
the Board of Appeals has the power and duty to hear and decide administrative appeals,
on a de novo basis, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration
9
or enforcement of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within forty (40) days of
the date of the decision appealed from, and not otherwise. Such appeal shall be made
by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal which includes:
(1) A concise written statement indicating the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer being appealed from; the specific provisions of the
ordinance relating to the decision that is alleged to be in error, and what
relief is requested.
(2) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing signs and
structures and other physical features of the lot and surrounding area
pertinent to the relief sought.
Upon being notified of an administrative appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of an appeal request.
Section 8.0. Conflicts with other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more
restrictive provision shall control.
Section 9.0. Authority
This ordinance is adopted under powers granted to the town by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, as
may be amended from time to time.
Section 10.0. Amendments
Amendments may be made by a majority vote of the Town at any Harpswell Town
Meeting and shall take effect upon enactment unless otherwise specified.
Section 11.0. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption and repeals and replaces the
Town of Harpswell Sign Ordinance previously adopted on December 9, 1976 and as
amended.
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
SITE PLAN REVIEW ORDINANCE
Effective April 26, 1983 Article 4
Amended on November 14, 1988 Article 10
Amended on March 6, 1999 Article 28
Reenacted on March 11, 2000 Article 20
Amended on August 23, 2001 Article 4,5,6,7
Amended on March 16, 2002 Article 56
Amended on November 23, 2002 Article 6
Amended on March 8, 2003 Article 63,64,65,71
Amended on May 20, 2004 Article 2, 10
Amended on March 10, 2007 Article 22, 23, 24
Amended on March 20, 2010 Article 12
Amended on March 12, 2011 Article 13
Amended on June 12, 2012
Amended on March 15, 2014 Article 5
The Site Plan Review Ordinance adopted on April 26, 1983, as subsequently amended, was
repealed and replaced by this ordinance.
2
SITE PLAN REVIEW ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Section 1. Purpose...................................................................................................... 4
Section 2. Authority................................................................................................... 4
Section 3. Applicability.............................................................................................. 4
Section 4. Effective Date........................................................................................... 5
Section 5. Availability................................................................................................ 5
Section 6. Severability............................................................................................... 5
Section 7. Conflicts with other Ordinances.............................................................. 6
Section 8. Amendments............................................................................................. 6
Section 9. Land Use Requirements............................................................................ 6
Section 10. Non-Conformance..................................................................................... 6
Section 11. Administration and Enforcement.............................................................. 6
Section 12. Permits Required....................................................................................... 6
Section 13. Review Procedures and Fees..................................................................... 6
13.1 Pre-application............................................................................................. 7
13.1.1 Purpose........................................................................................... 7
13.1.2 Information Required..................................................................... 7
13.2 Application Submission and Review Procedures........................................ 7
13.3 Final Approval and Filing............................................................................ 9
13.4 Fees.............................................................................................................. 9
13.4.1 Application Fee.............................................................................. 9
13.4.2 Technical Review Fee.................................................................... 9
Section 14. Submission Requirements......................................................................... 10
14.1 General Information..................................................................................... 10
14.2 Existing Conditions..................................................................................... 11
14.3 Proposed Development Activity................................................................... 12
14.4 Approval Block............................................................................................. 12
Section 15. Approval Standards and Criteria............................................................... 12
15.1 Dimensional Requirements........................................................................... 13
15.2 Utilization of the Site.................................................................................... 13
15.3 Adequacy of Road System............................................................................ 13
15.4 Access into the Site....................................................................................... 14
15.5 Access/Egress Way Location and Spacing................................................... 14
15.6 Internal Vehicular Circulation...................................................................... 15
15.7 Parking.......................................................................................................... 15
15.7.1 Parking Spaces Required................................................................ 15
15.7.2 Layout and Design.......................................................................... 16
15.8 Pedestrian Circulation................................................................................... 17
15.9 Stormwater Management.............................................................................. 17
15.10 Erosion Control............................................................................................ 18
15.11 Water Supply and Groundwater Protection................................................. 18
3
15.12 Subsurface Waste Disposal......................................................................... 18
15.12.3 Existing Use, Continuation of Use................................................. 19
15.13 Utilities and Essential Services.................................................................... 19
15.14 Natural Features and Buffering.................................................................... 19
15.15 Lighting........................................................................................................ 20
15.16 Water Quality Protection.............................................................................. 20
15.17 Hazardous, Special and Radioactive Materials............................................ 21
15.18 Solid, Special and Hazardous Waste Disposal............................................. 21
15.19 Historic and Archaeological Resources........................................................ 21
15.20 Floodplain Management............................................................................... 21
15.21 Technical and Financial Capacity................................................................. 21
15.22 Additional Standards for the Mitchell Field Marine Business District……. 22
15.22.1 Exterior Lighting............................................................................ 22
15.22.2 Noise.............................................................................................. 23
15.22.3 Odor Control.................................................................................. 24
15.22.4 Visual Impacts............................................................................... 24
Section 16. Post Approval Activities............................................................................. 25
16.1 Limitation of Approval................................................................................... 25
16.2 Approved Plan Necessary to Obtain Building Permit.................................... 25
16.3 Performance Guarantees................................................................................. 26
16.3.1 Form of Guarantee........................................................................... 26
16.3.2 Amount of Guarantee........................................................................ 26
16.3.3 Release of Guarantee...................................................................... 26
16.3.4 Default ……………………………………………………………. 26
16.4 Minor Amendments to Approved Plans or Activities Requiring
Site Plan Approval....................................................................................... 26
16.5 Amendments to Approved Plans...................................................................... 27
16.6 Submission of As-Built Plans........................................................................... 27
Section 17. Appeals.......................................................................................................... 27
THIS UNOFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS IS NOT A PART OF THE ORDINANCE AND IS PROVIDED FOR
CONVENIENCE ONLY.
4
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The site plan review provisions set forth in this Ordinance are intended to protect the public
health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community, and conserve the environment
by assuring that nonresidential and multifamily development is designed and developed in a
manner which assures that adequate provisions are made for traffic and pedestrian safety and
access; emergency access; water supply; sewage disposal; management of stormwater, erosion,
and sedimentation; protection of the groundwater; protection of the environment, wildlife
habitat, fisheries, and unique natural areas; protection of historic and archaeological resources;
minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the development
harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted under powers granted to the Town by 30-A MRSA § 3001, as may be
amended from time to time, and the Revised Comprehensive Plan of Harpswell.
Throughout this Ordinance there are "Citizen's Notes". These notes shall not be considered part
of this Ordinance as adopted by the Town, but shall only be considered as aids for citizens to use
this Ordinance and as guides to the intent of ordinance provisions and their proper interpretation.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
3.1. This Ordinance applies to the following activities wherever they occur in the Town:
1) The construction or placement of any new structure for a nonresidential use, including
accessory structures.
2) The expansion of an existing nonresidential structure including accessory structures that
increase the total floor area.
3) The conversion of an existing structure, in whole or in part, from a residential use to a
nonresidential use, except for home occupations.
4) The establishment of a new nonresidential use, or an expansion of an existing nonresidential
use, except for those set forth in Section 3.2, even if no structures are
proposed, including uses such as gravel pits, cemeteries, golf courses, campgrounds, and
other nonstructural nonresidential uses.
5) The conversion of an existing nonresidential use, in whole or in part, to another
nonresidential use if the Planning Board determines that the new use changes the basic
nature of the existing use such that it increases the intensity of the on- or off-site impacts
that are the subject of the standards and criteria of site plan review described in Section
15 of this Ordinance.
6) The construction or expansion of paved areas or other impermeable surfaces, including
walkways, access drives, and parking lots involving an area of more than one thousand
(1000) square feet within any three (3) year period for nonresidential uses.
7) Construction or expansion of structures for animal husbandry.
8) If the Planning Board determines pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401(4)(G), as may be
amended from time to time, that it shall review multi-unit dwellings and their accessory
5
structures under this Ordinance, then the Ordinance applies to the following activities:
a) The construction of a residential structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units
(a multi-unit dwelling).
b) The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure that increases the
number of dwelling units in the structure by three (3) or more in any five (5) year
period.
c) The conversion of an existing nonresidential structure, in whole or in part, into three
(3) or more dwelling units within a five (5) year period.
9) Mobile Food Handlers that provide a seating area for customers
3.2. The following activities shall not require site plan review approval. Certain of these
activities will, however, require the owner to obtain a building permit, plumbing permit or other
state or local approvals:
1) The construction, alteration, or enlargement of a single family or two-family dwelling,
including accessory structures.
2) The placement, alteration, or enlargement of a single manufactured dwelling or mobile
home dwelling, including accessory structures on individually owned lots.
3) Agricultural activities.
4) Timber harvesting and forest management activities.
5) The establishment and modification of home occupations.
6) Yard sales that do not exceed 3 consecutive days and of which there are no more than 2
on one premise in a single calendar year.
7) Mobile Food Handlers that either (a) are exempt from obtaining a license under the
Town’s Mobile Food Handlers Ordinance, or (b) hold a valid license issued by the Board
of Selectmen under the Town’s Mobile Food Handlers Ordinance and do not provide a
seating area for customers.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Ordinance is March 11, 2000. This Ordinance repeals and replaces the
Site Plan Review Ordinance that became effective on April 26, 1983, as amended.
SECTION 5. AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be accessible to
any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
6
SECTION 7. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision
shall control unless Federal or State law provides otherwise.
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town. The effective date of an
amendment shall be its date of enactment unless otherwise specified.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board, by a majority vote of the
Selectmen or by written petition signed by a number of registered voters equal to 10% of
Harpswell voters voting in the last gubernatorial election.
SECTION 9. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Except as this Ordinance specifies, no nonresidential structure or land shall be used or occupied,
no nonresidential structures or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, expanded, moved,
altered or replaced, and no nonresidential site improvement activities such as filling and earth
moving, construction of parking areas, access and egress, or loading areas shall be undertaken
except in conformity with the requirements of the Ordinance, unless, with respect to dimensional
requirements, a variance is granted by the Board of Appeals or the use or activity is exempted
from this Ordinance in Section 3, Applicability.
SECTION 10. NON-CONFORMANCE
Non-conforming structures, lots or uses subject to this Ordinance are subject to the nonconformance
provisions of the Basic Land Use Ordinance or the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as
applicable.
SECTION 11. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the administrative
provisions of the Basic Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time and the
Definitions Addendum, as may be amended from time to time.
SECTION 12. PERMITS REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer for development within the scope of this Ordinance, and no person shall engage in any
activity or use of land or structure within the scope of this Ordinance, unless and until a site plan
of the development has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Board in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 13. REVIEW PROCEDURES AND FEES
The Code Enforcement Office and Planning Board shall use the following procedures in
reviewing applications for site plan review approval.
7
13.1. Pre-application
Prior to submitting a formal application, the applicant or his/her representative shall request a
pre-application conference with the Planning Board or its designee. The pre-application
conference shall be informal and informational in nature. There shall be no fee for a preapplication
review, and such review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or
proceeding under 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, as may be amended from time to time. No decision on the
substance of the plan shall be made at the pre-application conference.
13.1.1. Purpose
The purposes of the pre-application conference are to:
1) Allow the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Planning Board or its designee to understand
the nature of the proposed use and the issues involved in the proposal;
2) Allow the applicant to understand the development review process and required
submissions;
3) Identify issues that need to be addressed in future submissions; and
4) Make the applicant aware of any opportunities for coordinating the development with
community policies, programs, or facilities.
In addition, the Planning Board may schedule a site inspection in accordance with subsection
13.2(5) if deemed necessary and resolve any requests for waivers and variations from the
submission requirements.
13.1.2. Information Required
There are no formal submission requirements for a pre-application conference. However, the
applicant should be prepared to discuss the following:
1) The proposed site, including its location, size, and general characteristics;
2) The nature of the proposed use and potential development;
3) Any issues or questions about existing municipal regulations and their applicability to the
development; and
4) Any requests for waivers from the submission requirements.
13.2. Application Submission and Review Procedures
13.2.1. The applicant must prepare and submit a site plan review application, including the
development plan and supporting documentation that meets the submission requirements set
forth below. This material must be submitted to the Planning Office. The Planning Office
shall give a dated receipt to the applicant.
Citizen’s Note: The following procedures described in paragraphs 13.2.2 through 13.2.6
may be compressed into one Planning Board meeting.
13.2.2. The Municipal Office shall, at the applicant's expense, give written notice to the
applicant, by first class mail, of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the
application will be considered, and to all property owners within five-hundred (500) feet of
the parcel on which the proposed development is located. The Municipal Office must also
give written notice to the applicable Fire Chief and the Road Commissioner. Failure of any
8
property owner, the Fire Chief, or the Road Commissioner to receive the notice sent as
required under this subsection shall not necessitate another public meeting or invalidate any
action taken by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall also cause notice of the date,
time and place of the meeting at which the application will first be considered to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting.
13.2.3. Within fifty (50) days of the receipt of a site plan review application, the Planning
Board shall review the material and determine whether or not the submission is complete. If
the application is determined to be incomplete, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing
of this finding, shall specify the additional materials required to make the application
complete, and shall advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the
Board until the additional information is submitted to the Board. This step shall be repeated
until the application is found to be complete.
13.2.4. As soon as the Board determines that the application is complete, the Board may, at
its discretion, take final action on the application at the same meeting at which it finds that
the application is complete.
13.2.5. The Planning Board may hold an on-site inspection of the site to review the existing
conditions, field verify the information submitted and investigate the development proposal.
The Board may schedule this visit either before or after the first meeting at which the
application is considered. The Board may decide not to hold an on-site inspection when the
site is snow covered. If an application is pending during a period when there is snow cover,
the deadline by which the Planning Board shall take final action on the application as
specified in 13.2.6 may be extended, such extensions shall not exceed thirty-five (35) days
after the Board is able to conduct an on-site inspection.
13.2.6. The Planning Board shall take final action on said application within thirty-five (35)
days of determining that the application is complete. The Board shall act to deny, to approve,
or to approve the application with conditions. The Board may impose such conditions as are
deemed advisable to assure compliance with the standards of approval.
In issuing its decision, the Planning Board shall make written findings of fact establishing
that the proposed development does or does not meet the standards of approval and other
requirements of the Town. The Board shall notify the applicant, and all parties who requested
to be notified, of the action of the Board, including the findings of fact and any conditions of
approval. This requirement can be met through the distribution of minutes of the meeting
containing the findings of fact and decision of the Board.
13.2.7. If any use or occupancy, in whole or in part, of a proposed structure, development or
land use is contemplated before all conditions of approval are met, the conditions of approval
must so specify.
13.2.8. All time limits provided for in this section may be extended by mutual agreement of
the applicant and Planning Board.
9
13.3. Final Approval and Filing
13.3.1. Upon completion of the requirements of this Section and an approval vote by the
majority of the Planning Board, the application shall be deemed to have final approval. The
approved site plan shall be signed by the Chair of the Board or his designee and filed by the
Board with the Code Enforcement Office.
13.3.2. The Planning Board must prepare a Notice of Decision signed by the Chair of the
Board. Upon final approval, the Notice of Decision shall note that the approved site plan is
on file at the Codes Enforcement Office. One copy of the Notice of Decision must be
recorded by the applicant in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds within forty-five (45)
days of approval and the book and page number provided by the applicant to the Code
Enforcement Office. Prior to the expiration of the 45 days, the Planning Board may extend
this period for cause.
Failure by the applicant to record the Notice of Decision, at the Registry of Deeds and
provide the Code Enforcement Office with the Registry book and page number within fortyfive
(45) days, or as extended, shall void the site plan approval. No building permits may be
issued until compliance with this recording provision is demonstrated.
13.4. Fees
13.4.1. Application Fee. An application for site plan review must be accompanied by an
application fee. This fee is intended to cover the cost of the Town’s administrative processing
of the application, including notification, advertising, mailings, and similar costs. The fee
shall not be refundable. This application fee must be paid to the Town and evidence of
payment of the fee must be included with the application.
13.4.2. Technical Review Fee
In addition to the application fee, the applicant for site plan review may also be required by
the Planning Board to pay a technical review fee to defray the Town’s legal and technical
costs of the application review. This fee must be paid to the Town and shall be deposited in
an individual trust account, which is separate and distinct from all other Planning Board and
Town accounts. When a technical review fee is required, the application will be considered
incomplete until evidence of payment of this fee is submitted to the Planning Board. If the
initial fee proves to be insufficient to meet the Town’s legal and technical costs of reviewing
the application, the Planning Board may assess an additional fee(s) to cover such legal and
technical costs.
The technical review fee may be used by the Planning Board only to pay reasonable costs
incurred by the Board, at its discretion, which relate directly to the review of the application
pursuant to the review criteria. Such services may include, but need not be limited to,
consulting, engineering or other professional fees, attorney fees, recording fees, and appraisal
fees. The Town shall provide the applicant, upon written request, with an accounting of his or
her account and shall refund all of the remaining monies, including accrued interest, in the
account after the payment by the Town of all costs and services related to the review. Such
payment of remaining monies shall be made no later than sixty (60) days after the approval
of the application, denial of the application, or approval with conditions of the application.
10
Such refund shall be accompanied by a final accounting of expenditures from the fund. The
monies in such fund shall not be used by the Board for any enforcement purposes.
SECTION 14. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applications for site plan review must be submitted on application forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Office. The complete application form, payment of the required fees, and the
required plans and related information must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Office. The
submission must contain at least the following exhibits and information unless specifically
waived in writing. The Planning Board may waive any of the submission requirements, if the
Board makes a written finding that the information is not required to determine compliance with
the standards.
All applications for site plan review must contain the following information:
1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan review.
2) Ten (10) copies of written materials plus ten (10) sets of maps or drawings containing the
information required in this section. The written materials must be contained in a bound
report. The maps or drawings must be at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items
listed under the approval standards and criteria, but in no case shall be more than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch for that portion of the tract of land being proposed for
development:
14.1. General Information
1) Record owner's name, address, and phone number and applicant's name, address and
phone number if different. If the person signing the application is not the owner of the
property, then that person must submit a letter of authority from the owner.
2) The area in square feet of the lot which is to be developed. The lot area includes the area
of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the maximum high
water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving
more than two lots.
3) Names and addresses of all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of any and all
property boundaries.
4) Sketch map showing general location of the site within the town based upon a reduction
of the tax maps.
5) Boundaries of all contiguous property under the total or partial control of the owner or
applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time.
6) The tax map and lot number of the parcel or parcels on which the development is located.
7) A copy of the deed to the property, an option to purchase the property or other
documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on the part of the
applicant.
8) A copy of all existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements, right-of-ways, or other
encumbrances affecting the property, delineated on the site plan wherever possible.
9) The name, registration number, and seal of the person who prepared the plan, if
applicable.
11
10) Evidence of the applicant's technical and financial capability to carry out the development
as proposed.
14.2. Existing Conditions
1) Zoning classification(s), including overlay and/or sub-districts, of the property and the
location of zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two (2) or more zoning
districts or sub-districts or abuts a different district.
2) A boundary survey including the bearings and length of all property lines and required
setbacks and buffers of the property to be developed and the source of this information.
The Planning Board may waive the requirement of a boundary survey when the Planning
Board deems that sufficient information is available to establish, on the ground, all
property boundaries.
3) Location and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and drains, on-site
sewage disposal systems, wells, underground tanks or installations, and power and
telephone lines and poles on the property to be developed, or on abutting roads, and land
that may serve the development, and an assessment of their adequacy and condition to
meet the needs of the proposed use.
4) Location, names, and present widths of existing public and/or private roads and rights-ofway
within or adjacent to the proposed development.
5) The location and dimensions of all existing structures on the site.
6) The location and dimensions of existing driveways, parking and loading areas, walkways,
and sidewalks on or immediately adjacent to the site.
7) Location of intersecting roads or driveways within two hundred (200) feet of the site.
8) The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, stonewalls, graveyards, fences, stands
of trees, and other important or unique natural areas and site features, including but not
limited to, floodplains, deer wintering areas, significant wildlife habitats, scenic areas,
habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals, unique natural communities and
natural areas, sand and gravel aquifers, and historic and/or archaeological resources,
together with a description of such features. For any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on sites listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, the applicant shall provide evidence that they have submitted their
proposal to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment. The
Planning Board may require a written statement from the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission indicating the proposed development will not adversely impact
archeological or historic resources or recommending how the proposed development
might be modified to minimize any adverse impact on archeological or historic resources.
Citizen’s Note: Consult with the Code Enforcement Office for availability of this
information.
9) The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site and, if specifically
required by the Planning Board, a topographic survey.
10) The location, front view, dimensions, and lighting of existing signs.
11) The location of the nearest fire hydrant, dry hydrant or other water supply for fire
protection.
12
14.3. Proposed Development Activity
1) Estimated demand for water supply and sewage disposal together with the location and
dimensions of all provisions for water supply and wastewater disposal, and evidence of
their adequacy for the proposed use, including a site evaluation and plan indicating soil
suitability for sewage disposal if on-site sewage disposal is proposed.
2) A surface drainage plan that shows the location and size of ditches, culverts, drainage
ways, easements and other improvements as well as the direction of proposed surface
water drainage across the site and from the site, with an assessment of impacts on
downstream properties.
3) A description of the solid, special, and hazardous waste to be generated, provisions for
handling that waste, and the location and proposed screening of any on-site collection or
storage facilities.
4) The location, dimensions, and materials to be used in the construction of proposed
driveways, parking and loading areas, and walkways and any changes in traffic flow onto
or off-site.
5) Existing and proposed landscaping and buffering.
6) The location, dimensions, height and, if a structure is in a flood plain, ground floor
elevation of all proposed structures including expansions or alterations.
7) A calculation of total area covered by all structures, driveways, parking areas, and other
impermeable surfaces expressed in square feet and as a percentage of lot area.
8) Location, front view, materials, and dimensions of proposed signs together with the
method for securing the sign.
Citizen’s Note: See Harpswell Sign Ordinance.
9) Location and type of exterior lighting.
10) The location of all utilities, including fire protection systems.
11) A general description of the proposed use or activity.
12) An estimate of the amount, type and impact of peak hour and daily traffic to be
generated by the development.
13) Stormwater calculations, erosion and sedimentation control measures, and water quality
and/or phosphorous export management provisions, if the development requires a
stormwater permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection or if the
Planning Board determines that such information is necessary based upon the scale of the
development or the existing conditions in the vicinity of the development.
14.4. Approval Block
Space must be provided on the plan drawing for the signatures of the Planning Board Chair and
date together with the following words, “Approved: Town of Harpswell Planning Board”.
SECTION 15. APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board in reviewing applications for Site
Plan Review and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the application. The
application shall not be approved unless the Planning Board determines that the applicant has
13
met all of these standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant who
must produce evidence sufficient to warrant a finding that all applicable criteria have been met.
Citizen’s Note: Consult with the Code Enforcement Officer on whether and how other town land
use ordinances may apply.
15.1. Dimensional Requirements
The plan for development must meet the dimensional requirements of the Basic Land Use
Ordinance or Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, as applicable, pertaining to lot area, setbacks,
impermeable surface coverage, structural height and frontage. For nonresidential development in
areas other than the Shoreland Zone, the minimum lot size standard and the minimum road
frontage standard is identical to the requirements for a single dwelling unit.
15.2. Utilization of the Site
The plan for the development must reflect the natural capabilities of the site to support
development. Structures, lots, and support facilities must be clustered in those portions of the site
that have the most suitable conditions for development. Environmentally sensitive areas,
including but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, significant wildlife habitats,
fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for threatened and endangered plants and animals, unique natural
communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel aquifers must be maintained and preserved
to the maximum extent. Natural drainage areas must also be preserved to the maximum extent.
The development must include measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited
to, modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent
of excavation.
15.3. Adequacy of Road System
15.3.1. Vehicular access to the site must be on roads which have adequate capacity to
accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
15.3.1.1. For developments which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour trips
based on the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Traffic
Engineers, intersections on major access routes to the site within one (1) mile of any
entrance road which are functioning at a Level of Service of D or better at the time the
application is reviewed by the Planning Board must function at a minimum at Level of
Service D after development. If any such intersection is functioning at a Level of Service
E or lower at the time the application is reviewed by the Planning Board, the
development must not reduce the current level of service. This requirement may be
waived by the Planning Board if the development is located within a growth area
identified in the Town’s land use ordinances and the Board determines that the
development will not have an unnecessary adverse impact on traffic flow or safety.
15.3.2. A development not meeting this requirement may be approved if the applicant
demonstrates that:
1) A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring
the level of access to this standard, or
14
2) The applicant will assume financial responsibility for the improvements necessary to
bring the level of service to this standard and will assure the completion of the
improvements with a financial guarantee acceptable to the Town.
15.4. Access into the Site
Vehicular access to and from the development must be safe and convenient.
1) Any driveway or proposed road and adjacent landscaping must be designed so as to
provide the minimum sight distance according to the Maine Department of
Transportation standards, to the maximum extent possible.
2) Points of access and egress must be located to avoid hazardous conflicts with existing
turning movements and traffic flows.
3) The grade of any proposed access/egress way must be not more than ±3% for a minimum
of forty (40) feet, from the intersection.
4) The intersection of any proposed access/egress way must function: (a) at a Level of
Service of D following development if the development will generate one thousand
(1,000) or more vehicle trips per twenty-four (24) hour period; or (b) at a level which will
allow safe access into and out of the development if less than one thousand (1,000) trips
are generated.
5) Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more roads, the primary access to and egress from
the lot must be provided from the road where there is less potential for traffic congestion
and for traffic and pedestrian hazards. Access from other roads may be allowed if it is
safe and does not promote shortcutting through the site.
6) Where it is necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to
avoid traffic congestion, the applicant shall be responsible for providing turning lanes,
traffic directional islands, and traffic controls within public roads.
7) Access ways must be designed and have sufficient capacity to avoid queuing of entering
vehicles on any public road.
8) The following criteria must be used to limit the number access/egress ways serving a
proposed development:
a. No use that generates less than one hundred (100) vehicle trips per day shall have
more than one (1) two-way access/egress way onto a single road. Such
access/egress way must be no greater than thirty (30) feet wide. The Planning
Board may approve a wider width if it deems a wider width to be functionally
necessary to the development.
b. No use which generates one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips per day shall
have more than two (2) access/egress ways from and to a single road. The
combined width of both access/egress ways must not exceed sixty (60) feet.
15.5. Access/Egress Way Location and Spacing
Access/egress ways must meet the following standards:
1) Entrances/exits must be located at least fifty (50) feet from the closest unsignalized
intersection and one hundred fifty (150) feet from the closest signalized intersection, as
measured from the point of tangency for the corner to the point of tangency for the access
15
way. This requirement may be reduced by the Planning Board if the shape of the site does
not allow conformance with this standard.
2) Private access ways in or out of a development must be separated by a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet where possible.
15.6. Internal Vehicular Circulation
The layout of the site must provide for the safe movement of passenger, service, and emergency
vehicles through the site.
1) Nonresidential developments that will be served by delivery vehicles must provide, as
necessary, off-road loading facilities located entirely off roads and entirely on the same
lot as the structure or use to be served, and provide a clear route for such vehicles with
geometric design to allow turning and backing.
2) Clear routes of access and egress must be provided and maintained for emergency
vehicles. The Planning Board may require that such a route be kept clear and posted with
appropriate signs.
3) The layout and design of parking areas must provide for safe and convenient circulation
of vehicles throughout the lot.
4) All roads must be designed to harmonize with the topographic and natural features of the
site insofar as practical by minimizing filling, grading, excavation, or other similar
activities which result in unstable soil conditions and soil erosion, by fitting the
development to the natural contour of the land and avoiding substantial areas of excessive
grade and tree removal, and by retaining existing vegetation during construction. The
road network must provide for vehicular, pedestrian, and cyclist safety, all season
emergency access, snow storage, and delivery and collection services.
15.7. Parking
15.7.1. Parking Spaces Required
The site must provide for sufficient off-road parking. Parking requirements shall be
calculated utilizing one or more of the following formulas in a cumulative fashion, as
appropriate:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Lodging and Accommodations 1 p e r lodging unit and 1 per employee
Campground 1 per site, 1 per employee
Multi-Family Residential 2 per dwelling unit
Church 1 per 3 seats in the assembly room
School 1 per 3 seats in principal assembly
room or 2 per classroom whichever is
greater
Private Club or Lodge 1 per 4 members
Hospital and Nursing Homes 1 per 3 beds and 1 per employee based
upon expected average occupancy
Retail and Commercial Sales 1 per 180 sf. of gross leasable floor
area
16
Business and Professional Structures 1 p e r 250 sf. of gross leasable floor
area
Eating, Drinking, Amusement and
Recreation Establishment
1 per 3 seats and 1 per employee on
shift
Auto Service and Repair 1 per employee and 1 per 50 sf. of floor
space used for service work
Funeral Homes 1 per 75 sf. of floor space in slumber
rooms, parlors and individual service
rooms
Industrial, Public Utilities, Warehouse
and Storage Facilities, Truck Facility,
Construction Services
1 per employee based upon highest
average employee occupancy on the
largest shift and 1 for each vehicle used
in the conduct of the enterprise
Adequate spaces shall be provided to accommodate customers, patrons, and employees of all
other uses not specifically listed above.
In specific cases where it is demonstrated that a particular structure can be occupied or used
with fewer parking spaces than required under this section, the Planning Board may reduce
the requirement for off-road parking upon finding that such reduction will not detract from
neighborhood values, inconvenience the public or increase congestion in the road.
15.7.2. Layout and Design
Off-road parking must conform to the following standards:
1) Parking areas with more than two (2) parking spaces must be arranged so that it is not
necessary for vehicles to back into the road.
2) All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces must be located at least twenty
(20) feet from any side or rear lot line, except where standards for buffer yards require a
greater distance. No parking spaces or asphalt type surface shall be located within ten
(10) feet of the front property line. Parking lots on adjoining lots may be connected by
access/egress ways not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in width.
3) Parking stalls and aisle layout must conform to the following standards.
Parking Angle
Stall Width Skew Width Stall Depth Aisle Width*
90° 8’-6” 8’-6” 18’-6” 12’-0” one way
only
60° 8’-6” 10’-6” 18’-0” 16’-0” one way
only
45° 8’-6” 12’-9” 17’-6” 12’-0” one way
only
30° 8’-6” 17’-0” 17’-0” 12’-0” one way
only
17
* Aisle width doubled for two way traffic.
4) In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow must be indicated by
signs, pavement markings or other permanent indications and maintained as necessary.
5) Parking areas for non-residential uses must be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of
any other motor vehicles. Double stack parking may be permitted for resident parking in
conjunction with residential uses if both spaces in the stack are assigned to the occupants
of the same dwelling unit.
6) Provisions must be made to restrict the "overhang" of parked vehicles when it might
restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian or bicycle movement on
adjacent walkways, or damage landscape materials.
15.8. Pedestrian Circulation
The site plan must provide for a system of pedestrian ways within the development appropriate
to the type and scale of development. This system must connect the major structure
entrances/exits with parking areas and with sidewalks, if they exist or are planned in the vicinity
of the development. The pedestrian network may be located either in the road right-of-way or
outside of the right-of-way in open space or recreation areas. The system must be designed to
link the development with residential, recreational, and commercial facilities, schools, bus stops,
and sidewalks in the neighborhood or, when appropriate, to connect with amenities such as parks
or open space on or adjacent to the site.
15.9. Stormwater Management
Adequate provisions must be made for the collection and disposal of all stormwater that runs off
proposed roads, parking areas, roofs, and other surfaces, through a stormwater drainage system
and maintenance plan, which must not have adverse impacts on abutting or downstream
properties.
1) To the extent possible, the plan must retain stormwater on the site using the natural
features of the site.
2) Stormwater runoff systems must detain or retain water to minimize the rate of flow from
the site after development.
3) The applicant must demonstrate that on and off-site downstream channel or system
capacity is sufficient to carry the flow without adverse effects, including but not limited
to flooding and erosion of shoreland areas, or that he/she will be responsible for whatever
improvements are needed to provide the required increase in capacity and/or mitigation.
4) All natural drainage ways must be preserved at their natural gradients and must not be
filled or converted to a closed system unless approved as part of the Site Plan Review.
5) The design of the stormwater drainage system must provide for the disposal of
stormwater without damage to roads, adjacent properties, downstream properties,
shoreland areas, inter-tidal areas, wetlands, soils, and vegetation.
6) The design of the storm drainage systems must be fully cognizant of upstream runoff that
must pass over or through the site to be developed and provide for this movement.
18
7) The biological and chemical properties of the receiving waters and adjacent shoreland or
inter-tidal areas must not be degraded by the stormwater runoff from the development
site. The use of oil and grease traps in manholes, the use of on-site vegetated waterways,
and vegetated buffer strips along waterways and drainage swales, and the reduction in use
of deicing salts and fertilizers may be required as part of the site plan approval, especially
where the development stormwater discharges into a gravel aquifer area or other water
supply source, or a great pond, wetland, inter-tidal area, or the ocean.
15.10. Erosion Control
All structures, site, and road designs and layouts must harmonize with existing topography and
conserve desirable natural surroundings to the fullest extent possible such that filling, excavation
and earth moving activity must be kept to a minimum. Natural vegetation must be preserved and
protected wherever possible. Earthmoving, erosion, and sedimentation control must conform to
the provisions of Section 15.16 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
Citizen’s Note: Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies may be
minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of the “Maine Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices”, dated March 1991. A copy is
on file in the Code Enforcement Office. Additional copies may be obtained from the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection or the Cumberland County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
15.11. Water Supply and Groundwater Protection
The development must be provided with a system of water supply that provides each use with an
adequate supply of water.
If the development is to be served by a public water supply, the applicant must secure and submit
a written statement from the supplier that the proposed water supply system conforms with its
design and construction standards, will not result in an undue burden on the source or
distribution system, and will be installed in a manner adequate to provide needed domestic and
fire protection flows.
In the Mitchell Field Marine Business District all uses must be provided with an adequate fire
protection water supply. If the community system located on the Mitchell Field property does not
provide adequate fire protection flows and pressure, the applicant must demonstrate how
adequate fire protection will be provided.
The proposed site development and use must not adversely impact either the quality or quantity
of groundwater available to abutting properties or to public water supply systems. Applicants
whose developments involve on-site water supply or sewage disposal systems with a capacity of
five hundred (500) gallons per day or greater must demonstrate that the groundwater at the
property line will comply, following development, with the standards for safe drinking water as
established by the State of Maine.
15.12. Subsurface Waste Disposal
15.12.1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems must be installed in conformance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and to minimize adverse impacts on
ground water quality.
19
15.12.2. All new, replacement, renovated, or expanded structures or uses generating waste,
must provide evidence of the type specified in 13.3.4 of the Basic Land Use Ordinance that
an adequate waste water disposal system can be constructed or that an adequate waste water
disposal system already exists.
15.12.3. Existing Use, Continuation of Use: The use of any legal system which exists on
the effective date of this Ordinance, or which had previously been approved for installation,
may be continued without change except as may be specifically covered by the Maine State
Plumbing Code or deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector for the general safety and
welfare of the occupants and the public.
15.12.4. The minimum setback for new subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be not less
than one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the maximum high water line of a perennial
water body. The minimum setback distances from the water bodies for new subsurface
sewage disposal systems shall not be reduced by variance.
15.12.5. Replacement systems shall meet the standards for replacement systems as contained
in the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
15.12.6. When two or more lots or structures in different ownership share the use of a
common subsurface disposal system, the system must be owned and maintained in common
by an owner’s association. Covenants in the deeds for each lot, or in the case of the Mitchell
Field Marine Business District, provisions in the leases for each lot, must require mandatory
membership in the association and provide for adequate funding for the association to assure
proper maintenance of the system.
Citizen’s Note: The Town recommends that all owners of new and replacement systems install
low-flow flushes and shower heads.
15.13. Utilities and Essential Services
Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways and
existing service corridors and above ground facilities must be located so as to avoid crossing
open areas and scenic views as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
15.14. Natural Features and Buffering
15.14.1 The landscape must be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical by
minimizing tree removal, disturbance and compaction of soil, and by retaining existing
vegetation insofar as practical during construction. Extensive grading and filling must be
avoided as much as possible.
15.14.2. The development must provide for the buffering of adjacent uses where there is a
transition from one type of use to another use and for the screening of mechanical equipment
and service and storage areas. Buffering must be designed to provide a year-round visual
screen in order to minimize adverse impacts. The buffer may be provided by distance,
landscaping, fencing, changes in grade, and/or a combination of these and other techniques.
1) Buffers shall be sufficient to shield structures and uses from the view of incompatible
abutting properties and traveled ways, and to otherwise prevent any nuisances.
20
2) Exposed storage areas, service areas, exposed machinery installations, and gravel
extraction operations, truck loading areas, utility structures other than transmission poles,
and areas used for the storage and collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals
or any other articles of salvage or refuse, and similar accessory areas and structures, shall
have sufficient setbacks and screening to provide an audio/visual buffer sufficient to
minimize their adverse impact on other land uses within the development site and
surrounding properties, such as a stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge six feet or
more in height.
3) Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical screening
sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be provided and shall
be maintained in good condition.
4) Natural features shall be maintained wherever possible to provide a buffer between the
proposed development and incompatible abutting properties and roads. When natural
features such as topography, gullies, stands of trees, shrubbery, and rock outcrops do not
exist or are insufficient to provide a buffer, other kinds of buffers shall be considered.
5) Evergreens can be used as buffers, provided they are planted properly. An evergreen
buffer requires two or three rows of staggered plantings. The rows should be five feet
apart and the evergreens planted four feet on center.
6) Fencing and screening shall be durable and properly maintained at all times by the owner.
7) All buffer areas shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition by the owner.
8) In the Mitchell Field Marine Business District, any lot that abuts the perimeter of the
Mitchell Field Marine Business District must maintain a buffer along that property line.
The buffer must meet the requirements of this section and must include the entire
required setback area except for provisions to provide for public access across the lots.
Any lot that abuts a portion of the Mitchell Field property outside of the Mitchell Field
Marine Business District that is designated for recreational use must maintain a buffer
along that property line. The design of the buffer in this area should provide for a
treatment that addresses buildings and service areas while maintaining views across the
lot to the ocean to the extent feasible (see provisions of Section 15.22. relative to visual
impacts). For the purposes of this requirement, service areas do not include areas used for
outside boat storage in conjunction with a functionally water-dependent use, marina, boat
repair facility, or other marine-related business.
15.15. Lighting
Provisions for exterior lighting must not create undue hazards to motorists traveling on adjacent
roads, must be adequate for the safety of the occupants or users of the site, and must not damage
the value or diminish the usability of adjacent properties.
15.16. Water Quality Protection
All aspects of the development must be designed so that:
1) No person or activity shall result in, locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of
any treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such
nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that may run off, seep, percolate,
or wash into surface or ground waters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters
21
or cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris,
oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal, plant, or
aquatic life.
2) All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and biodegradable
raw materials, must meet the standards of the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection and the State Fire Marshal's Office.
3) If the development is located within the watershed of a “body of water most at risk from
development” as identified by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
the development must comply with the standards of the DEP with respect to the export of
total suspended solids and/or phosphorous.
15.17. Hazardous, Special and Radioactive Materials
The handling, storage, and use of all materials identified by the standards of a federal or state
agency as hazardous, special or radioactive must be done in accordance with the standards of
these agencies.
No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground unless
they are located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, or forty (40) feet in the case of
underground storage. All materials must be stored in a manner and location which is in
compliance with applicable rules and regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and
other federal, state, and local regulations.
15.18. Solid, Special and Hazardous Waste Disposal
The proposed development must provide for adequate disposal of the solid, special and
hazardous wastes generated by the development. All waste must be disposed of at a licensed
disposal facility having adequate capacity to accept the development's wastes.
15.19. Historic and Archaeological Resources
The development shall be designed to protect and preserve archeological and historic sites that
have been identified in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan, or by the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission or the National Park Service.
15.20. Floodplain Management
If any portion of the site is located within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, all use and development of that portion of the site must be
consistent with the Town's Floodplain Management Ordinance.
15.21. Technical and Financial Capacity
The applicant must demonstrate that he/she has the financial and technical capacity to carry out
the development in accordance with this Ordinance and the approved plan.
22
15.22. Additional Standards for the Mitchell Field Marine Business District
The following performance standards apply only to development within the Mitchell Field
Marine Business District. In reviewing applications for development within this District, the
Planning Board must determine that each of these standards will be met. Where these standards
are more restrictive than other standards of this ordinance, these standards shall control.
15.22.1. Exterior Lighting
Exterior lighting, including new lighting or modifications to existing lighting, must provide
only the minimum lighting levels necessary to ensure adequate vision, safety and comfort
and not cause glare beyond the lot boundaries. Exterior lighting must conform to the
following standards:
1) All lighting fixtures whether pole-mounted or building mounted, must be full cut-off
fixtures.
2) Lighting fixtures must be hooded or shielded so that the lighting element is not exposed
to view from adjacent properties, roads, or the ocean.
3) The use of flood lighting or other directional lighting is not permitted in the Mitchell
Field Marine Business District.
4) The mounting height of all lighting fixtures as measured to the light source must not
exceed twenty feet above the surrounding grade at the base of the pole for pole-mounted
fixtures or at the foundation directly beneath the light for building-mounted fixtures.
5) Lighting fixtures located on or within canopies or other horizontal surfaces must be
recessed into the ceiling or surface so that the lamp, reflector, or lens is not visible from
roads or adjacent property outside of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District and to
limit the direction of light as required for “cut-off fixtures”. Refractors or diffusing
panels that are dropped below the surface are not permitted.
6) The illumination of the walls of buildings or other architectural features is not permitted.
7) The maximum illumination level at the property line of the lot with any other lot that is
not part of the District measured four feet above grade must be not more than 0.2 footcandle.
8) Exterior lighting other than security lighting must be turned off when the business is not
in operation. The use of after-hours security lighting is permitted provided that the
average lighting level does not exceed two (2) foot-candles when the business is not in
operation.
23
15.22.2. Noise
The location and design of structures as well as service and loading areas, and the operation
of the site must minimize the impact of noise on areas outside of the Mitchell Field Marine
Business District. This requirement can be met by the following:
1) All work and operations will be conducted, and all machinery including, but not limited
to, generators, compressors, and HVAC components will be located within a sound insulated
structure, or
2) If the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
requirement of 1) cannot be met without unduly limiting the facility’s intended use and
function, the applicant must submit, and the Planning Board must review as part of the Site
Plan Review for the use, a Noise Control Plan demonstrating how the noise impacts will be
minimized. If the sound generating characteristics of the use change or if a new use occupies
the property, the Noise Control Plan must be revised and submitted for review and approval
by the Planning Board.
In approving a Noise Control Plan, the Planning Board must find that the applicant has made
adequate provisions to minimize noise impacts consistent with reasonable operation of the
site. In reviewing and approving a Noise Control Plan, the Planning Board shall apply the
following decibel sound limit for day and night activity unless the applicant demonstrates
and the Planning Board finds that a higher limit is necessary due to the nature of the use
based on typical noise levels associated with that use with the application of appropriate
noise control measures:
The maximum allowable sound level in dBA based on a fifteen-minute equivalent sound
level L-Aeq 15minute when measured at the boundary of the Mitchell Field Maine Business
District:
- for daytime activity between the hours of 6:00 AM and 9:00 PM 65dBA
- for nighttime activity between the hours of 9:00 PM and 6:00 AM 50 dBA
In approving a Noise Control Plan, the Planning Board may establish reasonable
requirements to ensure that noise impacts are minimized. These requirements may include,
but are not limited to:
a) provisions for enclosing machinery, equipment, or operations;
b) limits on the hours of operation;
c) design of the site to reduce noise impacts (noise reducing site design);
d) the methods of operation of noise producing equipment or operations;
e) alterations of vehicle travel patterns on the site including the location of service or
loading areas, and/or
f) provisions for sound level monitoring.
24
15.22.3. Odor Control
The location and design of structures as well as service and loading areas, and the operation
of the site must minimize the impact of odors on areas outside of the Mitchell Field Marine
Business District. This requirement can be met by the following:
1) All work and operations that generate odors will be conducted within a structure without
any venting of odors to the outside, or
2) If the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
requirement of 1) cannot be met without unduly limiting the facility’s intended use and
function, the applicant must submit, and the Planning Board shall review, an Odor Control
Plan demonstrating how the odor impacts will be minimized. If the odor generating
characteristics of the use change or if a new use occupies the property, the Odor Control Plan
must be revised and submitted for review and approval by the Planning Board. In approving
an Odor Control Plan, the Planning Board may establish reasonable requirements to ensure
that the applicant has made adequate provisions to minimize odor impacts consistent with the
reasonable operation of the site. These requirements may include, but are not limited to:
a) provisions for odor collection and/or reduction equipment on machinery, equipment,
exhaust fans, or operations;
b) design of the site to reduce odor impacts including the location of odor generating
activities;
c) requirements for modes of operation; and/or
d) provisions for odor monitoring.
15.22.4. Visual Impacts
The development of lots within the Mitchell Field Marine Business District must minimize
the visual impact of the development on adjacent residential neighborhoods, other areas of
the Mitchell Field property, and people who can see the site from the water. This requirement
can be met by the following:
1. The location and design of structures and other improvements on the lot, in conjunction
with structures and improvements on other lots in the Mitchell Field Marine Business
District, must maintain views of the ocean from other areas within the Mitchell Field
property to the extent feasible consistent with reasonable development and use of the
property for the intended purpose. Where feasible, view corridors across the Marine Business
District to the water must be maintained. Structures should be clustered together or oriented
with their long axis perpendicular to the shoreline if feasible from an operational perspective
to maximize views through the district.
2. Structures and other improvements must be used to screen parking lots, service and
loading areas, and loading docks or overhead doors from view from the main Mitchell Field
access road, the “Lower Field” as shown in the Mitchell Field Master Plan, adjacent
properties outside of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District, and/or the ocean where
practical. For the purposes of this requirement, service areas do not include areas used for
25
outside boat storage in conjunction with a functionally water-dependent use, marina, boat
repair facility, or other marine-related business.
3. Architectural features such as dormers, entranceways, shade structures, windows, breaks
in the roofline, or wall offsets should be used to break up the scale of structures especially
larger ones with a footprint of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet or walls that are
longer than one hundred (100) feet in length.
4. Exterior surfaces of structures including roofs must be treated so that the development
blends into the landscape when viewed from a distance especially from the water. The use of
dark natural colors and earth tones is encouraged. Bright primary colors or light tones should
be avoided. Matte finishes are preferred while high gloss or reflective finishes should be
avoided. Exterior surfaces should not be reflective or metallic appearing unless required by
operational necessity.
5. Large westerly-facing windows should be avoided unless they are treated to avoid glare
through the use of non-reflective glass, recessing of the windows, the use of shading devices
that cast a shadow on the window, or similar techniques.
6. All functional elements such as transformers, HVAC units, dumpsters, material storage
areas, loading docks/doors must be either incorporated into the building or screened from
view by enclosures, fencing, landscaping, or other techniques.
SECTION 16. POST APPROVAL ACTIVITIES
16.1. Limitation of Approval. Substantial start of construction of the development covered by
any site plan approval must be commenced within twelve (12) months of the date upon which the
approval was granted. If construction has not been substantially started within the specified
period, the approval shall be null and void. The applicant may request an extension of the
approval deadline prior to the expiration of the period. Such request must be in writing and must
be made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board may grant up to a one-year extension if the
approved plan conforms to the ordinances in effect at the time the extension is granted and if any
and all federal and state approvals and permits are current.
16.1.2. If construction has not been completed within two (2) years of the granting of
approval, the approval shall be null and void, unless the Planning Board grants an extension
of the time to complete the development. When an approval has expired, a new site plan
review application shall be filed. The new application must meet the requirements of the
Town’s land use ordinances in effect at the time of the new filing.
16.2. Approved Plan Necessary to Obtain Building Permit
One copy of the approved site plan must be included with the application for the building
permit(s) for the development and all construction activities must conform to the approved plan,
including any conditions of approval and minor changes approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer to address field conditions.
26
16.3. Performance Guarantees
Prior to approval of the site plan, the Planning Board must require documentation that the
applicant has financial capacity to carry out the proposed development. A performance
guarantee, letter of credit or similar agreement with the Planning Board may be required for the
following, whether on-site or off-site:
1) The construction of roads and/or buffer improvements;
2) The construction of any water supply or sewage system other than individual on-site
facilities;
3) The construction of drainage systems, erosion control measures, or water supply systems
for fire protection; and
4) The construction of other improvements, such as buffer strips, intended to minimize
adverse impacts on the public or on abutting properties.
16.3.1. Form of Guarantee. The performance guarantee may be tendered as a certified
check payable to the Town, a savings account passbook in the name of the Town, an
irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the Selectmen, or a
faithful performance bond running to the Town and issued by a surety company licensed to
do business in the State of Maine and acceptable to the Selectmen.
16.3.2. Amount of Guarantee
The amount of the performance guarantee is one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the
cost of the requirements of Subsection 16.3 above. All guarantees are conditioned upon the
completion of all such improvements within two (2) years from the date of approval or
another agreed upon date based on Section 16.1 above of this Ordinance.
16.3.3. Release of Guarantee
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall
determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Town's consultant and whatever other agencies and departments may be involved, that the
proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that
portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.
16.3.4. Default
If, upon inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer or the Town's consultant finds that any of
the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved plan
and specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to the
Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board, and the applicant. The performance guarantee shall
then remain in place until the provisions of Subsection 16.3.3 above are met.
If the requirements of Subsection 16.3.3 are not met within a reasonable period of time after
such notice, the Selectmen may utilize the funds from the guarantee to cause the completion
of the improvements or to restore the site to its pre-development condition.
27
16.4. Minor Amendments to Approved Plans or Activities Requiring Site Plan Approval
Minor amendments in approved site plans or activities identified in Section 3 of this Ordinance
that were in existence at the time of first adoption of this Ordinance may be approved by a Staff
Review Committee consisting of the Code Enforcement Officer, Town Planner, and Chair of the
Planning Board or his/her designee, provided that any such amendment does not affect
compliance with the Site Plan Review Ordinance approval standards or alter the essential nature
of the original site plan or activity. The Town Planner shall serve as the Chair of the Staff
Review Committee. Amendments to approved site plans for structures of less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet shall be reviewed by the Staff Review Committee rather than the Planning
Board, except that the Staff Review Committee may refer any such proposed amendments to the
Planning Board if it determines that the proposed amendment affects compliance with the Site
Plan Review Ordinance approval standards or alters the essential nature of the original site plan.
The Staff Review Committee shall cause notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at
which the minor amendment will first be considered to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting and written notice of said
meeting to be mailed to all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the parcel at least
seven (7) days prior to the meeting. Approval by the Staff Review Committee shall require the
affirmative vote of at least two members of the Committee. The applicant may request a
continuation of the Staff Review Committee’s consideration if only two members are present.
The Town Planner shall provide written notice to the Planning Board of the fact that a minor
amendment to the site plan has been approved. Any amendment approved by the Staff Review
Committee pursuant to this subsection must be endorsed in writing on the approved plan by the
Staff Review Committee. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice required under this
subsection does not invalidate any action taken by the Staff Review Committee.
16.5. Amendments to Approved Plans
Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and plans contained in
the application and supporting documents submitted and affirmed to by the applicant. Any
variation from the plans, proposals, and supporting documents, except minor amendments as set
forth in Section 16.4 of this Ordinance, is subject to prior review and approval by the Planning
Board.
16.6. Submission of As-Built Plans
Any development involving the construction of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
gross floor area or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of impermeable surface, must provide
the Code Enforcement Office with a set of construction plans showing the structure(s) and site
improvements as actually constructed on the site. These "as-built" plans must be submitted
before the issuance of a certificate of compliance for the development.
SECTION 17. APPEALS
Appeals of any action taken by the Planning Board under this Ordinance shall be to the Board of
Appeals in accordance with the Basic Land Use Ordinance’s administrative provisions. Action
taken by the Staff Review Committee under this Ordinance may be appealed, in writing, to the
Planning Board by the applicant or an aggrieved party within fifteen (15) days of final action by
the Staff Review Committee; provided, however, that any action by the Staff Review Committee
to refer a matter to the Planning Board shall not be appealable. The Planning Board shall hear
and decide any appeal on a de novo basis.
1
Town of Harpswell
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
Effective Dates
Re-enacted March 14, 1992
Amended
March 13, 1993
March 12, 1994
June 10, 1994
December 5, 1994
March 16, 1996
June 23, 1997
March 6, 1999
March 11, 2000
August 23, 2001
March 16, 2002
November 23, 2002
March 8, 2003
May 20, 2004
March 13, 2005
March 11, 2006
March 10, 2007
March 14, 2009
March 20, 2010
March 12, 2011
June 14, 2011
March 10, 2012
June 12, 2012
March 9, 2013
March 15, 2014
March 14, 2015
March 12, 2016
March 11, 2017
The Shoreland Zoning Ordinance previously adopted on June 27, 1974 and subsequently
amended was repealed and replaced by this ordinance.
THIS UNOFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS IS NOT A PART OF THE ORDINANCE AND IS
PROVIDED FOR CONVENIENCE ONLY.
2
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Section 1. Purposes……………………………………………………………….....………………. 1
Section 2. Authority………………………………………………………………………………… 1
Section 3. Applicability…………………………………………………………………………….. 1
Section 4. Effective Date and Repeal of Formerly Adopted Ordinance……………………………. 2
Section 5. Availability……………………………………….……………………………………… 2
Section 6. Severability……………………………………….……………………………………… 2
Section 7. Conflicts With Other Ordinances………………..………………………………………. 2
Section 8. Amendments……………………………………………………………………………. 2
Section 9. Land Use Requirements……………………………………..…………………………. 3
Section 10. Non-Conformance………………………..……………………………………………... 3
10.1 Purpose………………………………………………………………………………….. 3
10.2 General……………………………………………………………………..…….……… 3
10.3 Nonconforming Structures……..………………………………………………..……… 3
10.4 Nonconforming Uses………….…………………………………………………..……. 7
10.5 Nonconforming Lots……..……………………………………………………….…….. 8
10.6 Creation of Nonconforming Lot(s) for Preservation or Conservation Purposes…..…… 9
Section 11. Districts and Zoning Map…………………………..…………………………………… 10
Section 12. Interpretation of District Boundaries……………….…………………………………… 10
Section 13. Establishment of Districts……………………….…………………………………….… 11
Section 14. Table of Land Uses In The Shoreland Zone.………………………………………….… 16
Section 15. Land Use Standards……………………………………………………………………… 20
15.1 Minimum Lot Standards Table……………………………………………………..…… 20
15.2 Principle and Accessory Structures……………………………………………………… 22
15.3 Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over
or Below the Maximum High Water Line of a Great Pond, Stream, Tributary Stream,
HAT of the Coastal Wetland or Within a Freshwater Wetland………………………….
26
15.4 Campgrounds……………………………………………………………….…………… 27
15.5 Individual Private Campsites………………………………………………………….… 28
15.6 Commercial and Industrial Uses………………………………………………………… 29
15.7 Parking Areas………………………………………………………………………….… 29
15.8 Roads and Driveways……………………………………………………………………. 30
15.9 Signs……………………………………………………………………………………... 32
15.10 Storm Water Runoff……………………………………………………………………... 32
15.11 Subsurface Wastewater Disposal………………………………………………………... 33
15.12 Utilities and Essential Services. ………………………………………………………… 34
15.13 Agriculture………………………………………………………………………………. 34
15.14 Timber Harvesting…[Removed March 14, 2015] 35
15.15 Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities other than Timber Harvesting…..….. 35
15.16 Earthmoving, Erosion and Sedimentation Control……………………………………… 37
15.17 Soils……………………………………………………………………………………… 38
15.18 Water Quality……………………………………………………………………………. 39
15.19 Archeological and Historic Sites………………………………………………………… 39
15.20 Home Occupations………………………………………………………………………. 39
15.21 Fertilizer Use……………………...……………………………………………………... 40
15.22 “In-Law” Apartments……………………………………………………………………. 40
15.23 Community Piers, Docks and Wharves………………………………………………….. 41
15.24 Swimming Pools…………………………………………………………………………. 42
Section 16. Administration…………………………………………………………………………… 42
3
SECTION 1. PURPOSES
The citizens of the Town of Harpswell, through enactment of this Shoreland Zoning Ordinance,
commit to preserve and protect the Town of Harpswell’s coastal marine heritage. The provisions
contained herein are designed and intended to foster the continuation of traditional marine uses
and encourage the development of new marine uses to the greatest extent practicable.
In addition, the purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life,
bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated
erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and
maritime industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control building sites,
placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual
points of access to inland and coastal water; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to
anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas of Harpswell.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 435-449,
as may be amended from time.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all land areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the maximum high water line of any great pond; within two hundred fifty (250) feet,
horizontal distance, of the highest annual tidal (HAT) of any coastal wetland (see definitions
addendum, Wetland – Coastal Wetland); within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland of ten (l0) or more contiguous acres, or the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland of less then ten (l0) contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
water body, excluding any tributary stream, such that in a natural state, the combined surface
area is in excess of ten (l0) acres; and within seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance of the
maximum high water line of a stream or tributary stream. This Ordinance also applies to the
portion of the Mitchell Field Marine Business District as shown on the Official Shoreland
Zoning Map that is more than two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, from the HAT of
the coastal wetland. This Ordinance also applies to Eagle Island as shown on the Official
Shoreland Zoning Map.
This Ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf, pier or other
structure extending below the maximum high water line of a great pond, freshwater wetland of
ten (l0) or more contiguous acres or tributary stream, or below the HAT of the coastal wetland as
described in this section.
Citizen's Note: Land use activity adjacent to protected natural resources requires a permit from
the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act,
38 M.R.S.A.§ 480-C, as may be amended from time to time. Please see Code Enforcement
Officer for more information.
4
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEAL OF FORMERLY ADOPTED
ORDINANCE
This Ordinance was originally enacted and became effective on March 14, 1992. Subsequent
amendments become effective on the dates of their enactment, unless otherwise specified, and
are listed on the Title Page. All amendments to and replacements of this Ordinance are subject to
approval by the Department of Environmental Protection. If Department of Environmental
Protection approval is made with conditions, the Ordinance shall be administered in accordance
with those conditions pending further town legislative action. The Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
previously adopted on June 27, 1974, and subsequently amended was repealed and replaced by
this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible
to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost and
at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
Throughout this ordinance there are "Citizen's Notes". These notes shall not be considered part
of this ordinance as adopted by the Town, but shall only be considered as aids for citizens to use
this ordinance and as guides to the intent of ordinance provisions and their proper interpretation.
SECTION 7. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the Town, the
more restrictive provision shall control unless State shoreland zoning law provides otherwise.
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS
This ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town. The effective date of an
amendment shall be its date of enactment unless otherwise specified. Copies of amendments,
attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body and shall not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. If the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45)
days of the Commissioner's receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period
shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, as if such amendment is approved by the
Commissioner.
5
SECTION 9. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Except as this Ordinance specifies, no structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered
and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified
for the district in which it is located, unless variance is granted by the Board of Appeals.
SECTION 10. NONCONFORMANCE
10.1. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
lawful nonconforming conditions that existed before the effective dates of this Ordinance and of
any amendments to this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set
forth in this section.
Citizen's Note: Nonconformance should not be considered illegal or unacceptable.
Nonconformance means lots of record or uses that are grandfathered because they were in
conformance with the standards in effect before the effective date of this Ordinance and any
amendments that created new nonconforming conditions. The concerned party is encouraged to
read through this Ordinance and contact a Town official should a question arise.
10.2. General
10.2.1. Transfer of Ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots and uses may be transferred,
and the new owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
10.2.2. Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep
and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures including repair or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as Federal, State, or local building and safety codes may
require.
Citizen's Note: See Definitions Addendum for the definitions of nonconforming structures,
nonconforming uses, and nonconforming lots.
10.3. Nonconforming Structures
10.3.1. Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining
a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, an increase to the nonconformity of the structure shall mean:
 any expansion towards a water body, great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal
wetland, freshwater wetland or property line that decreases the shortest existing
nonconforming setback distance from the water body, great pond, stream, tributary
stream, coastal wetland, freshwater wetland or property line; or
 any expansion that would cause the structure to exceed the impermeable surface coverage
requirements of Section 15.2.4; or
 any expansion that would cause the structure to exceed the height limits of Section
15.2.2.
6
The shortest existing nonconforming setback distance from a water body, great pond, stream,
tributary stream, coastal wetland, freshwater wetland or a property line may not be measured
from an existing area used mainly for access to a structure, such as a small patio, terrace,
landing, or small set of stairs.
Citizen’s Note: It should be understood that small patios, terraces, landings, or small sets of
stairs within minimum setbacks do not change the setback of the adjacent structure and
cannot be used to justify expansion of any other part of the structure into that setback.
10.3.1.1. Further limitations. If any portion of a structure in existence as of January 1,
1989 is less than the required setback from the maximum high water line of a great pond,
stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland, upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
or from a property line, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor area or
volume, by thirty percent (30%) or more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a
replacement structure conforms to the requirements of Section 10.3.2.2 and is less than the
required setback from a great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater
wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the original structure existing on
January 1, 1989 had been expanded by thirty percent (30%) in floor area and volume since
that date.
Citizen's Note: Disputed decisions may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
10.3.1.2. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, basing the decision on the criteria specified in Section 10.3.2.1,
Relocation. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of
the structure, except for expansion in conformity with Section 10.3.1.1, Further limitations,
and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3)
additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure (from original ground level
to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the
structure.
10.3.2. Relocation, Reconstruction, or Replacement
10.3.2.1. Relocation. A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries
of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms
to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface
wastewater disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that a new system can be installed in
compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a
manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming. Any relocation approved by
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed in writing by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
7
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic systems and other on-site soils suitable for
septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the
relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the resource setback area in
order to relocate a structure, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require replanting of
native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from
which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting
shall be required as follows:
10.3.2.1.1. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least
one native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees
are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than fifty percent (50%) of the
number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or
wetland than the trees that were removed. Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and
ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be reestablished.
An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground
cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback
area. The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation
and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
10.3.2.1.2. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel, the original
location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation that may consist of grasses,
shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
10.3.2.2. Reconstruction or Replacement – More than Fifty Percent of Value. Any
nonconforming structure that is located less than the required setback from a waterbody,
great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland, freshwater wetland or from a
property line, and that is removed, damaged, or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by
more than fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the structure, as adjusted by the
Town’s assessment ratio as most recently certified by the Assessors to the State of Maine,
before such damage, destruction, or removal, as determined by the Assessors or their
designee in consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer, may be reconstructed or
replaced provided that a permit is obtained within one (1) year of the date of said
damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that such replacement or reconstruction is
in compliance with the setback requirements to the greatest practical extent, as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance. In no case, shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity. Any reconstruction or replacement approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed in writing by the Code Enforcement
Officer. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback, it
shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section
10.3.1. above, as determined by the nonconforming floor area and volume of the
reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area
and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the
required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be
8
replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When it
is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation
shall be replanted in accordance with Section 10.3.2.1 above.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the water body,
great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland, or freshwater wetland setback to the
greatest practical extent, the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider, in addition to the
criteria in Section 10.3.2.1 above, the physical condition and type of foundation present,
if any.
10.3.2.3. Reconstruction or Replacement – Fifty Percent or Less of Value. Any
nonconforming structure that is located less than the required setback from a water body,
great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland or from a
property line and that is removed by fifty percent (50%) or less of the assessed value of
the structure, as adjusted by the Town’s assessment ratio as most recently certified by the
Assessors to the State of Maine, as determined by the Assessors or their designee in
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer or damaged or destroyed by fifty percent
(50%) or less of the assessed value of the structure, as adjusted by the Town’s assessment
ratio as most recently certified by the Assessors to the State of Maine as determined by
the Assessors or their designee in consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer,
excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is
obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage,
destruction, or removal.
10.3.2.4. Authority of Planning Board to Exercise Jurisdiction over an Application.
Except as provided for below, for any application for relocation of a nonconforming
structure made under 10.3.2.1, or for the reconstruction or replacement of a
nonconforming structure involving more than fifty percent (50%) of its adjusted assessed
value made under 10.3.2.2, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to
the Planning Board and all property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
property as listed on the Town’s most recent assessing records that a relocation,
reconstruction or replacement application has been received and is being reviewed.
The opportunity for the Planning Board to take jurisdiction under this provision and to
receive notice shall not apply in any of the following situations:
(a) The relocation, replacement, or reconstruction will be carried out such that the
structure complies with all applicable setback requirements, or
(b) The structure being relocated is an accessory structure that meets all of the
following requirements:
1) The floor area of the existing nonconforming structure is less than two
hundred (200) square feet,
2) The floor area or volume of the structure will not be increased,
3) The structure is and will continue to be accessory to the principal use of
the property,
4) The structure will not be served by water, and
5) The structure has not been and will not be used for human habitation, or
(c) The structure being reconstructed or replaced is an accessory structure that
meets all of the following requirements:
9
1) The floor area of the existing nonconforming structure is less than two
hundred (200) square feet,
2) The floor area and volume of the replacement or reconstructed structure
will not be larger than one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the floor area
and volume of the existing structure and the replacement or reconstruction
will not increase the floor area and volume of the existing structure that is
nonconforming by more than thirty (30) percent in accordance with
Section 10.3.1,
3) The existing structure is accessory to the principal use of the property and
the replacement or reconstructed structure will continue to be so,
4) The replacement or reconstructed structure will not be served by water,
and
5) The replacement or reconstructed structure will not be used for human
habitation.
During that forty (40) day time period, the Planning Board may elect to exercise
jurisdiction over the relocation, reconstruction or replacement application. The Planning
Board’s review, if any, shall be governed by the same review standards as govern the
Code Enforcement Officer’s review. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue any
permit under this Section until the earlier of (a) forty (40) days after the date that the
Code Enforcement Officer provides such written notice to the Planning Board and all
property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property as listed on the
Town’s most recent assessing records or (b) the date the Planning Board declines to
exercise jurisdiction over the application. Any relocation, reconstruction or replacement
application approved by the Planning Board pursuant to this subsection shall be endorsed
in writing. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice sent under this subsection
does not invalidate any action taken by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
10.3.3. Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming structure
may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater impact on a great pond, stream,
tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require
written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain management,
archaeological and historical resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities, and
other functionally water-dependent uses.
10.4. Nonconforming Uses
10.4.1. Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that
nonconforming residential and institutional uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, be expanded within existing structures or within expansions of such
10
structures as allowed in Section 10.3.1 above; provided; however, expansions of
nonconforming institutional uses in the resource Protection Districts are prohibited.
Citizen's Note: Disputed decisions may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
10.4.2. Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming
use may not again be devoted to a nonconforming use. This provision shall not apply to the
resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure has been used or
maintained for residential purposes for the preceding five (5) year period.
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to one year
extension to the above time periods.
10.4.3. Change of Use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject
and adjacent properties and resources, including water-dependent uses in the CF I & II District,
than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater
adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section 10.3.3 above. A nonresidential
use in a CF I district may not be changed to a residential use.
10.5. Nonconforming Lots
10.5.1. Nonconforming lots whether located in legal subdivisions or elsewhere are subject to
the provisions of this section.
10.5.2. Nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided
that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same
ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot area, lot width, and shore
frontage are met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot
width or shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
The status of a nonconforming lot of record shall not change as a result of realigning a
common boundary line with the owner of a contiguous parcel of land, provided that (a) neither
lot ends up more nonconforming after the transaction than it was prior to the transaction, as
evidenced in writing by a land surveyor licensed to practice in Maine; (b) the parties cause
copies of the recorded deeds to be submitted to the CEO within 30 days of the recording of the
deeds at the registry; and (c) no permits or approvals relating to such nonconforming lot shall
be issued unless or until the applicant complies with subsections (a) and (b) herein.
10.5.3. Contiguous Built Lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or
joint ownership of record as of the effective date(s) of this ordinance and any amendments
thereto, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, and
if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed
separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law and Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
11
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective date
of this ordinance, each may be sold as a separate lot, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size
Law and Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with. When such lots are
divided, each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance.
10.5.4. Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built. If two or more contiguous lots or
parcels are in single or joint ownership of record as of the effective date(s) of this ordinance or
any amendment thereto, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots are
vacant or contain no principal structure, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to
meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is
nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on the effective date(s) of this ordinance
or any amendments thereto and recorded in the Registry of Deeds, if the lot is served by a
public sewer, or can accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Rules and:
10.5.4.1. Each lot contains at least one hundred (100) feet of shore frontage and at least
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area; or
10.5.4.2. Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of subparagraph
10.5.3. Are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least one hundred
(100) feet of shore frontage and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area.
10.5.5. Changes in Lot Boundaries of Vacant Lots in Subdivisions. The boundaries of a
vacant lot in a subdivision approved under the Subdivision Ordinance may be modified
provided the lot or lots so created, even though nonconforming, are less nonconforming than
the approved lot or lots, and further provided that the new lot or lots will have no greater
adverse impact on a great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources
than the uses anticipated by the approved subdivision plan. Approval of boundary
modification shall be obtained by action of the Planning Board.
10.6. Creation of Nonconforming Lot(s) for Preservation or Conservation Purposes
10.6.1. An existing conforming lot or a nonconforming lot referred to in Sections 10.5.2. and
10.5.3. of this Ordinance may be divided so as to create not more than two lots, one or both of
which are nonconforming lots, provided that the Harpswell Planning Board finds that the
following conditions are met:
10.6.1.1. One of the resulting lots is conveyed to a governmental body or a nonprofit tax
exempt organization (preservation grantee) for conservation or preservation purposes.
10.6.1.2. The division does not create or exacerbate a public health or safety problem on
the nonconforming lot not to be conveyed to a preservation grantee (the remaining lot) to
the extent that the remaining lot does not have adequate (as defined by the appropriate
code) well and septic waste disposal options.
12
10.6.1.3. If the lot conveyed to the preservation grantee is undeveloped land, or is to be
returned to an undeveloped state, the deed or instrument of conveyance shall contain
restrictions which require that the land be preserved or maintained in its natural state
(although not necessarily "forever wild") in perpetuity for one or more generally
recognized purposes which benefit the natural, cultural, or architectural history of the Town
or which preserves a diminishing or threatened place, parcel of land, resource, or habitat.
10.6.1.4. If the lot conveyed to the preservation grantee contains a pre-existing structure or
improvement, the structure or improvement must have a demonstrable historic, cultural, or
architectural importance and the deed or instrument of conveyance shall contain restrictions
which require that the land and the improvements thereon be preserved and maintained so
as to protect and preserve said historic, cultural, or architectural importance. No structure
on the lot conveyed to a preservation grantee pursuant to this section may be inhabited as a
dwelling.
SECTION 11. DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
11.1. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are
hereby divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s)
which is (are) made a part of this Ordinance:
1) Resource Protection
2) Shoreland Residential
3) Shoreland Business
4) Commercial Fisheries I
5) Commercial Fisheries II
6) Mitchell Field Marine Business
7) Eagle Island Historic District
11.1.1. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less
than: 1 inch = 1500 feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating
the symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
11.1.2. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map
shall be certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the
municipal office.
11.1.3. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning. If amendments, in accordance with
Section 8, are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official
Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection. Any changes to the Official Maps must be approved by a majority
vote of the Town.
SECTION 12. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The depiction of the Resource Protection Districts and all Shoreland Zoning Districts on the
Official Shoreland Zoning maps for the Town of Harpswell is illustrative of their general
location. The boundaries of these districts shall be determined by measurement from maximum
high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the HAT of the coastal wetland or the
13
upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, regardless of the
location of the boundary shown on the map.
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are
property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads, and rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the
shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district
boundary lines shown on the official map, the written description shall be the determining factor.
The Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to the location.
SECTION 13. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
13.1. Resource Protection District The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or
scenic and natural values. This district shall include the areas listed below when they occur
within the limits of the Shoreland Zone, except that areas which are developed and areas which
meet the criteria for the Shoreland Business or Commercial Fisheries I & II Districts need not be
included within the Resource Protection District.
1. Areas within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, within two hundred fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, of the HAT of coastal wetlands consisting predominantly
of salt marshes, salt meadows, and freshwater wetlands associated with great ponds that
are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including
nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
(MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer
maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department of Environmental Protection as of
May 1, 2006. For the purposes of this paragraph “freshwater wetlands associated with
great ponds” shall mean areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and
hydric soils that are contiguous with a great pond, and have a surface elevation at or
below the water level of the great pond during the period of normal high water.
“Freshwater wetlands associated with great ponds” are considered to be part of that great
pond.
2. Areas within the Shoreland Zone that are also within the V-zone of the one hundred (100)
year flood plains adjacent to tidal waters as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or as determined by a survey performed by a
licensed surveyor establishing the base flood elevations for a parcel.
Citizen’s Note: To determine the location of the V-zone of the 100-year flood plain, see
the Harpswell Flood Plain Ordinance, and the above-referenced maps currently in effect
which are on file at the Town Office.
3. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of twenty percent (20%)
or greater.
4. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric
soils, that are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance and that are not surficially connected to a water body during the period of
maximum high water.
14
5. Areas within the Shoreland Zone that are adjacent to tidal waters and are subject to
severe erosion or mass movement, such as steep coastal bluffs.
Citizens Note: All Resource Protection areas as defined in subsections 2, 3, 4, and 5, above
may not appear on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. See Section 12 of this ordinance.
13.1.1. Principal Use. The Planning Board may approve a permit for a one-unit residential use
and accessory residential structures in a Resource Protection District provided that the
applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1. There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
2. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and
recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District.
3. The proposed location of all buildings, sewage disposal systems, and other improvements
are:
a. located on natural ground slopes of less than twenty percent (20%); and
b. located outside the floodway of the one hundred (100) year floodplain along rivers
and artificially formed great ponds along rivers; and outside the velocity zone in areas
subject to tides, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least
one foot above the one hundred (100) year floodplain elevation; and the development
is in compliance with the municipal floodplain elevation; and the development is in
compliance with the municipal floodplain ordinance. If the floodway is not shown on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be the width of
the one hundred (100) year floodplain.
4. The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of
all principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of fifteen hundred (1,500)
square feet. This limitation shall not be altered by variance.
5. All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the
maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the HAT of the
coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance to the greatest practical extent, but not less than seventy-five (75) feet
horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall
consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type
and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site's elevation in regard
to the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
13.1.2. Accessory Use. The Planning Board may approve a permit for a home occupation as
an accessory use in a Resource Protection District subject to the standards outlined in Section
15.20 of this Ordinance.
13.1.3. Community Shoreland Access Special Exception. The Planning Board may approve
a permit for the construction of and/or improvement to community shoreland access ways and
15
associated accessory structures and uses in a Resource Protection District provided that the
following conditions are met:
1. There is no location suitable for shoreland access, other than a location within the
Resource Protection District, which is practicable.
2. The proposed location of structures, sewage disposal systems, and other improvements
excluding raised boardwalks, stairs and open fences intended to restrict access to
environmentally sensitive areas are:
a. located on natural ground slopes of less than twenty percent (20%); and
b. located outside the floodway of the one hundred (100)-year floodplain along rivers
and artificially formed great ponds along rivers; and outside the velocity zone in areas
subject to tides, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least
one foot above the one hundred (100)-year floodplain elevation; and the development
is in compliance with the municipal floodplain elevation; and the development is in
compliance with the municipal floodplain ordinance. If the floodway is not shown on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be the width of
the one hundred (100)-year floodplain.
3. All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, raised boardwalks, stairs,
and fences intended to restrict access to environmentally sensitive areas are set back from
the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the HAT of the
coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance to the greatest practical extent, but not less than seventy-five (75) feet
horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall
consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type
and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site's elevation in regard
to the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
13.2. Shoreland Residential District. The Shoreland Residential District includes areas of mixed
residential, recreational, and light commercial development. Home occupations, including but not
limited to commercial fishing, are an allowed accessory use within the Shoreland Residential
District provided they meet the standards outlined in Section 15.20 of this Ordinance. The
Shoreland Residential District includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection District,
and areas which are used less intensively than those in the Shoreland Commercial District, or the
Commercial Fisheries I & II District.
13.3. Shoreland Business District. The Shoreland Business District includes areas of mixed light
commercial and residential uses. This district includes areas of one (1) or more contiguous acres in
size devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and commercial uses. Industrial uses
are prohibited. See definition.
13.4. Commercial Fisheries I District. The Commercial Fisheries I District shall be defined as
the C.F. District existing prior to March 14, 1992 limited to seventy-five (75) feet inland from the
HAT of the coastal wetland and includes areas where the existing predominant pattern of
development is consistent with the allowed uses for this district as indicated in the Table of Land
16
Uses, Section 14, and other areas which are suitable for functionally water-dependent uses, taking
into consideration such factors as:
1. shelter from prevailing winds and waves;
2. slope of the land within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the HAT
line;
3. depth of the water within one hundred fifty (150) feet, horizontal distance, of the
shoreline;
4. available support facilities including utilities and transportation facilities; and
5. compatibility with adjacent upland uses.
Principal and accessory residential use is prohibited within the Commercial Fisheries I District.
13.5. Commercial Fishing II District. The Commercial Fishing II District shall be defined as the
remaining one hundred seventy-five (175) foot zone behind CF I, to two hundred fifty (250) feet
inland from the HAT of the coastal wetland.
In the CF II District, the residential standards as defined in Section 15.1 and Table I in Section 14
of this Ordinance shall apply. Both parts of CF I and CF II of any lot in the CF District existing
prior to January 1, 1989, shall be included in calculating lot size.
13.6. Mitchell Field Marine Business District. The Mitchell Field Marine Business District
includes the area of the shoreland area within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the HAT of the
coastal wetland as well as the adjacent upland area that is more than two hundred fifty (250) feet
from the maximum high water line as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
13.7. Eagle Island Historic District. The Eagle Island Historic District includes all
land area that comprises Eagle Island.
13.7.1. Purpose. The protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of landmarks of historical and
cultural importance and significance is necessary to promote the economic, cultural,
educational and general welfare of the citizens of Harpswell and the general public. It is
recognized that the Eagle Island State Historic Site represents the unique confluence of time
and place that produced significant historic, cultural and natural resources that constitute the
heritage of the Town of Harpswell. It is the purpose of this district to:
13.7.1.1. protect and enhance the Eagle Island State Historic Site, which represents
distinctive elements of Harpswell’s historic, cultural and natural resources heritage;
13.7.1.2. foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past;
13.7.1.3. protect and enhance Harpswell’s attractiveness to visitors and the support and
stimulus to the economy thereby provided; and
13.7.1.4. increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and natural resource
preservation through public education about the Eagle Island State Historic Site.
13.7.2. Land Use Standards.
13.7.2.1. Permitted land uses include (a) one-unit residential, museum, visitors’ center,
water related uses, boat house, wharf, and pier; (b) structures accessory to the uses set forth
17
in subsection (a); and (c) any educational, park, recreational, cultural or historic
preservation uses related in any way to the uses set forth in subsection (a).
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, there shall only be
one (1) one-unit residential use allowed within the Eagle Island Historic District.
13.7.2.2. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream,
tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance; provided, however, that any new principal and
accessory structures consistent in footprint, height and general location with structures
historically located on Eagle Island may be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet,
horizontal distance, from the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary
stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in
Section 3 of this Ordinance. The great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or
freshwater wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures which require direct
access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls,
nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
13.7.2.3. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet in height. All expansions of principal and accessory structures that
increase the footprint of the structure shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.
13.7.2.4. The lowest floor elevation or opening of all building and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the one hundred (100)-
year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types
identified as recent flood plain soils.
13.7.2.5. The total footprint area of all structures and other impermeable surfaces within the
district shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total land area of the district.
13.7.2.6. A building permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer for the construction, expansion, replacement, rehabilitation or alteration of any
structure containing uses set forth in Section 13.7.2.1 above.
13.7.2.7. Except as set forth herein, permitted land uses shall be conducted in accordance
with all other applicable provisions of federal, State and local law, including, without
limitation, the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
13.7.2.8. Sections 15.2 and 15.9 of this Ordinance do not apply to the district.
13.7.3. Conflicts. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance to the contrary, in the
event that any provision of this Section 13.7 conflicts with any other provision of this
Ordinance, Section 13.7 shall prevail.
18
SECTION 14. TABLE OF LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
14.1. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall
conform to all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15 of this Ordinance. The land use
activities that are prohibited or allowed with or without permits are indicated in Table 1. The
district designation for a particular site shall be determined by measurement from maximum high
water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, regardless of the location
of the boundary shown on the map.
TABLE 1 LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
Shoreland Districts
Land Uses RP SR SB CF I CF II MFMB16
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as
hunting, fishing, and hiking
yes yes yes yes yes yes15
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes yes yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber harvesting yes yes yes yes yes no
4. *Timber Harvesting
[Removed March 14, 2015]
CEO/PB
or Bureau
yes/PB
or Bureau
yes/PB
or
Bureau
yes/PB
or
Bureau
yes/PB
or
Bureau
no
5. *Clearing of vegetation for approved construction and other
allowed uses
CEO yes yes yes yes yes
6. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes yes yes
7. Wildlife management practices
yes yes yes yes yes yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices
yes yes yes yes yes yes
9. Mineral exploration no no no no no no
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no no no no no no
11. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes yes yes
12. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes yes yes
13. *Agriculture PB yes yes no 1 yes no
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB PB PB PB16
15. Principal structures and uses
15.1. One and two-unit residential uses, including driveways PB10 CEO CEO no CEO no
15.2. Multi-unit residential no no no no no no
15.3. *Commercial no13 no 13 PB PB4 PB2 PB16
15.3.1 Commercial Fishing no13 CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
15.4. *Industrial no no PB no no PB16
15.5. *Governmental and Institutional no9 PB no no no PB
15.6. Small non-residential facilities for marine, scientific or
nature related purposes
no PB PB PB PB PB17
15.7. Non-agricultural Fertilizer Use
15.7.1 Chemical fertilizer, sludge and non-composted
manure no no no no no no
19
15.7.2 Organic Fertilizer and composted manure Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21 Yes21
15.8. Community Shoreland Access PB20 CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
16. Accessory Structures and uses PB11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO11 CEO
17. Structural Repair yes yes yes yes yes yes
17.1 Structural alteration/replacement: residential CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO No
17.2 Structural alteration/replacement: non-residential
CEO/ PB CEO/ PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB
CEO/
PB CEO/PB
18.1. Non-commercial piers, docks, wharves, bridges, and other
structures and uses extending over or below the HAT,
maximum high water line or wetland PB14 CEO14/18 CEO14/18 CEO14/18 CEO14/18 CEO14/18
18.2. Commercial piers, docks, wharves, bridges, and other
structures and uses extending over or below the HAT,
maximum high-water line or wetland PB14
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
CEO/PB
14/19
18.3 Community piers, docks and wharves PB PB PB PB PB PB
19. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences
no LPI LPI no LPI no
20. *Home occupations
PB8 yes 8 yes 8 yes 8 yes 8 no
21. Sewage disposal systems PB10/ LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
22.*Essential services PB PB PB PB PB PB
23. Service drops for allowed uses yes yes yes yes yes yes
24. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal
development but no building
PB PB CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. *Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO no CEO no
26. *Campgrounds no 5 PB PB no PB no
27. *Road construction no 6 CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
28. *Parking areas – residential CEO/PB CEO CEO CEO CEO no
29. *Parking areas – non-residential no9 PB PB PB 4 PB PB
30. *Marinas no no PB PB 7 PB 7 PB16
31. Boat Repair Facility no no PB PB PB PB16
32. Filling and earthmoving of <50 cubic yards CEO yes yes yes yes yes
33. Filling and earthmoving of >50 cubic yards but less than
1,000 cubic yards
PB CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
34. Filling and earthmoving of >1000 cubic yards12 PB PB PB PB4 PB PB
35.*Signs CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
36. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO4 CEO CEO
37. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
38. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB4 PB PB
39. Projects which use more than 1000 gallons of water/day
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO PB
40. Land Management Roads
PB yes yes yes yes no
41. Mobile Food Handlers
no BOS BOS BOS BOS no
20
14.2. Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use standards.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO - Requires permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Requires permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Bureau - Requires permit issued by State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry
ABBREVIATIONS:
RP - Resource Protection
SR - Shoreland Residential
SB - Shoreland Business
CF I - Commercial Fisheries I
CF II - Commercial Fisheries II
MFMB - Mitchell Field Marine Business
FOOTNOTES: Land Use Table
*For further information on the * uses in land use chart see Section 15.
1. No - except grand-fathered properties.
2. Marine related services only. Retail stores limited to nine hundred (900) or less square
feet in size.
3. No - except limited Commercial Fishing activities.
4. Functionally water-dependent and accessory to Commercial Fishing uses only.
5. Except when area is zoned for resource protection solely due to flood plain criteria in
which case a permit is required from the PB.
6. Except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or where no reasonable
alternative route or location is available outside the RP area, in which case a permit is
required from the PB.
7. Primarily commercial fishing related use.
8. Home occupations that provide public restrooms and showers or serve food to the
public require a CEO permit. All home occupations are subject to the provisions of
Section 15.20 of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance regardless of whether they are
located within the Shoreland Zone.
9. Additions or expansions to existing Town Office Complex may be allowed with
Planning Board approval.
10. Only as provided in Section 13.1.1. of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
11. When a structure is accessory to both residential and non-residential uses, the more
restrictive provisions of the ordinances shall apply.
21
12. May require site plan review approval. See Town of Harpswell Site Plan Review
Ordinance.
13. Except for other allowed commercial uses listed in the Table that are allowed in the
respective district.
14. Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit
is required.
15. Hunting is prohibited on all property at Mitchell Field that is owned by the Town of
Harpswell.
16. At least forty-five percent (45%) of the gross leasable lot area within the district must
be utilized for aquaculture, marinas, boat repair facilities, and/or functionally waterdependent
uses as defined in the Definitions Addendum. Not more than fifteen percent
(15%) of the gross leasable lot area in the district may be used for commercial or
industrial uses that are not functionally water-dependent businesses, aquaculture,
marinas, and/or boat repair facilities nor other marine-related businesses as defined in
the Definitions Addendum provided that these uses may not be located within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the HAT of the coastal wetland. Marine-related business
uses are allowed within the district provided that the limitations set forth above are met.
The use of the pier and the causeway leading to the pier is limited to activities
involving public access and recreation and activities related to and in support of
functionally water-dependent uses and marine related businesses that are located within
the Mitchell Field Marine Business District provided that the private use of these
facilities does not unduly restrict reasonable public access to and use of the pier.
17. The limitation on the size of non-residential facilities for marine, scientific, or nature
related purposes shall not apply in the Mitchell Field Business Districts if the Planning
Board finds that the scale and location of the facility are consistent with the objectives
of shoreland zoning and the Mitchell Field Master Plan.
18. Permits applications for non-commercial, private piers, docks or wharves with a
maximum width of six (6) feet as measured parallel to the shoreline and which do not
extend below the low water line shall be reviewed and issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Non-commercial, private piers greater than six (6) feet wide as measured
parallel to the shoreline or which extend below the low water line are prohibited.
19. Permits applications for commercial piers, docks or wharves with a maximum width of
twelve (12) feet as measured parallel to the shoreline and which limit the length of the
structure to the minimal amount necessary to provide access to the boats intended to
use the facility shall be reviewed and issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permits
for commercial piers greater than twelve (12) feet wide as measured parallel to the
shoreline or which exceed the minimum length necessary to provide access to the boats
intended to use the facility shall be reviewed and issued by the Planning Board.
20. Only as provided in Section 13.1.2. of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
22
21. Organic fertilizer and composted manure may not be applied within twenty five (25)
feet of the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of
the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland as outlined in Section
15.21.1 of this ordinance.
Citizen’s Note: Land use activity adjacent to protected natural resources requires a permit
from the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A.§ 480-C, as may be amended from time to time. Please see Code
Enforcement Officer for more information.
SECTION 15. LAND USE STANDARDS
No developer, person, or group shall restrict the use of property in any Shoreland Zone, neither
now nor in the future, that limits commercial fishing or its related uses, as a home occupation.
(i.e. lobstering, dragging, clamming, trap storage)
All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone shall conform to the following provisions, if
applicable:
15.1. Minimum Lot Standards Table
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Shore
Frontage (feet)
Residential per dwelling unit
1. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to Tidal Areas. 40,000 150
Note: See sliding scale regarding frontage in Section
15.1.3
2. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 40,000 200
3. Offshore Islands 40,000 150
Commercial per principal structure
1. Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal Areas
Exclusive of Those Areas Zoned for Commercial Fisheries
I and II and Mitchell Field Marine Business
40,000 200
2. Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal Areas Zoned
for Commercial Fisheries I and II (for Commercial Uses
Only)
NONE NONE
3. Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Tidal Areas Zoned
Mitchell Field Marine Business District for all uses
20,000 150
4. Within the Shoreland Zone Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas 60,000 300
Public and Private Recreational Facilities
1. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to Tidal and Non-Tidal
areas
40,000 200
Community Docks
23
1. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to Tidal and Non-Tidal
Areas if improved with no structure other than the
community dock
NONE * 60
*Lot area must be sufficient, as determined by the Planning Board, to accommodate parking
spaces for vehicles, vehicular circulation on the lot, loading and unloading areas, any float
storage and any access ramp.
15.1.1. The following land shall not be included in the calculation of the area of a lot for the
purposes of meeting minimum lot size or other density or dimensional requirements:
15.1.1.1 Land below the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, or tributary
stream,
15.1.1.2 Land below the HAT of a coastal wetland,
15.1.1.3 Land below the upland edge of a freshwater wetland with a contiguous area of
more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
15.1.1.4 Land which is part of a road, or a transportation right-of-way, or easement
serving more than two (2) lots, except rights-of-way or easements used exclusively for
pedestrian access, and
15.1.1.5 Land created by the filling or draining of a great pond, stream, tributary stream,
or coastal or freshwater wetland.
15.1.2. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a
separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both
sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
15.1.3. Sliding Scale: Lot frontage in the Shoreland Zone is governed by the average shore
frontage of three (3) lots to either side of the lot to be divided. Lots shall be either, not less
than, one hundred (100) feet frontage or one hundred fifty (150) feet or greater of frontage.
A 200 - 299 ft. lot (frontage) surrounded by three (3) lots on either side, averaging one hundred
forty nine (149) feet or less frontage, could be divided into lots with one hundred (100) feet
minimum shore frontage. If surrounded by three (3) lots to either side with an average of one
hundred fifty (150) feet frontage or greater, the lot could not be divided.
HENCE: If a parcel is surrounded by three (3) lots either side, averaging less than one hundred
forty nine (149) feet frontage, lot can be divided into one hundred (100) feet frontage lots. If a
parcel is surrounded by three (3) lots either side averaging greater than one hundred fifty (150)
feet frontage, lot must be divided into one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage or greater lots.
15.1.4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the
coastal wetland or upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance, shall be equal or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the
proposed use.
15.1.5. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional
commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established
24
on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit
principal structure, or use except in the Mitchell Field Marine Business District. In the
Mitchell Field Marine Business District, the lot must conform to the minimum lot area
requirement for each principal structure. In the Mitchell Field Marine Business District, the lot
must conform to the minimum shore frontage requirement, however if there is more than one
principal structure on a lot within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the HAT of the coastal
wetland, the lot must meet the minimum shore frontage requirement for each principal
structure.
15.2. Principal and Accessory Structures
Citizen’s Note: See Land Use Chart for proper permitting authority. Check definition of a
structure.
15.2.1. Setbacks. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream,
tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, and twenty-five (25) feet from all other lot lines
including a property line with any road, except as provided in subsection 15.2.1.1, 15.2.1.2 and
15.2.1.3.. In a Resource Protection District, the setback requirement shall be two hundred fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other related
objects specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements above shall
apply.
Citizen's Note: See definition of water bodies Definitions Addendum.
15.2.1.1. The great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland
setback provision shall neither apply to structures which require direct access to the water
as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls, nor to other
functionally water-dependent uses or commercial fishing related structures, or marinerelated
businesses in the Mitchell Field Marine Business District.
15.2.1.2. For piers, docks, and wharves that do not serve as community docks, the sideline
setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet. For piers, docks, and wharves that serve as
community docks, the sideline setback shall be ten (10) feet for all parcels with shared
access and twenty-five (25) feet for all parcels that do not have shared access to the pier,
dock or wharf. The Code Enforcement Officer may permit the sideline setback to be
reduced if the abutter(s) agrees in writing and it is duly recorded in Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds.
15.2.1.3. On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and
it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required great pond, stream,
tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland setbacks, and which an accessory
structure does not already exist, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a permit to place
a single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar
equipment. Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area or
eight (8) feet in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as
practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the
shoreline or tributary stream than the principal structure.
25
15.2.1.4. Seawalls and/or retaining walls which are necessary to stabilize shoreline erosion
shall not be required to meet the structure setback requirement; provided that the seawall or
retaining wall is permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A.§ 480-C, as may be amended from time to
time. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure
setback requirement; provided, however, that low retaining walls and associated fill
necessary for erosion control need not meet the structure setback requirement if the
following conditions are met:
15.2.1.4.1. The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does
not exist;
15.2.1.4.2. The wall(s) is (are) at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from
the maximum high-water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the
coastal wetland or upland edge of a freshwater wetland;
15.2.1.4.3. The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn
or is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be
stabilized with vegetative plantings;
15.2.1.4.4. The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, is no more than 24 inches;
15.2.1.4.5. Retaining walls are located outside of the one hundred (100) year
floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil
types identified as recent flood plain soils;
15.2.1.4.6. The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the
setback area, including patios and decks; and
15.2.1.4.7. A vegetated buffer area is established within twenty-five (25) feet,
horizontal distance, of the maximum high-water line of a great pond, stream, tributary
stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or upland edge of a freshwater wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following
characteristics:
15.2.1.4.7.1. The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous
vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking, the area must be supplemented
with leaf or bark mulch;
15.2.1.4.7.2. Vegetative plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion
and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
15.2.1.4.7.3. Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
26
15.2.1.4.7.4. A minimum buffer width of fifteen (15) feet, horizontal distance, is
required, measured perpendicularly to the maximum high-water line, HAT or
upland edge of a resource; and
15.2.1.4.7.5. A footpath not to exceed the standards set forth in Section 15.15.2.1 of
this Ordinance may traverse the buffer.
15.2.1.5. For principal structures, water and wetland setback measurements shall be taken
from the top of a coastal bluff that has been identified on Coastal Bluff maps as being
“highly unstable” or “unstable” by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant to its
“Classification of Coastal Bluffs” and published on the most recent Coastal Bluff map. If
the applicant and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, are in
disagreement as to the specific location of a “highly unstable” or “unstable” bluff, or where
the top of the bluff is located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ a Maine
Registered Professional Engineer, a Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State
Geologist, or other qualified individual to make a determination. If agreement is still not
reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the Board of Appeals.
15.2.1.6. In the Mitchell Field Marine Business District, all principal and accessory
structures including parking and service areas and equipment or material storage areas shall
be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the northern, eastern and southern boundaries of the
Mitchell Field Business District.
15.2.2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet in height. All expansions of principal and accessory structures that increase the
footprint of the structure shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. For any principal or
accessory structure existing as of March 10, 2007 that lawfully exceeds thirty (30) feet in
height, such structure may be expanded without the need for a variance provided that (a) the
expansion does not increase the footprint of the structure; and (b) the expansion does not
exceed the greatest height of the existing structure. Expansions of non-conforming structures
must comply with all other expansion limitations of this Ordinance. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall review any proposed expansion of a structure and shall determine, in writing,
whether the requirements of this subsection are met prior to the issuance of any permit. Any
non-residential structure exceeding twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet must apply for Site
Plan Review. This subsection does not apply to structures such as transmission towers,
windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
The height of a structure shall be determined by using the vertical distance, as measured from
halfway between the mean original grade at the downhill side of the structure and the mean
original grade at the uphill side of the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding
chimneys, steeples, antennas and similar appurtenances which have no floor area.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, cupolas or similar portions of a structure having no
floor area and exceeding any of the following dimensions (a) a side wall of sixteen (16) square
feet; (b) a side wall of four (4) feet in height; (c) sixteen (16) square feet of horizontal area; or
(d) a twelve (12) pitch roof, shall be included in the measurement of the height of a structure.
27
If the measurement cannot be made from the original grade where the structure is to be located,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall establish a reasonable approximation of original grade for
the purposes of determining height.
15.2.3. The lowest floor elevation or opening of all building and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year
flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types
identified as recent flood plain soils.
15.2.4. The total footprint area of all structures, driveways, parking lots, and other
impermeable surfaces within the Shoreland Zone shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
lot or a portion thereof, located within the Shoreland Zone, including land area previously
developed, except in the Shoreland Business, Mitchell Field Marine Business, and Commercial
Fisheries I and II Districts. In the Shoreland Business District, impermeable surface coverage
shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) for boat repair and construction facility, marina uses,
and commercial fishing uses only; the twenty percent (20%) impermeable surface coverage
limitation shall apply to all other uses that may occur in the Shoreland Business District. In the
Commercial Fisheries I District and the Mitchell Field Marine Business District, impermeable
surface coverage shall not exceed seventy percent (70%). In the Commercial Fisheries II
District, impermeable surface coverage shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) for functionally
water dependent or functionally water dependent accessory uses only; the twenty percent
(20%) impermeable surface coverage limitation shall apply to all other uses that may occur in
the CF II District.
15.2.5. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, community shoreland access, stairways
or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to
provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is
limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over
the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal
wetland or upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C, as may be amended from time to time; and that the
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
15.2.6. During the construction or reconstruction of a single-family home, a property owner
may place an accessory temporary living accommodation on the lot in conformance with this
section. Prior to installing the accessory temporary living accommodation on the lot, the
property owner must obtain a temporary certificate of compliance from the Code Enforcement
Officer. The CEO shall issue the temporary certificate of compliance only if he/she finds that
all of the provisions of this section have been met. The temporary certificate of compliance
shall be for a period of not more than twelve (12) months. The owner may apply for up to two
(2) twelve (12) month renewals of the temporary compliance permit and the CEO shall
approve such renewals only if he/she finds that the property owner is in compliance with all of
the provisions of this section.
The placement and use of the accessory temporary living accommodation shall conform to all
of the following requirements:
28
15.2.6.1. The accessory temporary living accommodation shall be a travel trailer,
recreational vehicle, tent, or other similar enclosure that is not permanently attached to the
ground.
15.2.6.2. The temporary living accommodation shall have a maximum of three hundred
(300) square feet of area that can be occupied.
15.2.6.3. The accommodation shall be used only for the temporary living quarters of the
property owner and her/his immediate family while construction is in progress on the
home.
15.2.6.4. The temporary living accommodation shall be located on the lot in full
conformance with the shoreland and property line setbacks.
15.2.6.5. The temporary living accommodation shall not be located on any type of
permanent foundation and if the accommodation is a travel trailer, recreational vehicle, or
similar mobile enclosure with integral wheels, the wheels shall remain on the vehicle while
it is on the lot.
15.2.6.6. The owner shall prepare a written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed
method and location of provisions for sewage disposal. The plan must be approved by the
local plumbing inspector. When disposal is off-site, written authorization from the
receiving facility or land owner is required.
A property owner who has been issued a temporary certificate of compliance for the placement
of an accessory temporary living accommodation on the lot shall remove the temporary living
accommodation within fifteen (15) days of being notified by the CEO in writing that the use is
not in compliance with the standards and/or that the temporary certificate of compliance has
expired, or shall disconnect the unit from all permanent utilities and sewage disposal
provisions within fifteen (15) days of receiving a certificate of compliance for the new or
replacement home. Failure to remove the accessory temporary living accommodation or
disconnect it from all permanent utilities and sewage disposal provisions as required shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance subject to the penalties described in Section 13.6 of the
Basic Land Use Ordinance in accordance with Section 16. Administration.
15.3. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges, And Other Structures And Uses Extending Over Or
Below The Maximum High Water Line Of a Great Pond, Stream, Tributary Stream, HAT
of the Coastal Wetland Or Within a Freshwater Wetland.
15.3.1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed
so as to control erosion.
15.3.2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
15.3.3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse affects on fisheries.
15.3.4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and
be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area.
15.3.4.1. Non-commercial, private piers, docks and wharves shall have a maximum width
of 6 feet and shall not extend below the low water line (not including ramps and floats).
29
15.3.4.2. Commercial piers, docks and wharves shall be limited to twelve (12) feet in
width. The width of larger projects shall be justified by the applicant and approved by the
Planning Board.
15.3.4.3. The maximum width of community docks is as set forth in Section 15.23 of
this Ordinance.
15.3.5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock, or other
structure extending beyond the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary
stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or within a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of
this Ordinance. Commercial fishing structures requiring direct access to the water as an
operational necessity are allowed.
15.3.6. No existing structure built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure
extending beyond the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT
of the coastal wetland or within a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance
shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
15.3.7. Except in the Commercial Fisheries I District, structures built on, over or abutting a
pier, wharf, dock, or other structure extending beyond the maximum high water line of a great
pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or within a freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the
pier, wharf, dock, or other structure.
Citizens Note: Permanent structures projecting into or over water bodies shall require a
permit from the Department of Environmental protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C, as may be amended from time to time, and from the Army
Corp of Engineers.
15.3.8. No new wharf, pier, dock, and/or float shall be constructed on a lot shown on a
recorded subdivision plan that has deeded rights of access to a wharf, pier, dock, and/or float;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may authorize a new community dock within that
subdivision pursuant to Section 15.23 of this Ordinance if the applicant can demonstrate that
the new community dock will significantly improve access to a wharf, pier, dock, and/or float
for at least one-third of the lots within the subdivision and protect natural resources from
overdevelopment.
15.3.9. New permanent piers and docks on non-tidal waters shall not be allowed unless it is
clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a
permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the
Natural Resources Protection Act pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38
M.R.S.A. § 480-C, as may be amended from time to time.
15.4. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing
procedures, Harpswell’s Site Plan Review Ordinance, and the following:
15.4.1. The total land area of the campground in square feet, not including roads and
driveways, must equal the number of campsites times five thousand (5,000). Land below the
30
maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland
or within a freshwater wetland shall not be included in calculating total land area.
Campsites within the Shoreland Zone, either in whole or in part, shall contain at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet. Campsites with shore frontage must have a minimum of fifty
(50) feet of shore frontage.
Campsites located outside of the Shoreland Zone shall contain at least one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
15.4.2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter, and utility
buildings, or service buildings shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the
maximum high water line of a great pond,, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal
wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in section 3 of this Ordinance;
and twenty-five (25) feet from campground property lines.
15.5. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with
campgrounds are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
15.5.1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of lot area within the Shoreland Zone, whichever is less, may be
permitted.
15.5.2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or
tent platform, shall be set back seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the maximum
high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance; and twenty-five
(25) feet, horizontal distance, from any individual private campsite property line.
15.5.3. Only one Recreation Vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. Recreational vehicles
shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no
structure(s) except canopies shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
15.5.4. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent, or similar
shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1,000) square feet.
15.5.5. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each campsite and must be approved by the local plumbing
inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
15.5.6. An individual private campsite shall not be utilized for the placement of any
recreational vehicle(s), tent(s), or similar shelter(s) for more than one hundred twenty (120)
days in any calendar year. This one hundred twenty (120) day limitation applies to all
individual private campsites whether or not they have been utilized prior to effective date of
this amendment. Placement of any recreational vehicle(s), tent(s) or similar shelter(s) on an
individual private campsite for more than one hundred twenty (120) days in any calendar year
requires compliance with all requirements of this Ordinance applicable to a dwelling, including
the installation of a subsurface wastewater disposal system in compliance with the Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. This Section does not prohibit the storage of an
31
unoccupied recreational vehicle, tent, or similar shelter on land other than an individual private
campsite.
15.5.7. No recreational vehicle, tent, or similar shelter may be occupied unless it is located: (1)
in a campground allowed under Section 15.4; (2) on an individual private campsite allowed
pursuant to Section 15.5; or (3) on the same lot as a dwelling and used for no more than one
hundred twenty (120) days in a calendar year, by the residents of the dwelling or their guests.
15.6. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within two hundred fifty (250) feet horizontal distance of the maximum high water
line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance; in the Mitchell Field Marine
Business District and in any other portion of the Shoreland Zone:
1. Auto washing facilities
2. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers other than
amounts normally associated with individual households or farms
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping except painting in
boat building - boat repair facilities
6. Dry cleaning establishments
7. Electronic circuit assembly
8. Laundromats
9. Electro plating, finishing, or polishing
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property
as use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas, boat repair
facilities, and commercial fishing operations
11. Photographic processing
12. Printing
15.7. Parking Areas. This section applies when an area is developed for one thousand (1,000)
square feet or more of parking.
15.7.1. Parking areas shall meet the Shoreland setback requirements for structures for the
district in which such areas are located, except that:
15.7.1.1. The setback requirement for parking areas in the Commercial Fisheries I District
may be reduced to no less than twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the
maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal
wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this ordinance
if the Code Enforcement Officer determines that no reasonable alternative exists, and
15.7.1.2. The setback requirements for parking areas serving public boat launching
facilities, in districts other than the Commercial Fisheries I District may be reduced to no
less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, from the maximum high water line of a great
pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal or upland edge of a wetland described in
Section 3 of this ordinance if the Code Enforcement Officer finds that no other reasonable
alternative exists.
32
15.7.2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to
minimize runoff and erosion. Where feasible, runoff will be retained on site and prevented
from flowing directly into a great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater
wetland.
15.8. Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads
and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
15.8.1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of
the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance, unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may reduce the
road and/or driveway setback requirement to no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance,
upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater
wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins,
and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid
sedimentation of the great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater
wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty percent (20%) the road and/or driveway setback shall be
increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five percent (5%) increase in slope
above twenty percent (20%). This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water
crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities
located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
15.8.1.1. Section 15.8.1 does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or
driveways that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the
shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding docks for recreational
uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area
shall comply fully with the requirements of Section 15.8.1 except for that portion of the road
or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
15.8.2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of
its setback from a great pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
15.8.3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that
the Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to
permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning
Board upon finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the
district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road
and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the maximum high-water line of a
great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or upland edge of a
freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
15.8.4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a fifty percent (50%) slope and shall
be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in Subsection 15.16.
33
15.8.5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten percent (10%) except for short
segments of less than two hundred (200) feet.
15.8.6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering a great
pond, stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland, roads and driveways
shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least
fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, plus two (2) times the average slope, in width between the
outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream,
tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or upland edge of a freshwater wetland described
in Section 3 of this Ordinance. Surface drainage that is directed to an unscarified buffer strip
shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize
channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
15.8.7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed
in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following shall apply:
15.8.7.1. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced
along the road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
15.8.7.2. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the road
grade is ten percent (10%) or less.
34
15.8.7.3. On sections having slopes greater than ten percent (10%), ditch relief culverts shall
be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle down slope from a line perpendicular to
the centerline of the road or driveway.
15.8.7.4. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to
allow for effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with
appropriate materials.
15.8.8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
15.9. Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection,
Shoreland Residential, Mitchell Field Marine Business, and Shoreland Business Districts, in
addition to the Harpswell Sign Ordinance. The more stringent provisions shall apply. A permit
must be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
15.9.1. Display signs relating to a business or to goods and services sold on the premises shall
be allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and shall
not exceed two (2) signs per premises. Billboards and signs relating to goods or services not
sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
15.9.2. Name signs shall be allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premise and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
15.9.3. Residential users may display a single sign not over five (5) square feet in area relating
to the sale of the premises.
15.9.4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to
number, provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
15.9.5. Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
15.9.6. No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
15.9.7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights. In the Mitchell Field
Business District, the shielding must prevent the light source from being seen from the water.
15.10. Storm Water Runoff
15.10.1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water
runoff from the site in excess of the natural pre-development conditions. Where possible,
existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall
be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwater.
15.10.2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
35
15.11. Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
15.11.1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be permitted and installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the
following:
15.11.1.1. Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any
associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the maximum high-water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT
of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of
this Ordinance and
15.11.1.2. A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland
zone.
15.11.2. All new, replacement, renovated or expanded structures or uses generating waste,
shall provide evidence of the type specified in 13.3.4. of the Basic Land Use Ordinance that an
adequate wastewater disposal system can be constructed or that an adequate waste water
disposal system already exists.
15.11.3. Existing use - continuation of use: The use of any legal system which exists on the
effective date of this ordinance, or which had previously been approved for installation, may be
continued without change except as may be specifically covered by the Maine State Plumbing
Code or deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector, for the general safety and welfare of the
occupants and the public.
15.11.4. Change in use - it shall be unlawful to make any change in the use of any system, or
to erect, enlarge, or change the use of a structure that uses an existing system without the
approval of the plumbing inspector and certification that such change does not result in any
hazard to public health, safety, and welfare.
15.11.5. The minimum setback for new subsurface sewage disposal fields shall be not less than
one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the maximum high-water line of a great pond, stream,
tributary stream, HAT of the coastal wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland
described in Section 3 of this Ordinance. The minimum setback distances from a great pond,
stream, tributary stream, coastal wetland or freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance for new subsurface sewage disposal fields shall not be reduced by variance.
15.11.6. Replacement systems shall meet the standards for replacement systems as contained in
the Rules.
15.11.7. The owner of the proposed system may locate the system or components partially on
property not owned or controlled by the owner of the system, provided that the owner of the
property where the system is to be located executes an easement in perpetuity for the
construction, operation, replacement, and maintenance of the system, giving the system’s
owner authorization to cross any land or right-of-way between the two parcels. The easement
shall be filed and cross-referenced in the Registry of Deeds and the Codes Enforcement Office
prior to issuance of a disposal system permit. The easement shall provide sufficient buffer
around the disposal field and fill material extensions for future replacement and maintenance of
the system.
36
Citizen’s Note: The Town recommends that all new and replacement system owners install lowflow
flushes and shower heads.
15.12. Utilities and Essential Services
15.12.1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public
ways and existing service corridors and above ground facilities must be located so as to avoid
crossing open areas and scenic views as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
15.12.2. The installation of essential services other than road side distribution lines is not
allowed in a Resource Protection Zone, except to provide services to a permitted use within
said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists.
Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse
impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
15.12.3. No public utility, or utility company of any kind, may install services to any new
structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and
currency of all local permits required under this or any previous ordinance has been issued by
the appropriate municipal officials. Following installation of service, the company or district
shall forward the written authorization to the municipal officials, indicating that installation has
been completed.
15.12.4. Damaged or destroyed public utility distribution and transmission lines, towers, and
related equipment may be replaced without a permit. When replacement does occur, the
damaged or destroyed public utility line, towers, and related equipment shall be removed
within one (1) year.
15.12.5. Utilities in the Mitchell Field Marine Business District shall be installed underground
unless the Planning Board finds as part of a subdivision or site plan review that underground
installation is not feasible due to site or soil conditions or the nature of the utility.
15.13. Agriculture
15.13.1. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the
Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on
November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201-4209, as may be
amended from time to time).
15.13.2 Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one (100) feet horizontal distance of
the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal
wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
All manure storage areas within the Shoreland Zone must be constructed or modified such that
the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated stormwater.
15.13.3. New agricultural activities, not in existence before adoption of this Ordinance
involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in surface area, or the
spreading, disposal or storage of manure within the Shoreland Zone shall require a Soil and
Water Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance.
37
Citizens Note: Assistance in preparing a soil and water conservation plan may be available
through the Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District office.
15.13.4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from a great pond, stream, tributary stream or coastal wetland; or within twenty-five (25) feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance. Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained.
15.13.5. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, and coastal wetland;
within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3
of this ordinance. Livestock grazing associated with on going farm activities, and which are not
in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is
conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
15.14. Timber Harvesting [Removed March 14, 2015]
15.15. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities other than Timber Harvesting
15.15.1. In a Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be limited
to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
15.15.2. Except in areas described in Section 15.15.1 and except to allow for the development
of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, HAT of the coastal
wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance, a
buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
15.15.2.1. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in the forest canopy (or existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present)
as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six
(6) feet in width as measured between tree trunks, and/or shrub stems is permitted provided
that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer is not created.
15.15.2.2. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a well
distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation, including existing ground cover,
shall be maintained. For the purposes of this section a "well-distributed stand of trees”
adjacent to a water body, tributary stream, or a wetland described in Section 3 of this
Ordinance, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of sixteen (16) or more in any
twenty-five by fifty (25x50) foot square area (1,250 square feet) as determined by the
following rating system:
38
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet
Above Ground Level (inches) Points
2 - <4" 1
4 - <8" 2
8 - <12” 4
12" or greater 8
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
15.15.2.2.1. The twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular plots must be
established where the landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
15.15.2.2.2. Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
15.15.2.2.3. Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation
removed except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
15.15.2.2.4. Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed
down to the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
15.15.2.2.5. Where conditions permit, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the points on
any twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater
than twelve (12) inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15.15.2.2, “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining
at least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½)
feet above ground level for each twenty-five (25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangle area.
If five (5) saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter
can be removed until five (5) saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty percent (40%) of the total
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one half (4-
1/2) feet above ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year period.
In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3)
feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall
not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted
uses as described in this section.
Pruning of dead tree branches on the bottom one-third (1/3) of trees is permitted.
In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these
openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is
present.
39
Alternative plans in compliance with State of Maine Laws, developed by a licensed
Maine Forester, may be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
The provisions contained in paragraph 2 above do not apply to those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are
limited to the minimum area necessary.
15.15.3. At distance greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the
maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, the HAT of the coastal
wetland or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland described in Section 3 of this Ordinance,
there shall be permitted on any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more
than forty percent (40%) of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured
four and one half (4-1/2) feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the
development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty percent (40%) calculation. For the
purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared opening for development, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate,
twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is
greater, including land previously developed. This provision shall not apply to the Commercial
Fisheries I and II Districts and Shoreland Business District when for a commercial use.
An alternative plan in accordance with Maine laws signed by a licensed Maine Forester may be
presented to the Planning Board for approval.
15.15.4. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this ordinance may be
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by this ordinance.
15.15.5. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall
be regulated under the provisions of this section.
15.15.6. The clearing or removal of vegetation in the Commercial Fishing I and II Districts
within the buffer strip may be allowed, provided that the clearing or removal of vegetation is
necessary for a principal commercial fishing use located on the parcel and the primary income
for the landowner or lessee is derived from the same principal commercial fishing use.
15.16. Earthmoving, Erosion, and Sedimentation Control
15.16.1. All activities that require a permit and involve filling, grading, excavation or other
similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions shall require a written soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for
approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
15.16.1.1. Mulching and re-vegetation of disturbed soil.
15.16.1.2. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing, or diversion
ditches.
15.16.1.3. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap. Permanent
stabilization structures permitted by this section must be approved in advance, in writing,
40
by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be no larger than necessary to stabilize the area.
No retaining wall shall be approved if there is an alternative method of stabilization
available.
Citizens Note: The above does not apply to normal maintenance of existing private roads
and driveways. Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies may be
minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of the “Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices”, dated March
1991. A copy is on file in the Code Enforcement Office. Additional copies may be obtained
from the Maine Dept. of Environmental Protection or the Cumberland County Soil and
Water Conservation District.
15.16.2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development should be designed to fit
with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely
as possible.
15.16.3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity.
The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the
potential for erosion.
15.16.4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily stabilized by use of riprap, sod, seed,
and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within
one (1) year of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
15.16.4.1. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five
hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
15.16.4.2. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may
be required to maintain the mulch cover.
15.16.4.3. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation
into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
15.16.5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and constructed in
order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with
vegetation or lined with riprap.
15.17. Soils. All land uses shall be located on or upon soils in which proposed uses or structures
can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including
severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during, on,
or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or
industrial development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a soils report based in
an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may
include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, and Maine
State Certified Geologists. The report shall include an analysis of the characteristics of the soil
and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge,
41
drainage conditions, and other pertinent data that the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils
report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where
they exist.
15.18. Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the water
of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances will
impair designated uses or the water classification of a great pond, stream, tributary stream,
coastal wetland or freshwater wetland,
No activity shall locate, store, discharge or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated, or
inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness,
toxicity, or temperature that run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters so as
to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances.
15.19. Archeological and Historic Sites. All proposed land use activities shall be designed to
protect archeological and historic sites that have been identified in the Town’s Comprehensive
Plan, or by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission or the National Park Service. Any
proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to
sites listed on, or determined by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission to be eligible to be
listed on, the National Register of Historic Places shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment at least twenty (20) business
days prior to action being taken by the applicable permitting authority; provided, however, that
the Code Enforcement Officer may, in the event of an emergency as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, take appropriate action to allow only such limited land use activity as is
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare in order to cure the emergency
situation. The Town permitting authority shall consider comments received from the
Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
15.20. Home Occupations. Home occupations are allowed in all zoning districts. Those home
occupations that provide public restrooms or showers or that serve food to the public need a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. In all cases, the home occupation will be in
compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. Except for home
occupations related to commercial fishing, all home occupations, regardless of whether they are
located within the Shoreland Zone, are subject to the performance standards of this section.
15.20.1. Any home occupation that involves a prohibited activity or use listed in Section 15.6
of this ordinance shall be prohibited.
15.20.2. A home occupation shall be accessory to a residential use and clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling unit.
15.20.3. Except for family and group day care homes, and bed and breakfast home
occupations, no home occupation shall be located in more than one structure nor shall any one
or more home occupation utilize more than twenty-five (25%) of the gross floor area of the
dwelling (excluding basement floor areas) if located in the dwelling or more than nine hundred
(900) square feet of gross floor area of the accessory structure if located in an accessory
structure.
42
15.20.4. Any home occupation must be carried on by a resident or occupants of the dwelling
unit. In addition to the resident or occupants of the dwelling unit, no more than two (2) full
time employees, or part-time employees’ equivalent to two (2) full time employees, may be
employed in the home occupation. In Resource Protection districts within the Shoreland Zone,
no more than one (1) full time employee, or that number of part-time employees required to do
the work of one (1) full time employee, may be employed in the home occupation.
15.20.5. A home occupation shall not create a nuisance through generation of objectionable
conditions such as noise, smoke, dust, odors, accumulation of animal waste, glare, or other
nuisance conditions.
15.20.6. In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal requirements of the
dwelling, adequate off street parking shall be provided for the vehicles of each employee and
the maximum number of users the home occupation may attract during peak operating hours.
Parking areas beyond those needed for the residential use shall be designed to minimize runoff
and erosion. Where feasible runoff will be retained on site and prevented from flowing
directly onto a neighboring property or into a water body.
15.20.7. A home occupation shall not generate substantially greater traffic volumes than would
normally be expected in the neighborhood.
15.20.8. A home occupation may not generate special or hazardous waste in amounts larger
than those normally associated with the residential use of the property.
15.20.9. A home occupation shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and
surrounding residential uses.
15.20.10. Except for home occupations related to commercial fishing, Planning Board review
and approval is required for home occupations in a Resource Protection District unless the
home occupation:
a) is carried on entirely within the residential dwelling unit on the property,
b) has no employees other than the occupants of the dwelling unit,
c) has no retail sales,
d) generates no additional traffic than would normally be associated with the residential
use of the property, and
e) generates no special or hazardous wastes, as defined under Maine law.
15.21. Fertilizer Use
The use of fertilizers is regulated by the Outdoor Pesticides Control and Fertilizer Use
Ordinance.
15.22. "In-Law" Apartments. An apartment for a relative related by blood, marriage or
adoption to the record owner(s) of the property may be added to any dwelling unit provided that
(a) the property is owner-occupied; (b) a building permit is obtained; (c) all of the requirements
of this Ordinance, with the exception of shore frontage, road frontage, and minimum lot size, are
met; and (d) all requirements of the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules in accordance
with 22 M.R.S.A. § 42, as may be amended from time to time, are met. The immediate removal
of the “in-law” apartment shall be required upon discontinued use or occupation of the “in-law”
43
apartment by the above-qualified relative of the record owner(s). The record owner(s) shall be
responsible for informing the Code Enforcement Office when such use or occupation is
discontinued. The record owner(s) shall annually register with the Code Enforcement Officer the
legal name, mailing address and relationship to the record owner(s) of the relative occupying the
“in-law” apartment and shall maintain a certificate of compliance with the Code Enforcement
Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to inspect all “in-law” apartments to
ensure compliance with this section.
15.23. Community Piers, Docks and Wharves
15.23.1. Community piers, docks and wharves shall have a maximum width of 6 feet and
shall not extend below the mean low water mark (not including ramps and floats). The
proposed community pier, dock or wharf shall not otherwise prohibit or unreasonably impede
legitimate passage along a beach or through navigation over the waters for recreational or
aquacultural purposes.
15.23.2. For community piers, docks, and wharves located wholly within a subdivision, the
sideline setbacks shall be ten (10) feet. For community piers, docks and wharves that abut a
parcel located outside of the subdivision, the sideline setback from that adjoining parcel shall
be increased to twenty-five (25) feet. The Planning Board may permit the sideline setback to
be reduced if the abutter(s) agree in writing and it is duly recorded in Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds.
15.23.3. The applicant shall provide sufficient legal documentation to demonstrate right, title
or interest in the location of the community pier, dock or wharf and that the community pier,
dock or wharf will remain as a community pier, dock or wharf for the life of any such
community pier, dock or wharf. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board the
proposed easement deed or declaration of protective covenants demonstrating that permanent
access and maintenance rights shall be granted to the parties sharing the use of the
community pier, dock or wharf, which shall be reviewed by the Town Attorney as to form.
Upon approval by the Planning Board, the easement deed or declaration of protective
covenants shall be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds prior to the
issuance of any building permit for the community pier, dock or wharf.
15.23.4. An area where the float(s), if any, will be stored shall be designated on the plan.
15.23.5. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the number of lots to be served by the
community pier, dock or wharf, with a minimum of one parking space for every three noncommon
open space lots within the subdivision to be served by the community pier, dock or
wharf. Parking areas shall be designed to minimize runoff and erosion. Where feasible,
runoff will be retained on site and prevented from flowing directly into the coastal wetland,
stream, tributary stream, or freshwater wetland.
15.23.6. The design and construction shall not interfere with recreational intertidal lateral
access.
15.23.7. The landward approach to a community pier, dock, or wharf shall minimize harm to
vegetation on a coastal wetland, freshwater wetland or coastal bank.
44
15.24. Swimming Pools. All swimming pools, as that term is defined in 22 M.R.S.A. § 1631(2),
shall comply with the fence enclosure requirements set forth in 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 1631-1632, as
may be amended from time to time. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 16. ADMINISTRATION
This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced in accordance with Sections 12, 13, and 14 of
the Town's Basic Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time, and the
Definitions Addendum, as may be amended from time to time.
1
HARPSWELL SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE
Adopted March 18, 1989 ARTICLE #55
AMENDED March 11, 1995 ARTICLE #14
AMENDED March 10, 2007 ARTICLE #28
AMENDED March 12, 2011 ARTICLE #11
AMENDED March 9, 2013 Article #10
1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety and general well-being of the citizens of
Harpswell; enhance and maintain the quality of the environment; conserve natural resources and
prevent water and air pollution.
This ordinance also provides for a comprehensive and rational means of minimizing and regulating the
disposal of solid waste within the Town of Harpswell. Harpswell recycles and transfers solid waste.
2. DEFINITIONS
As used in the following sections, these words have the following meanings:
2-1 Agricultural Waste means waste that results from agricultural activities (including but not limited to
the growing of vegetables, fruits, seeds, nursery crops, poultry, livestock, field crops, cultivated or
pasture hay, and farmlot wood products, including Christmas trees) and that are returned to the
soils as fertilizer. It includes waste pesticides when generated by a farmer, provided that the farmer
triple rinses each emptied pesticides container in accordance with Departmental rules and disposes
of the pesticide residues in a manner consistent with the disposal instructions on the pesticide label.
2-2 Business means any entity performing a service or selling food or other goods.
2-3 Commercial Hauler means any hauler that is compensated for hauling solid waste or that hauls
commercially generated solid waste including demolition and construction debris and restaurant
waste. Persons hauling solid waste for apartment buildings, private homes, motels, holes and inns,
and any and all business shall be considered commercial haulers.
2-4 Commercial Waste means any solid waste that is generated by stores, offices, restaurants,
warehouses, and other non-manufacturing, non-processing activities. Commercial waste does not
include household, process, industrial or special wastes.
2-5 Contractor means any person who agrees with another to undertake special work according to price,
specifications and terms agreed on including those engaged in the construction, alteration or repair
of buildings or other structures, sidewalks or driveway pavements and those engaged in lawn
maintenance, landscaping, plowing and moving.
2
2-6 Demolition and construction debris means lumber, bricks, masonry, asphalt, shingles, insulation and
all other similar materials. It does not include asbestos.
2-7 Electronic waste means an electronic device containing circuit boards, capacitors, resistors or
transistors.
2-8 Facility means the Recycling Center and Transfer Station owned and operated by the Town of
Harpswell.
2-9 Household refuse means refuse commonly generated by usual domestic activities. It does not
include material defined as demolition and construction debris, furniture, white goods or tires.
2-10 Person means any individual, association, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity or their
agents.
2-11 Process waste means that waste which is generated in the process of reducing the volume of, or
changing the chemical or physical characteristics of solid waste.
2-12 Recyclable materials means solid waste that has useful physical or chemical properties and can be
reused or recycled for the same or other purposes. Recyclable material includes newspapers;
magazines; paperboard; paper products; cardboard; plastics; metal; foil; and glass.
2-13 Resident means any person who is domiciled within the Town of Harpswell or within any town that
may be a party to a solid waste agreement with the Town of Harpswell. It shall include persons who
may own, rent or lease a single-family unit seasonally.
2-14 Restaurant waste means solid waste generated by restaurants, commercial dining facilities and
ready-to-eat food vending establishments.
2-15 Solid Waste means useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to
be free flowing, including but not limited to rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse and
construction and demolition debris. It does not include septic or agricultural waste.
2-16 Special Waste, means any material that, by nature of the physical quantity or condition, or any
combination thereof, may disrupt or impair effective waste management or threaten public health
and may require special handling, transportation and disposal procedures.
2-17 White Goods means refrigerators, stoves, freezers, washing machines, cloths dryers, air
conditioners and other large, predominantly metal household appliances.
2-18 Wood Waste means brush, stumps, lumber, bark, wood chips, shavings, slabs, edgings, slash,
sawdust and wood from production rejects, that are not mixed with other solid or liquid waste. For
the purposes of this definition, “lumber” is entirely made of wood and is free from metal, plastics
and coatings.
3
2-19 Yard Waste means grass clippings, leaves, and other vegetal matter other than wood wastes and
land clearing debris.
3. ADMINISTRATION
3-1 Rules and regulations: The Selectmen shall establish the fees, rules and regulations required for the
municipality to conform to the standards and requirements set forth in the ordinance, subject to
any requirements for public hearings. Rules and regulations shall conform to all pertinent
regulations or directives of all local, county, state and federal agencies which may have jurisdiction.
The Town Administrator, Recycling Center Manager, and other persons designated by the Town
Administrator or Recycling Center Manager have the authority to ensure compliance with the rules
established by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and
recommend fines as established by the Board of Selectmen.
4. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND FEES
4-1 Permit required: Any resident or property owner disposing of solid waste at the facility shall be
required to obtain an annual permit from the Town Office or Recycling Center at no cost. Proof of
residency or property ownership is required at time of issuance of permit. The Recycling Center
Manager and/or the designated representative has the authority to refuse service to those residents
who do not have a permit.
4-2 Commercial Permits: Any commercial hauler disposing of solid waste at the facility shall be required
to obtain a permit from the Recycling Center Manager on an annual basis. Commercial haulers must
certify that he/she is depositing only waste from Harpswell residents or businesses. The commercial
hauler must also certify that restaurant wastes, animal wastes and electronic wastes are not being
deposited in the household waste compactors. Such items must be transported to the Transfer
Station and appropriate fees assessed. The Commercial Hauler must certify that the hauler’s
operation is in compliance with the provisions established in the Commercial Trash Haulers Rules
established by the Board of Selectmen.
4-3 Permit displayed: The disposal permit must be attached to a vehicle in a conspicuous place to gain
access to the facility.
4-4 Permit fees: The Selectmen shall set fees for the following permits:
4-4-1 Commercial Haulers
4-4-2 Contractors
4-4-3 Businesses (not serviced by commercial haulers)
4-5 Load Fees: The Selectmen shall set fees for the following:
4-5-1 A Per-Load fee, separated or unseparated, for brush, construction and demolition debris,
commercial waste.
4
4-5-2 A per-gallon charge for waste oil
4-5-3 Tires
4-5-4 White Goods
4-5-5 Storage Batteries
4-5-6 Electronic Waste
4-5-7 Separated/Unseparated Household Waste
4-5-8 Other Items
4-5-9 Metal
4-5-10 A Per-Load Fee, separated or unseparated, of any combination of the above items.
5. DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS
5-1 Responsibility: It is the responsibility of each resident to provide proper disposal of all solid waste
generated on his/her premises in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
5-2 Separation of solid waste: To reduce costs associated with disposal of solid waste, the Town of
Harpswell requires separation of solid waste delivered to the facility by residential users and
commercial haulers. Any solid waste that is not separated according to the requirements of this
section shall be subject to the penalties for unseparated trash set forth in section 9.
5-2-1 Where ambiguity exists (as is the case of Special Wastes) the Recycling Center Manager has the
authority to determine the proper disposal methods.
5-2-3 Subject to inspection: All materials presented at the facility shall be subject to inspection prior to
disposal to determine proper disposal methods and ensure that unacceptable materials are not
received. The inspector shall make himself/herself known to the resident or commercial hauler.
The inspector may open bags or other objects containing solid waste to examine the contents for
recyclable materials, hazardous materials or unaccepted materials and to determine the nature of
contents and ensure waste materials are delivered to the proper facility and/or location. All
disposed material is considered to be the property of the Town of Harpswell.
5-2-4 Recyclable materials: It is the intent of the Town of Harpswell to recycle waste as the primary step
in responsible waste management, before resorting to other disposal methods. All residents and
businesses shall recycle waste to the greatest extent practical in order to reduce the disposal cost
and environmental impact of solid waste. It shall be the responsibility of each household,
governmental and commercial establishment to separate and prepare recyclable materials from all
other types of waste, and to see that these materials are transported to the facility. A current list of
acceptable recyclable materials is available at the Town Office, Recycling Center Office and on the
Town’s Website. The list is subject to change as a result of industry standards, state/federal
5
regulations and market capability changes. The Recycling Center Manager is responsible to ensure
the list is maintained and updated regularly.
5-3 Commercial waste requirements: Commercial haulers are responsible for ensuring that solid waste
they delivery to the facility is drained of liquid, properly separated and meets all requirements of
this ordinance.
5-4 Delivery of wastes: All wastes delivered to the facility must be transported in a manner to prevent
littering.
5-5 Disposal only at facility: No person shall dispose of solid waste of any kind anywhere within the
limits of the Town of Harpswell except at the facility. This does not include wood waste or yard
waste.
5-6 The Compactor System at the Recycling Center is for the disposal of household waste only. Solid
waste generated by businesses and commercial entities, delivered by the same business or
commercial entity itself or through a commercial hauler as defined herein, shall be disposed through
the Transfer Station and all assessed fees shall be paid. This paragraph does not apply to
commercial haulers delivering household waste as defined herein.
6. RECYCLING CENTER AND TRANSFER STATION OPERATIONS
6-1 Hours: The hours of operation for the facility shall be set by the Selectmen.
6-2 Access: Access to the facility shall be only during the hours of operation unless upon express
permission from the Selectmen.
6-3 Disposal: Wastes shall be disposed in separate designated areas.
6-4 Scavenging: No person may remove any article or object, which has been disposed at the facility
without permission of the Recycling Center Manager or designee. All such items removed shall be noted
by date, resident, and item on log sheets located at the Transfer Station scale house or the Recycling
Center Office.
7. UNACCEPTABLE WASTE
7-1 Waste Originating out of town: Only wastes generated within the boundaries of the Town of
Harpswell and properly sorted will be accepted at the facility. It is illegal to dispose of wastes originating
from another municipality at the facility.
7-2 Unacceptable categories: The following categories of wastes will not be accepted at the facility.
This list is subject to changes concurrent with state and federal regulations. The Recycling Center Staff
shall provide guidance regarding the proper disposal of the below listed materials.
7-2-1 Hazardous wastes as defined by 38 M.R.S.A. § 1303-C, as may be amended
7-2-2 Medical or infectious wastes as defined by the State of Maine.
6
7-2-3 Explosives, including bullets and gunpowder, shotgun shells, marine and road flares, fireworks,
firecrackers. Compressed gas cylinders containing propane, oxygen, acetylene and other flammable
gases, unless they are emptied and the valves opened.
7-2-4 Sewage treatment and septic tank residues.
7-2-5 Animal and agricultural wastes in large quantities (as determined by the facility manager).
7-2-6 Radioactive materials
7-2-7 Automobiles
7-2-8 Dead Animals
7-2-9 Gasoline, Kerosene, Diesel Fuel, grease, bilge water and Antifreeze.
7-2-10 Heating Oil Tanks, unless they are drained and cut in half before being accepted.
7-2-11 Ash. Ash from fireplaces, stoves, burned houses, brush piles, other structures or other
burned materials.
7-3 Wet Wastes: Solid waste that is not sufficiently drained of liquid when delivered to the facility will
not be accepted.
8. HOME STORAGE AND DISPOSAL
8-1 Storage: All residents must ensure that solid waste stored on their premises does not create a
nuisance.
8-2 Composting: While solid waste generated in households and commercial establishments should be
taken to the facility for recycling and ultimate disposal, home composting of kitchen wastes, yard and
garden wastes and other organic materials is encouraged.
9. PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIAL ACTION
9-1 Violations: The Selectmen shall review any alleged violation of this ordinance or rules established by
the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and take appropriate action
as required. The Selectmen shall institute any necessary proceedings to enforce this ordinance.
9-2 Enforcement: Enforcement for this ordinance is the responsibility of Law Enforcement Officers for
the Town of Harpswell and the Selectmen.
9-3 Penalties:
9-3-1 Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall subject to a civil
penalty in an amount not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, except the minimum
penalty for a second offense within a twelve month period shall not be less than $ 100. A
commercial hauler which is found to be in violation for a second time within a twelve month period
7
shall also have its license revoked by the Selectmen for a period of not less than three months. A
third offense shall result in permit revocation.
9-3-2 Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a
separate offense.
9-3-3 All civil penalties shall accrue to the Town of Harpswell.
9-3-4 Remedial Action: All persons found in violation of this ordinance are responsible for any
remedial action and clean-up costs incurred by the Town. Remedial action must proceed in a timely
fashion upon notification by the Selectmen.
10. CONSTRUCTION
10-1 Severability: The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any section, subsection, sentence,
provision or part of this ordinance is held invalid, or unconstitutional, the remaining provision of this
ordinance shall not be affected or impaired.
10-2 Supersession: This ordinance supersedes and replaces all similar or comparable ordinances, policies
or decisions previously enacted within the municipality and will remain in effect until revoked or
superseded by action of the voters the municipality.
10-3 Amendments: the Selectmen shall propose any amendments to this ordinance to the voters of
Harpswell at a town meeting. Approval of any amendments, revision, or deletions rests exclusively with
the voters of the municipality.
1. Purpo
This ord
his/her p
not crea
2. Defin
A
o
B
m
C
e
D
w
o
E
§4
3. Regis
All spo
Enforcem
of this o
after the
registere
Sp
ose
dinance is in
property p
te a nuisan
nitions
A. Sport Sho
r other sim
B. Firearm: A
may be ame
C. Rimfire A
dge of the b
D. Automat
which is cap
ne mechan
E. Black Pow
42-A as it m
tration Req
ort shootin
ment Office
ordinance s
e adoption
ed prior to
T
port Sh
ntended to
rovided tha
ce for neigh
ooting Rang
milar shootin
Any weapo
nded from
Arms: Firear
base of the
ic Firearm:
pable of disc
nical action
wder Guns:
may be ame
quired
ng ranges
er. Any sp
shall be reg
n of this or
its use.
Town o
hooting
Enacted
allow a pro
at it is desi
hboring pro
ge: An area
ng sports an
on that is de
time to tim
rms which
cartridge ca
A weapon
charging a
on the trigg
: Firearms
ended from
shall be
port shootin
gistered pri
rdinance.
f Harp
g Rang
d March 9, 2
operty own
igned and
operty own
a designed a
nd the shoo
efined as a
me.
use cartrid
ase.
n of any des
number of
ger or firing
that are def
m time to tim
registered
ng range ex
or to its us
Any prop
pswell
ge Ordi
2019
ner to have
operated in
ners.
and used fo
oting of rifle
firearm in
ges that ha
scription, by
projectiles
g mechanis
fined as mu
me.
with Tow
xisting as o
se and no l
posed sport
inance
a sport sho
n a safe ma
or skeet and
es, shotgun
17-A M.R.S
ave the prim
y whatever
in rapid su
sm.
uzzleloader
wn of Har
of the date
later than n
t shooting
ooting rang
anner that
d trap shoo
ns and pisto
S. §2 (12-A)
mer around
r name know
uccession by
rs in 12 M.R
rpswell’s C
of the adop
ninety (90)
range sha
1
ge on
does
oting
ols.
as it
the
wn,
y
R.S.
Code
ption
days
all be
2
4. Standards for Registration
A sport shooting range shall comply with the following standards to be eligible to be
registered with the Town:
A. Pre-Existing Ranges
1. The owner of the property shall document that the use of the range has
occurred on a regular basis prior to the enactment date of the ordinance, and
2. The Code Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Cumberland County
Sheriff’s Department must find that the range conforms to generally accepted
gun safety and shooting range operation practices and is constructed in a manner
not reasonably expected to allow a projectile to cross the boundary of the range.
The Code Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Cumberland County
Sheriff’s Department shall be guided by the most recent edition of the Range
Source Book published by the National Rifle Association in making this
determination.
B. New or Expanded Ranges
1. The Code Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Cumberland County
Sheriff’s Department must find that the range conforms to generally accepted
gun safety and shooting range operation practices and is constructed in a manner
not reasonably expected to allow a projectile to cross the boundary of the range.
The Code Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Cumberland County
Sheriff’s Department shall be guided by the most recent edition of the Range
Source Book published by the National Rifle Association in making this
determination.
2. No portion of a shooting range involved with the discharge of firearms outside
of a building shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of any building or
residential dwelling without the prior written permission of the owner of the
building or residential dwelling or a person authorized to act on the behalf of the
owner.
5. Allowed Activities
The following activities are permitted at a registered sport shooting range:
A. Outdoor Ranges
1. The discharge of firearms limited to shotguns, Rimfire Arms and Black
Powder Guns.
3
2. The discharge of firearms other than shotguns, Rimfire Arms and Black
Powder Guns at a registered pre-existing range only if such firearms were
discharged prior to the enactment of this ordinance in conjunction with a legal
commercial use.
B. Indoor Ranges That Are Fully Enclosed Within a Building
1. The discharge of firearms limited to the types and calibers of firearms for
which the range is designed to accommodate based on the recommendations of
the most recent edition of the Range Source Book published by the National Rifle
Association.
6. Prohibited Activities
The following activities are prohibited at a registered sport shooting range:
A. The discharge of any automatic firearm.
B. The use of a firearm other than a shotgun, Rimfire Arm, or Black Powder Gun
within the area of a shooting range if the range is located outside of a fully
enclosed building except as provided for in 5.A.2.
C. The discharge of any firearm between 8:00 P.M. or sunset whichever is later
and 8:00 A.M. outside of a building or fully enclosed shooting range.
7. Fees
The Board of Selectmen may establish a fee for the registration of a Sport Shooting
Range.
8. Enforcement
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Cumberland County Sheriff’s Department or
any successor local law enforcement agency.
9. Penalties
Any person violating any part of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine as determined
by the Board of Selectmen of not less than $250.00 per violation or such greater penalty
as may be provided by state law which may include costs and reasonable attorney fees.
Such fine(s) shall be recovered for the use of the Town of Harpswell.
1
TOWN OF HARPSWELL
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Approved March 16, 1996
Amended March 6, 1999
Amended March 11, 2000
Amended August 23, 2001
Amended March 16, 2002
Amended November 23, 2002
Amended March 8, 2003
Amended May 20, 2004
Amended March 11, 2006
Amended March 10, 2007
Amended March 20, 2010
Amended March 9, 2013
Amended March 15, 2014
Amended March 14, 2015
Amended March 11, 2017
Amended March 10, 2018
(This replaces the Subdivision Ordinance reenacted March 19, 1990)
Citizen’s Note: Generally, a subdivision is the division of a tract or parcel of land into
three (3) or more lots within any five (5) year period in accordance with State Law (30-A
M.R.S.A. §4401[4]) as that subsection may be amended from time to time. For a specific,
determination, consult the Code Enforcement Officer.
2
Table of Contents
Section 1. Purpose……………………………………………………………...………… 4
Section 2. Authority and Administration ………………….……………………………… 4
Section 3. Applicability………………………..………………………………….……….. 4
Section 4. Availability…………………………………………………………….…….... 5
Section 5. Severability…………………………………………………….………………. 5
Section 6. Conflict with Other Ordinances……………………………….……………….. 5
Section 7. Waiver and Modification of Subdivision Submissions………..……………….. 5
Section 8. Submission of Documents and Review Schedule………………..…………….. 5
8.1. Application Review Process………………………….……………………. 5
8.2. Applications……………………………………………………………….. 7
8.3. Submissions……………………………………………………………….. 8
8.4. Notification………………………………………………………………… 17
8.5. Determination of Complete Application…………………………………... 17
8.6. Site Visits.………………………………………………………….……… 17
8.7. Public Hearing……………………………………………………………... 18
8.8. Planning Board Review……………………………………………………. 18
8.9. Planning Board Approval or Denial of the Subdivision…………………… 18
8.10. Recording of the Approved Subdivision Plan……………………………... 19
8.11. Plan Revisions after Approval……………………………………………... 19
8.12. Phasing of Development…………………………………………………... 19
8.13. Lot Line Amendments…………………………………………………….. 20
Section 9. Approval Standards…………………………..………………………………… 20
9.1. Conformance………………………………………………………………. 20
9.2. Municipal Services………………………………………………………… 20
9.3. Preservation of the Landscape………………………………………..……. 20
9.4. Lots………………………………………………………………………… 20
9.5. Land Not Suitable for Development………………………………………. 25
9.6. Required Improvements…………………………………………………… 25
9.7. Erosion and Sedimentation Control……………………………………….. 27
9.8. Utilities…………………………………………………………………….. 27
9.9. Construction in Flood Hazard Areas………………………………………. 28
9.10. Impact on Wetlands……………………………………………………….. 28
9.11. Impact on Groundwater…………………………………………………… 28
9.12. Stormwater Management………………………………………………….. 29
9.13. Offshore Islands…………………………………………………………… 30
3
9.14. Aesthetic, Cultural, and Natural Values…………………………………… 30
9.15. Traffic……………………………………………………………………… 31
9.16. Homeowners/Landowners Association……………………………………. 32
9.17. Community Docks…………………………………………………………. 32
9.18. Workforce Housing………………………………………………………... 33
Section 10. Performance Guarantee………………………………..……………………… 33
10.1. Requirement……………………………………………………………….. 33
10.2. Form of Guarantee………………………………………………………… 33
10.3. Amount of Guarantee……………………………………………………… 33
10.4. Release of Guarantee………………………………………………………. 34
10.5. Default……………………………………………………………………... 34
Section 11. Public Acceptance of Streets, Easements, or Open Space………………..…... 34
Section 12. Enforcement……………………………………………………………………. 34
Section 13. Expiration of Subdivision Plan Approval……………………………………… 35
Section 14. Appeals………………………………………………………………………. 35
Section 15. Interpretation, Validity, Conflict of Ordinances, and Effective Date………... 35
15.1. Editorial Notes……………………………………………………..………. 35
15.2. Validity, Conflict of Ordinances, and Effective Date……………………... 35
THIS UNOFFICIAL TABLE OF CONTENTS IS NOT A PART OF THE ORDINANCE AND IS
PROVIDED FOR CONVENIENCE ONLY.
4
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to further the intent of Harpswell's Comprehensive Plan in
protecting the safety, health, and quality of the environment, including groundwater resources,
and the future quality of life in the Town, and to encourage use of the best planning by private
developers. This Ordinance also seeks to establish an orderly, equitable, and expeditious
procedure for reviewing subdivision applications and to provide clear standards that encourage
orderly growth in the community. To this end the Planning Board shall follow the procedures
and criteria in this Ordinance when reviewing subdivision applications and before granting
approval shall find that the provisions of this Ordinance and State rules and regulations have
been met.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2.1. This Ordinance is known as the "Town of Harpswell Subdivision Ordinance", it governs
subdivisions within the limits of the Town, and replaces the Town Subdivision Ordinance
re-enacted on March 10, 1990. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers
as provided for in Article VIII, part 2, section 1 of the Maine Constitution and 30-A
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.), § 3001, municipal subdivision law 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time.
Throughout this Ordinance there are "Citizen's Notes". These notes shall not be
considered part of this Ordinance as adopted by the Town, but shall only be considered
as an aid for citizens to use and as a guide to the intent of ordinance provisions and their
proper interpretation.
2.2. The Planning Board shall administer this Ordinance.
2.3. If, after review of the Town’s Site Plan Review Ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4401(4)(G), as may be amended from time to time, the Planning Board determines that
the Town’s Site Plan Review Ordinance provides for a review and approval process of
multi-unit dwellings and their accessory structures at least as stringent as that provided by
the Town’s Subdivision Ordinance, then the Planning Board shall review applications for
approval of multi-unit dwellings and their accessory structures under the Town’s Site
Plan Review Ordinance.
2.4. Definitions
For purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be defined as set
forth in the Definitions Addendum, as may be amended from time to time.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all parcels of land proposed for subdivision in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4401[4], as that section may be amended from time to time, or division of land within
the boundaries of the Town of Harpswell previously subdivided.
For purposes of this Ordinance, a tract or parcel of land means all contiguous land in the same
ownership, provided that lands located on opposite sides of a road are not considered separate
5
tracts or parcels of land unless the road was established by the owner of land on both sides of the
road before September 22, 1971.
SECTION 4. AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible
to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at a reasonable cost
and at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance
shall be posted.
SECTION 5. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance, unless otherwise
provided by State law.
SECTION 6. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive shall
control unless otherwise provided by state law.
SECTION 7. WAIVER AND MODIFICATION OF SUBDIVISION SUBMISSIONS
The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the preliminary conceptual plan or final
subdivision plan submission requirements when it determines that, because of the size of the
project or circumstances of the site, these requirements would not be applicable or would be an
unnecessary burden on the applicant and that a modification or waiver would not adversely affect
the Planning Board’s ability to evaluate whether the application meets the standards of 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, and Section 6 of this Ordinance.
These modifications shall not modify the standards as contained in the Ordinance.
When the Planning Board grants a waiver to any of the submissions required by this Ordinance
for a final subdivision plan, the approved subdivision plan shall indicate the waivers granted and
the date on which they were granted.
SECTION 8. SUBMISSION OF DOCUMENTS AND REVIEW SCHEDULE
8.1. Application Review Process
8.1.1. Pre-application Procedures
8.1.1.1. Prior to submitting a formal application for subdivision review to the Planning
Board, the applicant and/or his/her representative shall attend a preapplication conference
with the Town Planner or his/her designee. A preapplication conference is mandatory and
an application will not be accepted for processing until a preapplication conference has
been held. The preapplication conference shall be informal and informational in nature.
There is no fee for a preapplication conference, and such a meeting shall not cause the plan
to be a pending application or proceeding under 1 M.R.S.A. §302, as it may be amended
from time to time.
6
The purposes of the preapplication conference are to:
(a) Allow the staff to understand the nature of the proposed subdivision and the issues
involved in the proposal;
(b) Allow the applicant to understand the subdivision review process and required
submissions and fees;
(c) Allow the staff to provide the applicant with written material about two approaches
for subdivision design, the Flexible Lot Size approach and the Two Acre Lot Size
approach and to discuss the potential for applying each of these approaches to the
proposed subdivision;
(d) Identify potential issues that need to be addressed in future submissions; and
(e) Make the applicant aware of any opportunities for coordinating the development with
community policies, programs, or facilities.
8.1.1.2. There are no formal submission requirements for a preapplication conference.
However, the applicant should be prepared to discuss the following with the Town Planner:
(a) The proposed site, including its location, size, and general characteristics;
(b) The nature of the proposed subdivision;
(c) Any issues or questions about existing municipal regulations and their applicability
to the project; and
(d) Any anticipated requests for waivers from the submission requirements and the basis
for the requests.
8.1.1.3. Following the preapplication conference with the Town Planner, the applicant may
proceed with preparing and submitting an application for submission to the Planning
Board.
8.1.2. Preliminary Conceptual Plan
An applicant for subdivision review, other than a lot line amendment in accordance with
Section 8.13, shall prepare and submit to the Planning Board a preliminary conceptual
plan and related information for study, and, if necessary, alteration and modification,
prior to the submission of a final plan. Preliminary conceptual plans shall comply with
the requirements set forth in Section 8.3. The Planning Board review of the preliminary
conceptual plan submission shall be informational and shall not result in any formal
approval or disapproval of the project by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
review the submission to determine if the information provides a clear understanding of
the parcel’s characteristics and its potential for subdivision and development and if the
preliminary conceptual plan is consistent with the development and conservation
potential of the parcel. The applicant may request that the review of the preliminary
conceptual plan submission be done in two (2) steps to allow feedback from the Planning
Board to be considered in the preparation of the conceptual subdivision plan. In this case,
the first step is the review of the site inventory and analysis (Section 8.3.1.2) and the
second step is the subsequent review of the preliminary conceptual subdivision plan
(Section 8.3.1.3). The outcome of the review process shall be a determination by the
Planning Board of the issues and constraints that must be addressed in the final
7
subdivision application including any suggested revisions to the conceptual subdivision
plan. The applicant shall not submit the final plan until the applicant has received from
the Planning Office written comments summarizing the Planning Board’s review of the
preliminary conceptual plan. Review of the preliminary conceptual plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of
suitability of the design submitted on the preliminary conceptual plan as a guide to the
preparation of the final plan. The Planning Board shall complete its review of the
preliminary conceptual plan application within seventy-five (75) days of finding the
application to be complete unless the applicant chooses to have the application reviewed
in two steps. In this case, the Planning Board shall complete its review of the site
inventory and analysis within forty-five (45) days of its initial consideration and its
review of the preliminary conceptual plan within sixty (60) days of the initial
consideration of the preliminary conceptual plan. All of these time frames may be
extended with the consent of the applicant.
8.1.2.1. Preliminary Conceptual Plan Expiration
Within one (1) year of the completion of the review of the preliminary conceptual plan,
the applicant shall submit the final plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with
Section 8.3, or else said preliminary conceptual plan review shall expire.
8.1.3. Final Plan
A final plan shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 8.3 and include the
following additional items:
(a) Space for the signatures of a legal majority of the Planning Board, the date of approval,
and the words “Approved by the Town of Harpswell Planning Board, pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.”;
(b) One (1) or more original drawing meeting the requirements of the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds for the recording of plans;
(c) Identification of all terms and conditions of approval adopted by the Planning Board,
including the following standard condition of approval: “The property shown on this
plan may be developed and used only as depicted on this approved plan. All elements
and features of the plan and all representations made by the applicant in the record of
the Planning Board proceedings are conditions of the approval. No change from the
conditions of approval is permitted unless an amended plan is first submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board”;
(d) Proper identification of the location of all permanent monuments; and
(e) A performance guarantee in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.
8.2. Applications
All applications for a subdivision shall be submitted to the Planning Office at least twenty-one
(21) working days in advance of a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. The applicant
shall provide ten (10) copies of the application, plans, and supporting documentation.
The Planning Office shall issue a dated receipt to the applicant. The Town Planner or his/her
designee shall review the submission to determine its compliance with the applicable submission
requirements. If the Town Planner deems the application to be provisionally complete for
8
placement on the Planning Board’s agenda, the application shall be scheduled for the next
Planning Board meeting for a formal review of completeness, unless the agenda cannot
accommodate the request, in which case, it will be scheduled for the next Planning Board
meeting. If the Town Planner deems the application to be incomplete, she/he shall advise the
applicant in writing of that determination together with the additional or corrected information
required and shall inform the applicant in writing that the application will not be placed on the
Planning Board’s agenda until it is complete. If the applicant disagrees with the Town Planner's
provisional determination, the applicant may request that the chair of the Planning Board include
the application on the Planning Board's next available agenda.
8.3. Submissions
The Planning Office shall submit to the Planning Board Chair the ten (10) copies of the complete
subdivision plan, application, and a copy of the dated receipt showing when the application was
received by the Planning Office.
The Planning Office shall issue a dated receipt, both to the applicant and to the Code
Enforcement Office, showing the fact that the plans have been received for consideration.
A complete application shall include:
8.3.1. Preliminary Conceptual Plan Application
A complete application for preliminary conceptual plan review shall include four (4) components
as follows:
1. A completed application form;
2. A location map in compliance with Section 8.3.1.1;
3. A site inventory and analysis in compliance with Section 8.3.1.2; and
4. A conceptual subdivision plan based on the four (4) step design process as set forth in
Section 8.3.1.3.
8.3.1.1. Location Map
The location map shall be adequate to show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to
adjacent properties, and to allow the Planning Board to locate the subdivision within the
Town. The map shall show:
8.3.1.1.1. All areas within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of the proposed
subdivision;
8.3.1.1.2. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision referenced
by the Registry of Deeds book and page number;
8.3.1.1.3. Location, names, and widths of existing and proposed rights-of-way;
8.3.1.1.4. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts; and
8.3.1.1.5. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
applicant's property if the location map covers only a portion of the applicant's entire
contiguous holding.
9
8.3.1.2. Site Inventory and Analysis
The site inventory and analysis is intended to provide both the applicant and the Planning
Board and staff with an understanding of the parcel and the opportunities and constraints
imposed on its use and development by both the natural and built environment. It is anticipated
that this analysis will result in a development plan that reflects the conditions of the parcel and
that the areas most suitable for the proposed use will be utilized while those that are not suitable
or present significant constraints will be avoided to the maximum extent possible. Therefore,
the submission requirements contained herein provide that the applicant submit basic
information about the parcel and an analysis of that information.
The site inventory and analysis must contain, at a minimum, all of the following information:
8.3.1.2.1. The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner and the applicant.
8.3.1.2.2. The names and addresses of all consultants working on the project, such as the
surveyor, engineer, land planner, site evaluator, wetlands scientist.
8.3.1.2.3. Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
8.3.1.2.4. Ten (10) copies of an accurate scale inventory plan of the parcel or the portion
of the parcel proposed for subdivision at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet
to the inch showing as a minimum:
(a) The name of the development, north arrow, date and scale.
(b) The boundaries of the parcel.
(c) The relationship of the parcel to the surrounding area, including nearby conservation
land and subdivisions within one thousand (1,000) feet of the parcel.
(d) The topography of the parcel at an appropriate contour interval as determined by the
Town Planner or his/her designee depending on the nature of the use and character of
the parcel (in most instances, 2' contours will be necessary unless no grading or
infrastructure construction is planned).
(e) The major natural features of the parcel and those located within five hundred (500)
feet of the parcel, including coastal and freshwater wetlands, significant vernal pools,
streams, ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats and
fisheries or other important natural features (if none, so state). This information must
be based on field determination for the parcel to be subdivided, unless the Planning
Board determines that information from available, published sources is adequate to
allow the review of the opportunities and constraints of the parcel. The information on
conditions on adjacent property may be from available, published sources.
(f) The location or existence of historic, archaeological, scenic or other critical resources
and culturally significant features on the parcel.
(g) A Class B high intensity soil survey for the portion of the parcel proposed to be
developed.
(h) The proposed method of sewage disposal, including the results of all site evaluations
to determine the suitability for on-site sewage disposal showing both test pits that are
acceptable and those that are not.
10
(i) The location of any areas with known or suspected groundwater quality or quantity
problems that may limit the ability to establish on-site wells.
(j) Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the lot and on adjacent lots
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the parcel (if none, so state).
(k) Existing restrictions or easements on the lot (if none, so state).
(l) The location and size of existing utilities or improvements servicing the lot (if none, so
state).
8.3.1.2.5. Ten (10) copies of a site analysis plan at the same scale as the inventory plan (see
Section 8.3.1.2.4 above) highlighting the opportunities and constraints of the parcel. This
plan should enable the Planning Board to determine: which portions of the parcel are
unsuitable for development or use (Primary Conservation Areas); which portions of the lot
are unsuitable for on-site sewage disposal; which areas of the lot have development
limitations or conservation value (e.g. soil constraints, groundwater issues, wildlife habitat,
fisheries, scenic vistas, drainage concerns, historic or archaeological resources) that should
be addressed in the development plan; which areas may be subject to off-site conflicts or
concerns (e.g., noise, lighting, traffic, existing dwellings on adjacent lots); and which areas
are most suited to the proposed use.
8.3.1.2.6. Ten (10) copies of a narrative describing the existing conditions of the parcel,
the proposed use and the constraints or opportunities created by the site. This submission
should include any traffic studies, utility studies, market studies or other preliminary work
that will assist the Planning Board in understanding the site and the proposed use.
8.3.1.3. Conceptual Subdivision Plan
The conceptual subdivision plan must be based on the site inventory and analysis and
reflect the suitability of the parcel for development and conservation identified in the
analysis. The plan shall show the general layout of the subdivision, including the locations
of dwelling sites or building envelopes, lot lines, streets, protected or common open space,
and other common facilities. The plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the site analysis
plan. The plan shall be developed based on the following Four Step Design Process and
the steps shall be documented: Applicants shall submit a plan that is the end result of this
process, but may be asked by the Planning Board to submit four (4) separate sketch maps
indicating the findings resulting from each step of the design process. In deciding whether
it is necessary to submit separate sketch maps for each of the steps listed above, the
Planning Board shall consider the size of the parcel and whether the site includes a
significant amount of environmentally sensitive areas.
The following four (4) step design process is intended to allow the developer the full
potential of the legally allowable number of lots, while at the same time preserving
valuable natural resources and open space.
8.3.1.3.1. Step 1 of the 4 Step Design Process: Delineation of Natural Resource or
Conservation Areas
A. Identify the portions of the parcel that have significant development restrictions due to
natural constraints (Primary Conservation Areas) or that have significant natural or cultural
11
resource value (Secondary Conservation Areas) based on the site analysis.
B. If the applicant is proposing a Flexible Lot Size subdivision, calculate the area of
required open space in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.4.3 of this ordinance.
C. If the applicant is proposing a Flexible Lot Size subdivision, designate the proposed
location of open space(s) on the conceptual subdivision plan based on Section 9.4.3. This
should be done on the basis of practical considerations related to the tract’s configuration,
its context to resource areas on neighboring properties, the priorities listed in Section 9.4.3
for open space areas, and the applicant’s subdivision objectives.
D. If the applicant is not proposing a Flexible Lot Size subdivision, designate areas that are
not appropriate for development as dwelling sites and adjacent areas, roads, and other
structural improvements.
8.3.1.3.2. Step 2 of the 4 Step Design Process: Location of Dwelling Sites
Potential dwelling sites shall be tentatively located using the results of Step 1 as a base,
as well as other relevant data from the Site Analysis, such as topography and soils.
Dwelling sites should generally be located not closer than one hundred (100) feet from
Primary Conservation Areas and fifty (50) feet from Secondary Conservation Areas,
taking into consideration the potential negative impacts of residential development on
such areas, as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive
views and visual settings for residences. In addition, the dwelling sites should be located
taking into account the location of existing dwellings on lots adjacent to the subdivision,
the character of the area between the existing dwellings and the potential dwelling sites,
and the potential for negative impacts on existing dwellings. The location of the dwelling
sites in a Flexible Lot Size Subdivision should avoid concentrating units in the portions
of the site immediately adjacent to existing dwellings outside of the subdivision.
8.3.1.3.3. Step 3 of the 4 Step Design Process: Alignment of Streets
Upon designating the dwelling sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular
access to each dwelling and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions.
Impacts of the street plan on natural resources or proposed conservation lands shall be
minimized, particularly with respect to crossing environmentally sensitive areas such as
wetlands and traversing slopes exceeding twenty percent (20%). Street connections shall
generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs and to facilitate access
to and from dwellings in different parts of the tract (and adjoining parcels) while
minimizing the potential for cut-thru traffic and speeding.
8.3.1.3.4. Step 4 of the 4 Step Design Process: Drawing in the Lot Lines
Upon completion of the preceding three (3) steps, lot lines shall be drawn as required to
delineate the boundaries of individual lots. Wherever possible, lot lines shall be
perpendicular to the street.
12
8.3.2. Final Subdivision Plan Application
The final subdivision plan shall consist of one (1) or more maps to a scale of not more than
fifty (50) feet per inch. The following information shall either be shown on the final
subdivision plan or accompany the application for the final subdivision plan. Information
indicated with an asterisk may be submitted as part of an updated site inventory and analysis:
Section
Submission Requirement
Lot
Line
Amend
ment
Minor
Sub.
Major
Sub.
8.3.2.1.
Proposed name of subdivision plan
X
X
X
8.3.2.2.
The Tax Assessor's map and lot numbers for the property proposed to
be subdivided.
X
X
X
8.3.2.3.
Verification of right, title, or interest in the property
X
X
X
8.3.2.4.
A standard boundary survey as specified by the Board of Licensure
for Professional Land Surveyors.
X
X
X
8.3.2.5.
The topography of the site shall be shown by two (2) foot contour
intervals in relation to mean sea level. The Planning Board may allow
larger contour intervals or require more detailed contour information
if it finds that the information is necessary to complete review of the
application. Existing buildings, springs, water courses, wetlands,
vegetative cover, rock outcroppings, and other essential existing
physical features shall also be located.
X
X
8.3.2.6.
A copy of all existing and proposed covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances affecting the
property, delineated wherever possible.
X
X
X
8.3.2.7.
The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, the square
footage of proposed lots.
X
X
X
8.3.2.8.
The date the plan was prepared, magnetic north arrow, graphic map
scale, names and addresses of the record owner, applicant, engineer,
and individual or company who prepared the plan, including
appropriate seals.
X
X
X
8.3.2.9.
Names of record owners of abutting properties, including any
properties directly across rights-of-way or traveled ways. For
purposes of abutter notifications, a separate list of abutters with
addresses should be submitted.
X
X
X
8.3.2.10.
The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the property and a
description of the proposed uses to be located on the site, including
quantity and type of residential units.
X
X
X
8.3.2.11.
A copy of the Cumberland County Medium Intensity Soil Survey.
X
X
13
8.3.2.12.
Proposed method of sewage disposal, including site evaluations
indicating suitability of the soil for sewage disposal on each lot. Test
pit analyses and completed sewage disposal design prepared by a
licensed site evaluator, shall be provided. Each test pit or boring must
be staked and identified on the subdivision plan. If a variance is
required according to the Maine State Plumbing Code, the Planning
Board may request a second evaluation to be done by the State
Division of Health Engineering or by a professional designated by the
Planning Board. The proposed subdivision plan shall also indicate the
locations where wells cannot be located because of sewage disposal
setbacks.
X
X
8.3.2.13.
Proposed type of water supply system(s) and documentation by a
Certified Geologist or Registered Engineer that the groundwater
system will support adequate supply and quality.
X
8.3.2.14.
Proposed method for handling solid waste disposal
X
X
8.3.2.15.
Documentation of adequate water quantity to serve the subdivision
based on information from neighboring wells, obtained from property
owners and well drillers.
X
8.3.2.16.
The location, proposed names, widths, grades, road profiles, radii,
length of curves, and central angle of curves for all existing and
proposed road rights-of-way, pavement and/or gravel lines, and
entrances to a public road. Copies of Maine Department of
Transportation (MDOT) approval for entrances onto existing State
highways shall also be required.
X
X
8.3.2.17.
An estimate of the amount, type, and impact of vehicular traffic to be
generated on a daily basis and at peak hours based on the assumption
of two (2) cars per residential dwelling unit or a figure generated from
the most recent edition of a recognized trip generation manual.
X
8.3.2.18.
The location of existing or proposed utilities on or adjacent to the
subdivision.
X
X
8.3.2.19*.
The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the one hundred (100)
year flood elevation as defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
X
X
X
8.3.2.20.
A surface drainage plan that shows the location and size of ditches,
culverts, drainage ways, easements, and other improvements on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision and the direction of flow.
X
X
X
8.3.2.21.
Description of any problems with drainage, soils, or topography, or a
representation that, in the opinion of the applicant, none exist.
X
X
14
8.3.2.22.
A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist
experienced in hydrogeology if:
8.3.2.22.1. Documented problems exist with the quality or quantity of
water in wells in the vicinity of the development; or
8.3.2.22.2. Part of the subdivision is located in the area recommended
as having lot sizes of 4.2 acres on Map 3 "Recommended minimum
lot sizes based on Groundwater Protection" of the 1987
Comprehensive Plan and the applicant proposes lot sizes of less than
4.2 acres; or
Citizen’s Note: The 4.2 acre restriction is not automatically part of
the Subdivision Ordinance.
8.3.2.22.3. The assessment shall include:
8.3.2.22.3.1. The depth of the water table at representative points
throughout the proposed development
8.3.2.22.3.2. Data on existing groundwater quality and quantity,
either from test wells in the subdivision, from existing wells on
neighboring property, or from data gathered during development
of the 1993 Comprehensive Plan
Citizen’s Note: This information is on file in the Code
Enforcement Office
8.3.2.22.3.3. Existing and post-construction drainage conditions
throughout the proposed subdivision
8.3.2.22.3.4. A map showing the location of all existing and
proposed subsurface wastewater disposal systems and all existing
and proposed drinking wells within the subdivision and all existing
systems within three hundred (300) feet of its boundary
8.3.2.22.3.5. Assessment of the potential for saltwater intrusion
when the proposed subdivision is located adjacent to areas
reporting high chloride content of drilled wells as shown on Map 2
"Future Land Use Map" of the 1993 Comprehensive Plan or where
there is evidence for potential saltwater intrusion
8.3.2.22.3.6. A map showing the location of all existing and
proposed subsurface wastewater disposal systems and all existing
and proposed drinking wells within the subdivision and all existing
systems within three hundred (300) feet of its boundary
X
X
15
8.3.2.23*.
The location or existence of historic, archeological, scenic, or other
critical resources known to exist in the proposed subdivision. For any
proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
the applicant shall provide evidence that they have submitted their
proposal to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review
and comment. The Planning Board may require a written statement
from the Maine Historic Preservation Commission indicating the
proposed development will not adversely impact archeological or
historic resources or recommending how the proposed development
might be modified to minimize any adverse impact on archeological
or historic resources.
X
X
8.3.2.24.
Written statement of how proposed subdivision plan fits in with the
character of the Town as set forth in the most recently adopted edition
of the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
X
X
8.3.2.25*.
The location of significant wildlife habitat or rare and irreplaceable
natural areas located in or near the proposed subdivision as identified
by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) and the
Natural Heritage Data Base in the Department of Economic and
Community Development (DECD) or in the 1987 or 1993
Comprehensive Plans, and shellfish habitats and other marine
environments which may be affected by the development.
X
X
8.3.2.26*.
The location, names, and dimensions of existing and proposed public
or private parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the
subdivision and a description of any proposed improvements and their
management.
X
8.3.2.27.
If parks or other open spaces are proposed to be deeded to the Town,
a homeowners/landowners association, land trust, or other non-profit
organization, the location of the open space shall be shown on the
subdivision plan. Written offers of cession to the organization and
copies of agreements or documents showing the manner in which
open spaces will be retained by the applicant or lot owners shall be
submitted.
X
8.3.2.28.
If a homeowners/landowners association is to be formed,
documentation of the standards contained in Paragraph 9.16 of this
Ordinance.
X
X
8.3.2.29.
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in conformance with
Section 9.7 of this Ordinance.
X
X
8.3.2.30.
Location and dimensions of all fencing and screening.
X
8.3.2.31.
Construction cost estimates for improvements to be completed by the
applicant prior to the sale of lots and an estimate of the time period
required for completion of the development.
X
X
16
8.3.2.32.
Subdivisions proposed for offshore islands must provide maps
indicating mainland support facilities, including private landings,
moorings, and a minimum of two (2) parking spaces for each lot. Also
required is documentation of title, right, or interest in mainland
property for support facilities. If mainland support facilities are
located in another municipality, the applicant must provide a written
statement of approval from that municipality.
X
X
8.3.2.33.
If the subdivision plan involves substantial improvements, such as
construction of utilities, the Planning Board may require evidence of
financial capacity to complete the proposed improvements.
X
X
8.3.2.34.
The following approvals, if applicable, must be obtained in writing:
8.3.2.34.1. A Wastewater Discharge License if required from the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP);
8.3.2.34.2. Approval from the Maine Department of Human Services
(DHS) if an engineered sewage disposal system is to be utilized or if
the applicant proposes to provide a central water supply system; or
8.3.2.34.3. Approval from the Local Plumbing Inspector indicating
that the wastewater disposal permits can be obtained
X
X
8.3.2.35.
At the option of the applicant or the Planning Board, any other
information that may be necessary for the full and proper
consideration of the subdivision plan.
X
X
X
8.3.2.36.
Any application for subdivision approval which constitutes a revision
or amendment to a subdivision plan which has been previously
approved shall indicate that fact on the application and shall identify
and provide a copy of the original signed plan being revised or
amended.
X
X
X
*Note: When the Planning Board requires the applicant to seek comments from a group or
agency outside of Town Officials, including but not limited to the Harpswell Historical
Society and Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, the applicant shall provide
written documentation of the request for comments. The applicant shall include in the written
request reference to this Section of the Ordinance which specifies that if the applicant has not
received written comments from the specified group or agency within forty-five (45) days of
receipt of the request, the Planning Board may assume that the group or agency has no
concerns with the proposed development.
8.3.3. Fee for Independent Consulting Services
In addition to the application fee, every application for a subdivision shall be accompanied by the
payment of an independent consulting fee assessed on a per lot or per dwelling unit basis,
whichever amount is greater, in such amount as may be established by the Board of Selectmen
from time to time. The payment shall be deposited in an individual trust account which is
separate and distinct from all other Planning Board and Town accounts.
17
The Planning Board may use the funds in the individual trust account to hire independent
consulting services to review the application. The applicant shall provide additional funds, as
necessary, to cover the cost of independent consulting services.
Any balance in the account remaining after a decision on the application by the Planning Board,
whether approved or denied, shall be refunded to the applicant after all payment of all consulting
services related to review of the subdivision.
8.4. Notification
When an application for either a preliminary conceptual plan or a final subdivision plan is
received, the Municipal Office, at the applicant's expense, shall give a dated receipt to the
applicant and shall notify, by first class mail, all record owners of abutting properties and the
clerk and reviewing authority of any municipalities that abut or include any portion of the
subdivision, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision and including a general
description of the project. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice sent as required
under this subsection shall not necessitate another public meeting or invalidate any action taken
by the Planning Board.
8.5. Determination of Complete Application
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a subdivision plan and fee, the Planning Board shall notify
the applicant in writing whether or not the application is complete, and if incomplete, of any
additional submissions which are required.
A fee schedule for subdivision applications shall be established and revised from time to time by
the Selectmen after notice, public hearing, and recommendation of the Planning Board in
conformance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4355, as may be amended from time to time. Application
fees shall be payable by check to the Town. Application fees are to be paid at the time of
submission of a preliminary conceptual plan or at the time of submission of a final plan for those
applications that file a preliminary and final plan simultaneously.
Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted, the Planning Board shall
issue a dated receipt to the applicant. If the Planning Board determines the application is
incomplete, the application will be heard at the Planning Board meeting following submission of
a complete application.
The Planning Board may notify a number of appropriate departments, committees, or individuals
of the application for the proposed subdivision, including but not limited to the Road
Commissioner, Harpswell SAD 75 representatives, Conservation Commission, Marine
Resources Committee, local Fire Chief, and other affected parties as appropriate. The Planning
Board may request that these officials and the Code Enforcement Office comment upon
consistency with local codes and the adequacy of departments to service the proposed
subdivision.
8.6. Site Visits
After submission of a complete application for a preliminary conceptual plan, the Planning Board
shall conduct a site visit to provide members the opportunity to view the site. The site visit shall
18
be scheduled prior to the meeting at which the application is considered so that all parties,
including the applicant or representative of the applicant, owners of abutting properties and
interested members of the public, have reasonable opportunity to participate as a matter of due
process as a public proceeding under Maine's Right to Know Law, 1 M.R.S.A. §401 et seq., as
may be amended from time to time. The Planning Board may hold a second site visit when the
application for a final plan is received following the same procedures.
8.7. Public Hearing
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on all final subdivision applications within thirty
(30) days of determination of a complete application. The Planning Board shall publish notice of
the date, time, and place of the meeting in a local newspaper at least two (2) times. The date of
the first publication must be at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing. In addition, the
Planning Board, at the applicant's expense, shall notify by first class mail, all record owners of
abutting property. Failure of any property owner to receive the notice sent under as required this
subsection shall not necessitate another public meeting or invalidate any action taken by the
Planning Board. To be considered by the Planning Board, all comments must be received in
writing prior to this public hearing, or made verbally at the public hearing.
8.8. Planning Board Review
The Planning Board shall discuss the final plan application at a regularly scheduled meeting
within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete application.
8.8.1. The applicant, or a duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the
Planning Board to discuss the subdivision plan. In the case of an authorized representative, the
Planning Board will require a letter showing that the representative is in fact authorized to
represent the applicant.
8.8.2. Before the Planning Board grants approval of the subdivision, the Planning Board shall
find that the applicant has met all standards of 30-A M.R.S.A., § 4404, as it may be amended
from time to time, and Section 9 of this Ordinance in accordance with Section 8.9 below.
8.8.3. Before the Planning Board grants approval of the subdivision, the applicant shall meet
the performance guarantee requirements contained in Section 10 of this Ordinance.
8.9. Planning Board Approval or Denial of the Subdivision
The Planning Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, and/or within sixty (60)
days of determining it has received a complete application, or within any other time limit that is
otherwise mutually agreed to, issue an order:
8.9.1. Denying approval of the proposed subdivision, or
8.9.2. Granting approval of the proposed subdivision, or
8.9.3. Granting approval upon any terms and conditions that it considers advisable to:
19
8.9.3.1. Satisfy the criteria listed in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404, as may be amended from time
to time,
8.9.3.2. Satisfy the criteria and regulations adopted under the provisions of this Ordinance,
and
8.9.3.3. Protect and preserve the public's health, safety, and general welfare.
The reasons for any denial, conditions of approval, or other stipulations shall be stated in the
written findings of the Planning Board. If the Planning Board grants a waiver of any submission
requirement, it shall state in the written findings the character and extent of the waiver, specify
that the waiver has been granted in accordance with Section 7 of this Ordinance, and will not
inhibit the Planning Board's ability to evaluate whether the application meets the standards of 30-
A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, and Section 9 of this
Ordinance.
The action of the Planning Board shall be recorded on the subdivision plan with the date of
action over the signatures of the members of the Planning Board.
When the subdivision is approved, the applicant shall pay the cost of reproducing the required
copies of the approved plan for Town records.
8.10. Recording of the Approved Subdivision Plan
The applicant shall, within ninety (90) days of Planning Board approval, submit the signed
subdivision plan to the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds and report the book and page
numbers to the CEO within one hundred and twenty (120) days so the references can be recorded
on the Town's copies of the plan. The plan shall either contain all the conditions of approval or
the applicant shall record a separate document that contains all the conditions of approval under
the same terms and provisions as those applying the plan. If the applicant fails to record the
signed plan and report the book and page number to the CEO within the required time frame,
approval shall be null and void and the CEO shall note that fact on all Town records.
8.11. Plan Revisions after Approval
No changes may be made in any subdivision plan after approval has been given by the Planning
Board unless the plan is first resubmitted and the Planning Board approves any modifications in
conformance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 and Section 12 of this Ordinance, as may be amended
from time to time. This provision does not prohibit minor field changes during construction,
made with the approval of the CEO or his or her delegate. In the event that an amended plan is
recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void and the
Planning Board shall record at the Registry of Deeds and with the Town Clerk an affidavit
stating the facts and setting forth the legal conclusion that the plan is null and void.
8.12. Phasing of Development
The Planning Board may permit the subdivision plan to be divided into two (2) or more separate
and distinct phases subject to any conditions it deems necessary to insure the orderly
development of the plan. This may be accomplished by limiting approval to those lots or areas
abutting that phase of the proposed subdivision road which is covered by a performance
20
guarantee. When development is phased, road and any other construction shall commence from
an existing public way. Approval of lots or other development in subsequent phases shall be
given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
If the subdivision plan requires the Town to expand, add to, or purchase new facilities, the
applicant shall provide an alternative development plan, including but not limited to phasing,
construction delays to coincide with public funding of the required improvements, and/or private
funding options.
8.13. Lot Line Amendments
Any proposal to revise, relocate or otherwise amend the lot line (or lines) of a lot (or lots) shown
on a subdivision plan that has been previously approved by the Planning Board that, if approved
by the Planning Board, would result in the same or smaller number of lots as existing prior to the
proposed lot line amendment must still be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board, but the
applicant may submit an abbreviated application as set forth in Section 8.3.2 regarding
submission requirements for a “Lot Line Amendment.”
SECTION 9. APPROVAL STANDARDS
When reviewing any subdivision plan, the Planning Board shall determine that the proposed
subdivision in conjunction with any other existing or approved development meets the review
criteria in 30-A M.R.S.A § 4404 and this Section, as may be amended from time to time.
Burden of Proof; Findings of Fact
In all instances, the burden of proof is upon the person proposing the subdivision. In issuing its
decision, the Planning Board shall make findings of fact establishing that the proposed
subdivision does or does not meet the criteria described in this Section.
9.1. Conformance
All proposed developments must be in conformity with all pertinent local, State, and Federal
ordinances, laws, and regulations.
9.2. Municipal Services
The proposed development shall not have an unreasonable adverse impact on municipal services
including the municipal road systems, fire department, solid waste program, schools, and other
municipal services and facilities.
9.3. Preservation of the Landscape
The landscape must be preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable by minimizing tree
removal, disturbance of soil, and retaining existing vegetation during construction. The Planning
Board may allow the removal of trees to create open meadows and scenic vistas which are part
of the overall subdivision.
9.4. Lots
9.4.1. Two-Acre Lot Size Subdivisions – The minimum lot size for lots in a Two-Acre Lot
Size subdivision shall be eighty thousand (80,000) square feet per dwelling unit. The minimum
21
road frontage per lot for subdivisions shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet, and the minimum
shore frontage per lot for subdivisions shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.
9.4.2. Flag lots and other odd shape lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcels in
order to meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited in Two-Acre Lot Size
subdivisions.
9.4.3. Flexible Lot Size Subdivisions – The applicant may propose, and the Planning Board
may approve, a subdivision design in which the lots are smaller and have less road frontage
than required for a Two-Acre Lot Size subdivision and in which at least half of the parcel is
preserved as open space in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
9.4.3.1 Purpose – The purposes of the Flexible Lot Size subdivision provisions are to:
1) provide the property owner or subdivider with flexibility in the design and layout of a
subdivision recognizing the development constraints for Two-Acre Lot Size subdivisions in
many areas of the community, 2) allow for the creation of developments with a stronger
neighborhood character, and 3) provide for the permanent protection of protected and
common open space that is consistent with the Town’s long range goals for preserving the
community’s natural, cultural and scenic resources.
9.4.3.2 Maximum Number of Lots – The intention in allowing Flexible Lot Size
subdivisions is that a property owner or subdivider can create approximately the same
number of lots that they could in a Two-Acre Lot Size subdivision. The maximum number
of lots allowed in a Flexible Lot Size subdivision shall be calculated based on the following
formula:
The Total Area of the Parcel
Minus
Fifteen percent (15%) of the Total Area of the Parcel
Minus
Land Not Suitable for Development (see Section 9.5)
Equals
The Net Useable Area of the Parcel
Divided by
Eighty thousand (80,000) Square Feet per Unit/Lot
Equals
The Maximum Number of Lots/Units Allowed in a Flexible Lot Size Subdivision
If the applicant proposes to include workforce housing as part of the subdivision, the
maximum number of lots allowed shall be adjusted according to the density bonuses for
workforce housing set out in Section 11.18 of the Basic Land Use Ordinance.
9.4.3.3 Minimum Size of Lots -- To provide property owners and subdividers with
flexibility in the design of a Flexible Lot Size subdivision, there is no minimum lot size
requirement subject to the following limitations:
22
9.4.3.3.1 – Lots that have their primary road frontage on an existing public road must
have a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
9.4.3.3.2 – For one-unit residential lots with less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of lot area, the applicant must demonstrate that the lot will meet the requirements of
the State Minimum Lot Size law.
9.4.3.3.3 – For lots that will have more than one (1) dwelling unit or a nonresidential use,
the applicant must demonstrate that the lot will meet the requirements of the State
Minimum Lot Size law.
9.4.3.3.4 – No lot that is located entirely within the Shoreland Zone shall have less than
required minimum lot area required by the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance. Lots that are
located partially within the Shoreland Zone may be smaller than required by the
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance if the principal building and the on-site sewage disposal
system are located outside of the Shoreland Zone.
9.4.3.4 Minimum Road Frontage – To encourage the creation of lots that do not front on
existing public roads, lots in a Flexible Lot Size subdivision shall conform to the following
minimum frontage requirements:
Lots that front on an existing public road 150 feet per unit
Lots that front on an existing private road 75 feet per unit
Lots that front on a new road within the subdivision 40 feet per unit
9.4.3.5 Lot Shape – To allow flexibility in the design of the subdivision in accordance with
the process laid out in Section 8.3.1.3, there are no limitations on the shape of lots in a
Flexible Lot Size subdivision as long as each lot contains a suitable development site of an
appropriate size to accommodate the anticipated development. Flag lots and other
irregularly-shaped lots are allowed as long as they are consistent with the overall utilization
of the parcel based on the site inventory and analysis and conceptual subdivision plan.
9.4.3.6 Sewage Disposal – Sewage disposal may be provided by individual, shared, or
common subsurface sewage disposal facilities. The components of the systems may be
located on the lot which they serve or may be located off the lot including within the
protected or common open space in accordance with Section 11.4 of the Basic Land Use
Ordinance.
9.4.3.7 Perimeter Buffer – Whenever any portion of a lot in the Flexible Lot Size
subdivision is located within twenty (20) feet of a parcel that is not part of the Flexible Lot
Size subdivision, that portion of the lot shall be maintained as a vegetated buffer. No
principal or accessory buildings, structural improvements (other than fences as part of an
approved buffer), lawns, gardens, storage of personal items, or similar activities shall occur
within this area. As part of the subdivision plan, the applicant shall provide details for how
this buffer will be treated and maintained. If the area is currently wooded or heavily
vegetated, this should be retained if possible. Where this area is not currently wooded, the
applicant shall provide for the establishment of a vegetated buffer sufficient to provide
23
visual relief to the abutting property. The Planning Board may waive or reduce this
requirement to allow for utilities to cross the buffer or to retain scenic views.
9.4.3.8 Minimum Protected or Common Open Space – The concept of a Flexible Lot
Size subdivision is to allow for smaller lots in return for a substantial portion of the parcel
being set aside as open space. The minimum amount of land included in protected or
common open space shall be determined by the following formula:
One hundred percent (100%) of the area of the parcel that is unsuitable for development
(see Section 9.5)
Plus
Fifty percent (50%) of the area of the remaining acreage of the parcel (total area of the
parcel minus the area unsuitable for development
9.4.3.9 Location of the Protected or Common Open Space – The protected or common
open space shall be located in accordance with the site inventory and analysis. In
determining which land should be included in the open space, the applicant shall be
guided by the following priorities:
9.4.3.9.1 First Priority – Primary Conservation Areas – Most or all of the identified
Primary Conservation Areas should be included in the protected or common open space.
9.4.3.9.2 Second Priority – Secondary Conservation Areas – After including the
Primary Conservation Areas in the open space, the following Secondary Conservation
Areas should be considered for inclusion in the protected or common open space in the
following order:
(a) Land that has been used for traditional access to the water or public beaches.
(b) Land that will be used to provide new or expanded access to the water.
(c) Land within one hundred (100) feet of tidal waters or streams that drain to tidal
waters.
(d) Land that is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a significant vernal pool.
(e) Land that is adjacent to land that is owned by the Town, a land trust, formally
organized conservation organization, or state agency or that is otherwise
permanently protected as open space.
(f) Land which will allow for the continuation or connection of trails whether or not
such a facility is proposed as part of the subdivision.
(g) Land that maintains the integrity of blocks of unfragmented habitat or that
protects identified habitats and/or travel areas between habitat blocks.
(h) Land containing identified historic or archeological sites or significant cultural
features such as stone walls and specimen trees.
(i) Land that is in current or planned agricultural or managed forestry use.
(j) Land that is in current or planned commercial fisheries use.
(k) Land that protects scenic views visible from public property or the views of
abutting property owners or of dwellings to be built within the subdivision.
(l) Land that is located within a focus area identified in the Town’s adopted Open
Space Plan.
24
9.4.3.10 Use of Protected or Common Open Space
For purposes of this section, protected or common open space areas must comply with the
following:
a. The common open spaces must be dedicated to the recreational amenity and
environmental enhancement of the development, must protect natural resources, and
must be recorded as such. For the purpose of these provisions, common open space
means an area that:
1) is not encumbered in any way by a principal structure;
2) is not devoted to use as a roadway, road right-of-way, parking lot, sidewalk, or
similar structural improvements;
3) is left in its natural or undisturbed state, except for low-intensity recreational
facilities including the cutting of trails for non-motorized recreation, unless the land
will be managed by an approved sustainable forestry plan signed by a Licensed
Maine Forester, or for community gardens, or for continuance of currently existing
agricultural use, or for components of subsurface sewage disposal or water supply
systems;
4) is capable of being used and enjoyed for the purpose of informal and unstructured
recreation and relaxation; and
5) is legally and practicably accessible to residents of lots in the development out of
which the open space is taken unless the open space will be owned by a private
party for agricultural or other natural resource use or such access will compromise
the natural resource value of the open space.
b. The common open space shall be controlled by one (1) or more of the following
methods:
1) common ownership by the owners of the units within the development with
covenants or deed restrictions approved by the Planning Board establishing
restrictions on the use of the open space and provisions for its permanent
management; and/or
2) transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a land trust or other recognized
conservation organization; and/or
3) ownership by a private party for agricultural or other natural resource use provided
that permanent restrictions are in place to provide for its continued use for this
purpose.
c. Any development proposed under this section shall specify the ownership, use,
management, and entity responsible for maintenance of all common areas and facilities.
When the open space will be protected through covenants or deed restrictions, those
provisions must provide that the covenants or deed restrictions are enforceable by the
owner of any lot in the subdivision, by the owner of any lot outside of the subdivision
that abuts the common open space, or by the Town of Harpswell. The covenants, deed
25
restrictions and/or conservation easements shall provide for the monitoring of
compliance with the restrictions at least once every two (2) years. A report of the
monitoring setting out the findings of the monitoring and any needed corrective action
shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission
shall review the monitoring report and shall have the opportunity to conduct an on-site
visit if necessary to verify the findings of the monitoring report. If the homeowners
association or easement holder fails to conduct the required monitoring, the
Conservation Commission may carry out the monitoring. If the Town takes action to
monitor or enforce the covenants, deed restrictions, or conservation easements, the cost
of such monitoring and/or enforcement shall be recoverable by the Town from the
homeowners association or easement holder. The Planning Board shall approve the
arrangements for the ownership, control, use and maintenance of the common open
space in accordance with the standards of subsections (a) and (b) above as part of the
approval of a final subdivision plan. No changes in the use or management of common
open space shall be made without Planning Board approval and a note shall be provided
on the approved subdivision plan to this effect.
d. Any common open space or facility not retained by a private owner shall be
maintained by a developer or homeowners’ association unless and until it is transferred
in its entirety to a recognized conservation organization and until the transfer actually is
completed. The formation and incorporation by the developer of a homeowners’
association, if one is proposed, shall be accomplished prior to final subdivision
approval.
9.5. Land Not Suitable for Development
The following land shall not be included in the calculation of the area of a lot for the purposes of
meeting minimum lot size or other density or dimensional requirements:
9.5.1. Land below the maximum high water line of a great pond, stream, or tributary stream,
stream, or pond;
9.5.2. Land below the HAT of a coastal wetland,
9.5.3. Land below the upland edge of a freshwater wetland with a contiguous area of more than
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
9.5.4. Land which is part of a road, or a transportation right-of-way, or easement serving more
than two (2) lots, except rights-of-way or easements used exclusively for pedestrian access, and
9.5.5. Land created by the filling or draining of a great pond, stream, tributary stream, or
coastal or freshwater wetland.
Citizen’s Note: The filling or draining of a water body, tributary stream, or wetland will usually
require State and Federal approval.
9.6. Required Improvements
The following improvements are required for all subdivisions:
9.6.1. Lot Markers
26
9.6.1.1. Permanent markers must be set at all road intersections and points of curvature,
points of tangency, and intersections.
9.6.1.2. Permanent markers must be set at all corners and angle points of the subdivision
boundaries.
9.6.2. Water Supply
9.6.2.1. The proposed subdivision plan must have sufficient water available for the
reasonably foreseeable needs of the development.
9.6.2.2. If a central water supply system is provided by the applicant, the location and
protection of the source, and design, construction, and operation of the system must
conform to the standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (C.M.R. 10-144
231). The Code Enforcement Office shall be notified by the Planning Board of the location
of a proposed community water supply for reference in future amendment of the
Comprehensive Plan.
9.6.2.3. Lot design shall permit the placement of wells and subsurface wastewater disposal
areas, and reserve sites for subsurface wastewater disposal areas in compliance with the
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
9.6.2.4. Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface
water, and contamination from subsurface wastewater disposal systems and other sources
of potential contamination.
9.6.2.5. Water supplies shall meet the primary Drinking Water Standards contained in the
Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If existing water quality contains contaminants in
excess of the secondary drinking water standards in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking
Water, that fact shall be disclosed in a note on the Plan to be recorded in the Cumberland
County Registry of Deeds.
9.6.3. Sewage Disposal
9.6.3.1. The subsurface disposal must be in full compliance with the requirements of the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and to minimize adverse impacts on
ground water quality. In addition, the Planning Board may request the applicant to pay for a
second assessment of the site if the site has been identified as being marginally acceptable
according to the Maine State Plumbing Code.
9.6.3.2. Any septic system must be placed at least one hundred (100) feet from any existing
well whether the well is on the property or on contiguous property.
9.6.3.3. If common or cluster septic systems are used, a second site suitable for subsurface
disposal must be available.
9.6.4. Fire Protection
Provisions must be made for adequate emergency vehicle access to the subdivision and for
water supply for fire protection.
27
9.7. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
9.7.1. The proposed subdivision plan will not cause soil erosion or a reduction in the land's
capacity to hold waters such that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
9.7.2. The following measures relating to soil conservation and erosion and sediment control
shall be included where applicable as part of all projects submitted for review and approval
under this Ordinance:
9.7.2.1. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan, submitted
by the applicant, shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and cleanup
stages.
9.7.2.2. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be
controlled by employing the following best management techniques:
9.7.2.2.1. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other development
must be done in such a way to control erosion;
9.7.2.2.2. Development must preserve outstanding natural features and ensure
conformity with topography so as to create the least erosion;
9.7.2.2.3. The rate of surface runoff from the proposed development shall not be
increased;
9.7.2.2.4. Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained;
9.7.2.2.5. Disturbed soils must be stabilized as quickly as possible;
9.7.2.2.6. Permanent vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures, in
accordance with the standards of the most recent edition of Environmental Quality
Handbook as published by the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission, must
be installed as soon as possible; and
9.7.2.2.7. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and completely
on private property is the responsibility of the owner to the point of discharge at the
property line.
9.7.3. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from the
site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations.
9.8. Utilities
9.8.1. Any utility installations remaining above ground must be located, where possible, in
existing public ways and existing service corridors, and so as to avoid crossing open areas and
scenic views as identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
9.8.2. The size and proposed location of utilities must be shown on the plans.
28
9.9. Construction in Flood Hazard Areas
When any part of a development is located in a Flood Hazard Area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the plan must be in conformance with the Harpswell
Floodplain Management Ordinance.
9.10. Impact on Wetlands
Subdivision plans shall be designed to minimize impact on wetlands.
Septic systems and structures must be set back at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from the
upland edge of moderate or high value wetlands, at least seventy-five (75) feet from a water
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a coastal or freshwater wetland; and at least
twenty-five (25) feet from the upland edge of a forested wetland.
If the Local Plumbing Inspector, upon review of written evidence submitted by a soil scientist
licensed to practice in Maine, determines that the only practical alternative for a specific
subsurface wastewater disposal system is within the seventy-five (75) foot setback of the upland
edge of a coastal or freshwater wetland, or within the twenty-five (25) foot setback from the
upland edge of a forested wetland, the Planning Board may waive the setback requirement for
that specific subsurface wastewater disposal system, and set appropriate conditions on the system
as recommended by the Local Plumbing Inspector, provided that the waiver does not have the
effect of nullifying the purpose of this Ordinance or violating the State of Maine Subsurface
Waste Water Disposal Rules. When the Planning Board grants a waiver pursuant to this
paragraph, the final plan to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds shall indicate the waiver granted
and the date on which it was granted.
Except as specifically approved by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection or United
States Army Corps of Engineers, roads shall be located to avoid crossing a wetland, tributary
stream, or water body and must be set back at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from the upland
edge of moderate or high value wetlands, at least seventy-five (75) feet from the upland edge of a
coastal or freshwater wetland, and at least twenty-five (25) feet from the upland edge of a
forested wetland.
Any cutting of vegetation or timber harvesting in a wetland area described in this Section or
within the setbacks outlined above shall be conducted in accordance with Section 11.15 of the
Town’s Basic Land Use Ordinance or, where applicable, Section 15.14 of the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance.
Citizen’s Note: The filling or draining of a water body, tributary stream, wetland, or pond will
usually require State and Federal approval.
9.11. Impact on Groundwater
9.11.1. The proposed subdivision plan will not alone, or in conjunction with abutters or other
existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of groundwater.
9.11.2. A subdivision plan must not increase the nitrate concentration in the groundwater at the
boundary to more than ten (10) milligrams per liter.
29
9.11.3. Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed
as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking
water wells are recommended in the assessment, those standards must be included as a note on
the final plan.
9.11.4. The proposed subdivision plan shall use on-site techniques to assure that the amount of
aquifer recharge post-development is no less than the amount before development.
9.11.5. Groundwater withdrawals by a proposed subdivision shall not lower the water table
beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.
9.11.6. Water conservation devices shall be used by the applicant to minimize negative
groundwater impacts of the development.
9.12. Stormwater Management
9.12.1. The Planning Board shall consider the impact of the proposed subdivision on erosion,
drainage, and runoff on the development itself and on adjacent properties and water bodies. In
assessing impacts, the Planning Board shall consider site visits, existing drainage problems,
topographical information, and, if deemed necessary, a runoff analysis based on a twenty-five
(25) year storm as submitted by the applicant. Subdivisions of five (5) or more lots must be
reviewed and endorsed by an independent consultant hired by the Town.
9.12.2. Adequate provisions must be made for disposal of all storm-water generated within the
subdivision and any drained groundwater through a management system of swales, culverts,
underdrains, and storm drains. Stormwater shall be treated to remove oil, grease, sediment, and
other contaminants prior to discharge into a water body or tributary stream.
9.12.3. The stormwater management system must be designed to conduct stormwater flows to
existing water courses or storm drains, except where retention basins are designed or
groundwater recharge is desirable. The stormwater management system shall make provisions
so as to not have adverse effect on neighboring properties, downstream water quality, soil
erosion, or the public drainage system.
9.12.3.1. The minimum size for any storm drainage pipe shall be twelve (12) inches. All
downstream pipes must be the same size or larger. Pipe must be embedded in a fine
granular material.
9.12.3.2. Catch basins must be installed where necessary.
9.12.3.3. Outlets must be stabilized against soil erosion.
9.12.4. Stormwater runoff systems must infiltrate, detain, or retain water falling on the site
such that the rate of flow from the site does not exceed that which would occur in the
undeveloped state.
9.12.5. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, tributary stream, or surface water
drainage way, the surface water runoff to be created by the subdivision shall be controlled.
Easements for existing or proposed drainage rights-of-way shall be provided with swales,
culverts, catch basins, or other means of channeling surface water within the subdivision
30
and over other properties. The easements or rights-of-way shall be at least thirty (30) feet
wide and substantially conform with the lines of existing and proposed drainage ways.
9.13. Offshore Islands
Subdivisions proposed for offshore islands will require deeded mainland support facilities
including private landing and at least two (2) parking spaces per lot.
9.14. Aesthetic, Cultural, and Natural Values
The proposed subdivision plan will preserve the scenic and natural beauty of the area, aesthetics,
historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for
physical or visual access to the shoreline.
The developer may offer the Town, Land Trust, or appropriate conservation group the title or
easement to existing and future points of public access to the shoreline and open spaces valuable
for aesthetic, historic, or wildlife habitat or used for traditional recreation.
The Planning Board may require the inclusion of a note on the subdivision plan and deed
restriction on the affected lots restricting the clearing of trees to those areas designated on the
subdivision plan.
9.14.1. All subdivision plans must conform with the wildlife management guidelines
developed by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MIFW) for the
protection of significant wildlife habitat. Any clearing of vegetation that takes place within
seventy-five (75) feet of the upland edge of a wetland designated as high or moderate value for
waterfowl habitat by the MIFW or in the Comprehensive Plan shall be limited to that which is
necessary for allowed uses. This restriction shall appear as a note on the subdivision plan and
as a deed restriction on the affected lots.
9.14.2. All subdivisions must be designed so as not adversely to impact rare natural areas as
identified by the Natural Heritage Data Base in the Department of Economic and Community
Development.
9.14.3. All subdivisions must be designed so that the completed development shall protect
shellfish habitats and other marine environments.
9.14.4. All subdivisions shall be designed to protect historic, archaeological, scenic, or other
critical resources known to exist in the proposed subdivision.
9.14.5. All subdivisions must be designed to ensure that important scenic areas and open
spaces, as identified in the Comprehensive Plan for Harpswell, are maintained.
9.14.6. If the land proposed for subdivision is located on Route 24, Route 123, Cundy's Harbor
Road, or Mountain Road and at the time of application is forested, a wooded buffer strip no
less than twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be left along the road right-of-way. If at the time
of application, the land is not wooded, a buffer strip no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width
shall be left along the road right-of-way.
31
9.15. Traffic
9.15.1. The proposed subdivision plan will not cause unreasonable highway or public road
congestion or unsafe conditions for vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
9.15.2. General Requirements
9.15.2.1. Proposed subdivisions must provide for safe access to and from public and private
roads. Safe access shall be assured by providing adequate access points with respect to
sight distances, intersections, schools, and other traffic generators. An entrance permit will
be required from the Maine Department of Transportation. The road serving the
subdivision shall be adequate to carry the anticipated traffic.
9.15.2.2. Provisions must be made for providing and maintaining convenient and safe
emergency vehicle access to all structures at all times.
9.15.2.3. The proposed subdivision plan must provide for safe and convenient access for
pedestrians within the subdivision and from the subdivision to surrounding development
and open areas.
9.15.2.4. Upon receipt of the subdivision plan, the Planning Board may forward it to the
Road Commissioner or to the Town's Consulting Engineer for review and comment.
9.15.3. Road Design and Construction Standards
9.15.3.1. The road design and construction standards contained in the Road Ordinance must
be met by all roads within developments reviewed under this Ordinance, regardless of
whether the road is intended to be public or private. If the applicant can provide clear and
convincing evidence that an alternate road design is necessary to preserve community
character and the resulting design will not create safety or maintenance problems for the
Town, the Planning Board may waive the travel way width, shoulder width, or slope
requirements of the Road Ordinance.
9.15.3.2. All roads must be platted along contour elevations which will result in minimum
grades and greatest visibility whenever practicable, with consideration given for anticipated
use of the land.
9.15.3.3. The proposed road layout must be coordinated with the road system of the
surrounding areas. All roads must provide for the continuation of or connection to existing
roads in surrounding areas and provide means of ingress and egress for surrounding lots or
parcels of land.
Where necessary, as determined by the Planning Board, to safeguard against hazards for
traffic and pedestrians and/or to preserve the traffic bearing capacity of existing roads,
provisions shall be made for turning lanes, guard rails, traffic directional islands, frontage
roads, shared driveways, sidewalks, bicycle ways, and traffic controls on existing roads.
The applicant will pay for any safety improvement required on existing roads as a result of
the subdivision plan.
32
9.16. Homeowners/Landowners Association
If commonly owned property is proposed, the subdivision plan shall have a
Homeowners/Landowners Association which, at a minimum, shall provide for the following:
9.16.1. Covenants for mandatory membership in the Homeowners/Landowners association
setting forth the owners' rights, interests, and privileges in the association and the common
property and facilities, to be included in the deed for each lot or dwelling.
9.16.2. Articles of incorporation of the proposed Homeowners/Landowners association as a
not-for-profit corporation.
9.16.3. By-laws of the proposed Homeowners/Landowners association specifying the
responsibilities and authority of the association, the operating procedures of the association,
and providing for proper capitalization of the association to cover the costs of major repairs,
maintenance, and replacement of common facilities.
9.16.4. Where a proposed subdivision would use an existing private road(s) for access,
provision requiring the subdivision developer and/or lot owners to contribute fairly to the cost
of maintenance, repair, and replacement of such road(s).
9.16.5. Where an alternate subdivision design is proposed, provision requiring the subdivision
developer and/or lot owners to contribute fairly to the cost of maintenance, repair, and
replacement of the common septic system(s), well(s), and/or open space.
These provisions must satisfy the Planning Board that the homeowners/landowners association
has the responsibility of maintaining the common property or facilities, has the power to levy
annual charges against all owners of lots or dwelling units to defray the expenses connected with
the maintenance, repair, and replacement of common property and facilities and tax assessments,
has the power to place a lien on the property of members who fail to pay dues or assessments,
and that the applicant shall maintain control of the common property, and be responsible for its
maintenance until development sufficient to support the association has taken place.
The developer shall maintain control of common open space and facilities and be responsible for
their maintenance until at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the development's lots or units have
been completed and sold, with evidence of such completion and sales submitted to and approved
by the Planning Board.
Covenants for mandatory membership in the association shall be approved by the Planning
Board and included in the deed for each lot or unit or incorporated by reference from a master
document recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
9.17. Community Docks
For any subdivision located in whole or in part the Shoreland Zone, no new wharf, pier, dock
and/or float shall be constructed to service only one lot if the upland area on which the wharf,
pier, dock and/or float is proposed to be located may reasonably be arranged to service more than
one lot, in which case the wharf, pier, dock and/or float may only be improved and used as a
community dock for as many of the lots in the subdivision as it can reasonably accommodate.
33
Community docks shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the
terms of the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
9.18. Workforce Housing
Any subdivision that is to include Workforce Housing Units or Lots shall comply with Section
11.18, Workforce Housing, of the Town’s Basic Land Use Ordinance, as may be amended from
time to time.
9.19. Spaghetti Lots are prohibited If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore
frontage on a river, stream, brook, great pond, or coastal wetland, as these features are defined in
Title 38, Section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision shall have a lot depth to
shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
9.20. Liquidation harvesting Timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been harvested
in violation of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12, Section 8869 Subsection 14.
SECTION 10. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
10.1. Requirement
Prior to approval of the subdivision plan, the Planning Board shall require documentation that
the applicant has financial capacity to carry out the proposed project. A performance guarantee,
letter of credit or similar agreement with the Planning Board may be required for the following,
whether on-site or off-site:
10.1.1. The construction of roads and/or buffer improvements;
10.1.2. The construction of any water supply or sewage system other than individual on-site
facilities;
10.1.3. The construction of drainage systems, erosion control measures, or water supply
systems for fire protection; and
10.1.4. The construction of other improvements, such as buffer strips, intended to minimize
adverse effects on the public or on abutting properties.
10.2. Form of Guarantee
The performance guarantee may be tendered as a certified check payable to the Town, a savings
account passbook in the name of the Town, an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution acceptable to the Selectmen, or a faithful performance bond running to the Town and
issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Maine and acceptable to the
Selectmen.
10.3. Amount of Guarantee
The amount of the performance guarantee is one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the cost
of the requirements of Subsection 10.1. All guarantees are conditioned upon the completion of
34
all such improvements within two (2) years from the date of approval or another agreed upon
date based on Section 8.12 of this Ordinance.
10.4. Release of Guarantee
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall determine
to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the CEO or the Town's consultant and whatever
other agencies and departments may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or
exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which
the release is requested.
10.5. Default
If, upon inspection, the CEO or the Town's consultant finds that any of the required
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved plan and
specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to the Board of
Selectmen, the Planning Board, and the applicant. The performance guarantee shall then remain
in place until the provisions of Subsection 10.4 are met.
If the requirements of Subsection 10.4 are not met within a reasonable period of time after such
notice, the Selectmen may utilize the funds from the guarantee to cause the completion of the
improvements or to restore the site to its pre-development condition.
SECTION 11. PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE OF ROADS, EASEMENTS, OR OPEN SPACE
The approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision plan shall not constitute or be evidence of
any acceptance by the Town of any road, easement, or open space shown on such plan. Such
acceptance may only be accomplished by the voters of the Town at Town Meeting.
SECTION 12. ENFORCEMENT
12.1. No building permit shall be issued under the Town's Ordinance, no building or site
disturbance shall commence, and no plan of a division or development of land within the Town
which constitutes a subdivision shall commence until the plan is recorded in the Cumberland
County Registry of Deeds.
12.2. No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity may sell, lease, develop, build upon,
occupy any building or structure, or convey for consideration, offer or agree to sell, lease,
develop, build upon, occupy any building or structure, or convey for consideration any land in a
subdivision which has not been approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the Cumberland
County Registry of Deeds, nor may any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity convey
any land in any approved subdivision plan unless the required permanent markers are set.
12.3. No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity may convey, offer, or agree to convey
any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on the approved plan as a separate lot.
12.4. Development of a subdivision without Planning Board approval is a violation of this
Ordinance and State law.
35
12.5. Violations of this Ordinance are punishable in accordance with the 30-A M.R.S.A.
§4452, as may be amended from time to time.
SECTION 13. EXPIRATION OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Approval of a subdivision plan shall lapse if the applicant, or his or her successor, has not
substantially started construction of approved improvements within one (1) year or within such
time period as may be agreed upon in writing by the Planning Board and the applicant. One (1),
one (1) year extension may be granted by the Planning Board. Three (3) months prior to the
expiration date for substantial start of construction, the CEO shall notify the applicant by
certified mail of the date of expiration.
SECTION 14. APPEALS
Any aggrieved party who participated in the proceedings before the Planning Board may take an
appeal to the Board of Appeals within forty-five (45) days from the date of any decision of the
Planning Board.
SECTION 15. INTERPRETATION, VALIDITY, CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES, AND
EFFECTIVE DATE
15.1. Editorial Notes
Throughout this Ordinance there are editorial "citizen’s notes" which are reproduced in italicized
print. These notes shall not be considered part of this Ordinance as adopted by the Town, but
shall only be considered guides to the intent of Ordinance provisions and their proper
interpretation.
15.2. Validity, Conflict of Ordinances, and Effective Date
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance for any reason be held void and invalid, it shall
not affect the validity of any other section or provision.
1
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES ORDINANCE
Adopted March 6, 1999
Amended March 10, 2007
Amended March 12, 2011
Amended March 10, 2018
CONTENTS
Page
Section 1 Title………………………………………………………………………... 2
Section 2 Authority………………………………………………………………....... 2
Section 3 Purpose……………………………………………………………………. 2
Section 4 Conflict and Severability………………………………………………….. 3
4.1 Conflicts with other Ordinances
4.2 Severability
Section 5 Applicability………………………………………………………………. 3
5.1 Exemptions
5.2 Existing Antennas
Section 6 Review and Approval Authority………………………………………….. 4
6.1 Approval Required
6.2 Approval Authority
Section 7 Approval Process…………………………………………………………. 4
7.1 Pre-Application Conference
7.2 Application
7.3 Submission Waiver
7.4 Fees
7.5 Notice of Complete Application
7.6 Public Hearing
7.7 Approval
Section 8 Standards of Review………………………………………………………. 11
8.1 CEO Approval Standards
8.2 Planning Board Approval Standards
8.3 Standard Conditions of Approval
Section 9 Amendment to an Approved Application………………………………… 15
Section 10 Abandonment……………………………………………………………... 15
Section 11 Appeals……………………………………………………………………. 15
Section 12 Administration and Enforcement………………………………………….. 15
Section 13 Penalties…………………………………………………………………… 16
Section 14 Definitions………………………………………………………………… 16
Section 15 Effective Date……………………………………………………………… 18
2
Section 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Siting
Ordinance" of Harpswell, Maine, (hereinafter referred to as the “ordinance").
Section 2. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the
Maine Constitution; the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 (Home Rule), and the
provisions of the Planning and Land Use Regulation Act, Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4312 et seq.
Section 3. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a process and a set of standards for the construction of
wireless telecommunications facilities in order to:
Implement a municipal policy concerning the provision of wireless telecommunications services, and
the siting of their facilities;
Establish clear guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of municipal authority to
regulate wireless telecommunications facilities;
Allow competition in telecommunications service;
Encourage the provision of advanced telecommunications services to the largest number of
businesses, institutions and residents of Harpswell;
Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights of way of Harpswell for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
Ensure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within Harpswell comply
with the ordinances of Harpswell;
Ensure that Harpswell can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and
welfare;
Encourage the colocation of wireless telecommunications facilities, thus helping to minimize adverse
visual impacts on the community;
Enable Harpswell to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state
regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development;
Further the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, while promoting orderly development of
the town with minimal impacts on existing uses; and
3
Protect the scenic and visual character of the community.
Section 4. Conflict and Severability
4.1 Conflicts with other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive provision shall
apply.
4.2 Severability
The invalidity of any part of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other part of this ordinance.
Section 5. Applicability
This local land use ordinance applies to all construction and expansion of wireless
telecommunications facilities, except as provided in Section 5.1.
5.1. Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance:
5.1.1 Emergency Wireless Telecommunications Facility. Temporary wireless
communication facilities for emergency communications by public officials.
5.1.2 Amateur (ham) radio stations. Amateur (ham) radio stations licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) with antennas that do not exceed seventy-five (75) feet
in height. Amateur (ham) radio antennas may exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height if the
Planning Board finds that the proposed antenna meets the standards of Sections 8.2.4, 8.2.5,
8.2.6, 8.2.7, 8.2.8, 8.2.9, 8.2.11, 8.2.12, and 8.2.13.
5.1.3 Parabolic antenna. Parabolic Antennas less than seven (7) feet in diameter, that are
an accessory use of the property.
5.1.4 Maintenance or repair. Maintenance, repair or reconstruction of a wireless
telecommunications facility and related equipment, provided that there is no change in the
height or any other dimension of the facility.
5.1.5 Temporary wireless telecommunications facility. Temporary wireless
telecommunications facility, in operation for a maximum period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
4
5.2 Existing wireless telecommunications facilities.
Wireless telecommunications facilities existing prior to March 15, 1998, that were in compliance
with the Town’s zoning regulations as of that date, or wireless telecommunications facilities that
were or have been constructed on or after March 15, 1998 in compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance then in effect, are considered to be existing wireless telecommunications facilities for
purposes of this Ordinance. Any modifications in the size or use of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility must comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. Except as
provided herein, an existing wireless telecommunications facility may not be enlarged, expanded or
increased in size.
Section 6. Review and Approval Authority
6.1. Approval Required
No person shall construct or expand a wireless telecommunication facility without approval of the
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or the Planning Board as follows:
6.1.1 Expansion of an Existing Facility and Colocation. Approval by the CEO is required
for any expansion of an existing wireless telecommunications facility that increases the
height of the facility by no more than 20 feet; accessory use of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility; or colocation on an existing wireless telecommunications
facility.
6.1.2 New Construction. Approval of the Planning Board is required for construction of a
new wireless telecommunications facility; and any expansion of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility that increases the height of the facility by more than 20 feet.
6.2 Approval Authority
In accordance with Section 6.1 above, the CEO or Planning Board shall review applications for
wireless telecommunications facilities, and make written findings on whether the proposed facility
complies with this Ordinance.
Section 7. Approval Process
7.1 Pre-Application Conference
All persons seeking approval of the CEO or the Planning Board under this ordinance shall meet with
the CEO no less than thirty (30) days before filing an application. At this meeting, the CEO shall
explain to the applicant the ordinance provisions, as well as application forms and submissions that
will be required under this ordinance.
5
7.2 Application
All persons seeking approval of the CEO or the Planning Board under this ordinance shall submit an
application as provided below. The CEO shall be responsible for ensuring that notice of
the application has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community.
7.2.1 Application for CEO Approval. Applications for permit approval by the CEO must
include the following materials and information:
7.2.1.1 Documentation of the applicant’s right, title, or interest in the property where
the facility is to be sited, including name and address of the property owner and the
applicant.
7.2.1.2 A copy of the FCC license for the facility or a signed statement from the
owner or operator of the facility attesting that the facility complies with current FCC
regulations.
7.2.1.3 Identification of districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in
American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or
eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C.
470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
7.2.1.4 Location map and elevation drawings of the proposed facility and any other
proposed structures, showing color, and identifying structural materials.
7.2.1.5 For proposed expansion of a facility, a signed statement that commits the
owner of the facility, and his or her successors in interest, to:
7.2.1.5.1 respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential colocation applicant, in exchange for a
reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
7.2.1.5.2 negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties;
7.2.1.5.3 allow shared use if an applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable
charges for colocation;
7.2.1.5.4 require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on
community rates and generally accepted accounting principles. This charge
may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning project administration, land costs, site design, construction and
maintenance, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of
adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without
causing electromagnetic interference.
6
7.2.2 Application for Planning Board Approval. An application for approval by the
Planning Board must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application must
include the following information:
7.2.2.1. Documentation of the applicant’s right, title, or interest in the property on
which the facility is to be sited, including name and address of the property owner
and the applicant.
7.2.2.2 A copy of the FCC license for the facility, or a signed statement from the
owner or operator of the facility attesting that the facility complies with current FCC
regulations.
7.2.2.3 A USGS 7.5 minute topographic map showing the location of all structures
and wireless telecommunications facilities above 150 feet in height above ground
level, except antennas located on roof tops, within a five (5) mile radius of the
proposed facility, unless this information has been previously made available to the
municipality. This requirement may be met by submitting current information (within
thirty days of the date the application is filed) from the FCC Tower Registration
Database.
7.2.2.4 A site plan:
7.2.2.4.1 prepared and certified by a professional engineer registered in
Maine indicating the location, type, and height of the proposed facility,
antenna capacity, on-site and abutting off-site land uses, means of access,
setbacks from property lines, and all applicable American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) technical and structural codes;
7.2.2.4.2 certification by the applicant that the proposed facility complies
with all FCC standards for radio emissions is required; and
7.2.2.4.3 a boundary survey for the project performed by a land surveyor
licensed by the State of Maine.
7.2.2.5 A scenic assessment, consisting of the following:
7.2.2.5.1 Elevation drawings of the proposed facility, and any other proposed
structures, showing height above ground level;
7.2.2.5.2 A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of the
facility on the site; location of existing structures, trees, and other significant
site features; the type and location of plants proposed to screen the facility;
the method of fencing, the color of the structure, and the proposed lighting
method.
7
7.2.2.5.3 Photo simulations of the proposed facility taken from perspectives
determined by the Planning Board, or their designee, during the preapplication
conference. Each photo must be labeled with the line of sight,
elevation, and with the date taken imprinted on the photograph. The photos
must show the color of the facility and method of screening.
7.2.2.5.4 A narrative discussing:
7.2.2.5.4.1 the extent to which the proposed facility would be visible
from or within a designated scenic resource,
7.2.2.5.4.2 the tree line elevation of vegetation within one hundred
(100) feet of the facility, and
7.2.2.5.4.3 the distance to the proposed facility from the designated
scenic resource’s noted viewpoints.
7.2.2.6 A written description of how the proposed facility fits into the applicant’s
telecommunications network. This submission requirement does not require
disclosure of confidential business information.
7.2.2.7 Evidence demonstrating that no existing building, site, or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed facility, the evidence for which may consist of
any one or more of the following:
7.2.2.7.1 Evidence that no existing facilities are located within the targeted
market coverage area as required to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements,
7.2.2.7.2 Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient height or
cannot be increased in height at a reasonable cost to meet the applicant's
engineering requirements,
7.2.2.7.3 Evidence that existing facilities do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
Specifically:
7.2.2.7.3.1 Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing facility, considering the existing and planned
use of those facilities, and these existing facilities cannot be
reinforced to accommodate the new equipment.
7.2.2.7.3.2 The applicant's proposed antenna or equipment would
cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna or equipment on the existing
8
facility would cause interference with the applicant's proposed
antenna.
7.2.2.7.3.3 Existing or approved facilities do not have space on
which planned equipment can be placed so it can function effectively.
7.2.2.7.4 For facilities existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share or adapt an existing facility are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding the pro rata share of a new facility development are presumed to be
unreasonable. This evidence shall also be satisfactory for a tower built after
the passage of this ordinance;
7.2.2.7.5 Evidence that the applicant has made diligent good faith efforts to
negotiate colocation on an existing facility, building, or structure, and has
been denied access;
7.2.2.8 Identification of districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in
American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or
eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C.
470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and 800).
7.2.2.9 A signed statement stating that the owner of the wireless telecommunications
facility and his or her successors and assigns agree to:
7.2.2.9.1 respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for
information from a potential colocation applicant, in exchange for a
reasonable fee not in excess of the actual cost of preparing a response;
7.2.2.9.2 negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless
telecommunications facility by third parties;
7.2.2.9.3 allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an
applicant agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for colocation;
7.2.2.9.4 require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on
community rates and generally accepted accounting principles. This charge
may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning project administration, land costs, site design, construction,
financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the
tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the
facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the useful life
span of the facility.
9
7.2.2.10 A form of surety approved by the Planning Board to pay for the costs of
removing the facility if it is abandoned.
7.2.2.11 Evidence that a notice of the application has been published in a local
newspaper of general circulation in the community.
7.3 Submission Waiver
The CEO or Planning Board, as appropriate, may waive any of the submission requirements based
upon a written request of the applicant submitted at the time of application. A waiver of any
submission requirement may be granted only if the CEO or Planning Board finds in writing that due
to special circumstances of the application, the information is not required to determine compliance
with the standards of this Ordinance.
7.4 Fees
7.4.1 CEO Application Fee
An application for CEO approval shall include payment of an application fee established by
the Selectmen. The application shall not be considered complete until this fee is paid. The
applicant is entitled to a refund of the application fee if the application is withdrawn within
fifteen (15) days of date of filing, less all expenses incurred by Harpswell to review the
application.
7.4.2 Planning Board Application Fee
An application for Planning Board approval shall include payment of an application fee
established by the Selectmen. The application shall not be considered complete until this fee
is paid. An applicant is entitled to a refund of the application portion of fee if the application
is withdrawn within fifteen (15) days of date of filing, less all expenses incurred by the
Harpswell to review the application.
7.4.3 Planning Board Review Fee
An applicant for approval by the Planning Board shall pay all reasonable and customary fees
incurred by the municipality that are necessary to review the application. The review fee shall
be paid in full prior to the start of construction.
That portion of the review fee not used shall be returned to the applicant within fourteen (14)
days of the Planning Board’s decision.
7.5 Notice of Complete Application
Upon receipt of an application, the CEO shall provide the applicant with a dated receipt. Within
thirty (30) working days of receipt of an application the CEO shall review the application and
10
determine if the application meets the submission requirements. The CEO or Planing Board, as
appropriate, shall review any requests for a waiver from the submission requirements and shall act on
these requests prior to determining the completeness of the application.
If the application is complete, the CEO shall notify the applicant in writing of this determination and
require the applicant to provide a sufficient number of copies of the application to the Planning
Board.
If the application is incomplete, the CEO shall notify the applicant in writing, specifying the
additional materials or information required to complete the application.
If the application is deemed to be complete, and requires Planning Board review, the CEO shall
notify all abutters to the site as shown on the Assessor’s records, by first-class mail, that an
application has been accepted. This notice shall contain a brief description of the proposed activity
and the name of the applicant, give the location of a copy of the application available for inspection,
and provide the date, time, and place of the Planning Board meeting at which the application will be
considered. Failure on the part of any abutter to receive such notice shall not be grounds for delay of
any consideration of the application nor denial of the project.
7.6 Public Hearing
For applications for Planning Board approval under Section 6.1.2, a public hearing shall be held
within 35 days of the notice of the complete application.
7.7 Approval
7.7.1 CEO Approval. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a complete application for
approval under Section 6.1.1, the CEO shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application in writing, together with the findings on which that decision is based. The CEO
shall approve the application if the CEO finds that the application complies with the
provisions in Section 8.1 of this ordinance.
The CEO shall notify all abutters of the decision to issue a permit under this section. The
time period may be extended upon agreement between the applicant and the CEO.
7.7.2 Planning Board Approval. Within ninety (90) days of receiving a complete
application for approval under Section 6.1.2, the Planning Board shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application in writing, together with the findings on which that
decision is based However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications that
would prevent the Planning Board from making a decision within the required ninety (90)
day time period, then a decision on the application shall be issued within sixty (60) days of
the public hearing, if necessary, or within sixty (60) days of the completed Planning Board
review. This time period may be extended upon agreement between the applicant and the
Planning Board.
11
Section 8. Standards of Review
To obtain approval from the CEO or the Planning Board, an application must comply with the
standards in this section.
8.1 CEO Approval Standards
An application for approval by the CEO under Section 6.1.1 must meet the following
standards.
8.1.1 The proposed facility is an expansion, accessory use, or colocation to a structure
existing at the time the application is submitted.
8.1.2 The applicant has sufficient right, title, or interest to locate the proposed facility on the
existing structure.
8.1.3 The proposed facility increases the height of the exiting structure by no more than
twenty (20) feet.
8.1.4 The proposed facility will be constructed with materials and colors that match or blend
with the surrounding natural or built environment, to the maximum extent practicable.
8.1.5 The proposed facility, to the greatest degree practicable, shall have no unreasonable
adverse impact upon districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant in American
history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, that are listed, or eligible for
listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (see 16 U.S.C. 470w(5); 36 CFR 60 and
800).
8.2 Planning Board Approval Standards
An application for approval by the Planning Board under Section 6.1.2 must meet the following
standards.
8.2.1 Priority of Locations. New wireless telecommunications facilities must be located
according to the priorities below. The applicant shall demonstrate that a facility of a higher
priority cannot reasonably accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility.
8.2.1.1 Colocation on an existing wireless telecommunications facility or other
existing structure on (a) the parcel on which the Harpswell television transmitting
tower is located, or (b) the parcel on which the Town Office and the Recycling
Center are located, or (c) the water tower located at Mitchell Field, or
8.2.1.2 Within the area defined in 8.2.1.1 above but not colocated.
8.2.2 Siting on Municipal Property. If an applicant proposes to locate a new wireless
telecommunications facility, or expand an existing facility on municipal property, the
12
applicant must show the following:
8.2.2.1 The proposed location complies with applicable municipal policies and
ordinances.
8.2.2.2 The proposed facility will not interfere with the intended purpose of the
property.
8.2.2.3 The applicant has adequate liability insurance and a lease agreement with the
municipality that includes reasonable compensation for the use of the property and
other provisions to safeguard the public rights and interests in the property.
8.2.3 Design for Colocation. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related
equipment must be designed and constructed to accommodate expansion for future
colocation of at least three additional wireless telecommunications facilities or providers.
However, the Planning Board may waive or modify this standard where the district height
limitation effectively prevents future colocation.
8.2.4 Height. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be no more than three
hundred (300) feet in height.
8.2.5 Setbacks. A new or expanded wireless telecommunications facility must comply
with the set back requirements for the area or zoning district in which it is located, or be set
back one hundred five percent (105%) of its height from all property lines, whichever is
greater. The setback may be satisfied by including the areas outside the property boundaries
if secured by an easement; provided, however, that the Planning Board may reduce the
setback upon a showing by the applicant that the facility is designed to collapse in a manner
that will not harm other property. This reduction may not reduce the setback below the
requirements of any other applicable ordinance of the Town of Harpswell.
8.2.6 Landscaping. A new wireless telecommunications facility and related equipment must
be screened with plants from view by abutting properties, to the maximum extent practicable.
Existing plants and natural land forms on the site shall also be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable.
8.2.7 Fencing. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be fenced to discourage
trespass on the facility and to discourage climbing on any structure by trespassers.
8.2.8 Lighting. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be illuminated only as
necessary to comply with FAA or other applicable state and federal requirements. Required
lighting shall be up-shielded to minimize the visual impact to local residents; provided,
however, that such shielding is permissible by FAA or other applicable state and federal
requirements.
8.2.8.1 Security lighting may be used as long as it is shielded to be down-directional
13
to retain light within the boundaries of the site, to the maximum extent practicable;
provided, however, that the proposed lighting does not exceed 20’.
8.2.9 Color and Materials. A new wireless telecommunications facility must be constructed
with materials and colors that match or blend with the surrounding natural or built
environment, to the maximum extent practicable. Unless otherwise required, muted colors,
earth tones, and subdued hues shall be used. No business identification or advertising is
permitted on any such facility.
8.2.10 Structural Standards. A new wireless telecommunications facility must comply with
the current Electronic Industries Association/ Telecommunications Industries Association
(EIA/TIA) 222 Revision Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures."
8.2.10.1. Guyed towers should use daytime visual markers (e.g., bird diverter
devices) on the guy wires to prevent collisions by local and migratory bird species.
8.2.11 Visual Impact. The proposed wireless telecommunications facility will have no
unreasonable adverse impact upon designated scenic resources within the Town, as identified
either in the Harpswell Comprehensive Plan, or by a State or federal agency.
8.2.11.1 In determining the potential unreasonable adverse impact of the proposed
facility upon the designated scenic resources, the Planning Board shall consider the
following factors:
8.2.11.1.1 The extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility is visible above tree line, from the viewpoint(s) of the impacted
designated scenic resource;
8.2.11.1.2 the type, number, height, and proximity of existing structures and
features, and background features within the same line of sight as the
proposed facility;
8.2.11.1.3 the extent to which the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility would be visible from the viewpoint(s);
8.2.11.1.4 the amount of vegetative screening;
8.2.11.1.5 the distance of the proposed facility from the viewpoint and the
facility’s location within the designated scenic resource; and
8.2.11.1.6 the presence of reasonable alternatives that allow the facility to
function consistently with its purpose.
8.2.12 Noise. During construction, repair, or replacement, operation of a back-up power
14
generator at any time during a power failure, and testing of a back-up generator between
8 a.m. and 9 p.m. is exempt from existing municipal noise standards.
8.2.13 Historic & Archaeological Properties. The proposed facility, to the greatest degree
practicable, will have no unreasonable adverse impact upon a historic district, site or
structure which is currently listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places.
8.3 Standard Conditions of Approval
The following standard conditions of approval shall be a part of any approval or conditional approval
issued by the CEO or Planning Board. Where necessary to ensure that an approved project meets the
criteria of this ordinance, the Planning Board can impose additional conditions of approval.
Reference to the conditions of approval shall be clearly noted on the final approved site plan, and
shall include:
8.3.1 The owner of the wireless telecommunications facility and his or her successors and
assigns agree to:
8.3.1.1 respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from
a potential colocation applicant, in exchange for a reasonable fee not in excess of the
actual cost of preparing a response;
8.3.1.2 negotiate in good faith for shared use of the wireless telecommunications
facility by third parties;
8.3.1.3 allow shared use of the wireless telecommunications facility if an applicant
agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges for colocation.
8.3.1.4 require no more than a reasonable charge for shared use of the wireless
telecommunications facility, based on community rates and generally accepted
accounting principles. This charge may include, but is not limited to, a pro rata share
of the cost of site selection, planning project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance, financing, return on equity, depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without
causing electromagnetic interference. The amortization of the above costs by the
facility owner shall be accomplished at a reasonable rate, over the life span of the
useful life of the wireless telecommunications facility.
8.3.2 Upon request by the municipality, the applicant shall certify compliance with all
applicable FCC radio frequency emissions regulations.
15
Section 9 Amendment to an Approved Application
Any changes to an approved application must be approved by the CEO or the Planning Board, in
accordance with Section 6.
Section 10 Abandonment
A wireless telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months shall be considered abandoned. The CEO shall notify the owner of an abandoned facility in
writing and order the removal of the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice.
The owner of the facility shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to demonstrate to
the CEO that the facility has not been abandoned.
If the Owner fails to show that the facility is in active operation, the owner shall have sixty (60) days
to remove the facility. If the facility is not removed within this time period, the municipality may
remove the facility at the owner's expense. The owner of the facility shall pay all site reclamation
costs deemed necessary and reasonable to return the site to its pre-construction condition, including
the removal of roads, and reestablishment of vegetation.
If a surety has been given to the municipality for removal of the facility, the owner of the facility may
apply to the Planning Board for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment are
removed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
Section 11 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CEO or the Planning Board under this ordinance may
appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals. Written notice of an appeal must be filed with the
Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the decision. The notice of appeal shall clearly state the
reasons for the appeal which contains a concise written statement indicating what decision of the
CEO or Planning Board the aggrieved party believes were clearly contrary to specific provisions of
this ordinance, what relief is requested, and why it should be granted.
Section 12 Administration and Enforcement
The CEO shall enforce this ordinance. If the CEO finds that any provision of this ordinance has been
violated, the CEO shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the
nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The CEO shall order
correction of the violation and may take any other legal action to ensure compliance with this
ordinance.
The Selectmen, or their authorized agent, are authorized to enter into administrative consent
agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this ordinance and recovering fines without
court action. Such agreements shall not allow a violation of this ordinance to continue unless: there
is clear and convincing evidence that the violation occurred as a direct result of erroneous advice
16
given by an authorized municipal official upon which the applicant reasonably relied to its detriment
and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith; the removal of the violation will result in a
threat to public health and safety or substantial environmental damage.
Section 13 Penalties
Any person who owns or controls any building or property that violates this ordinance shall be fined
in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation continues after notification
by the CEO shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 14 Definitions
The terms used in this ordinance shall have the following meanings:
14.1 "Antenna" means any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.
14.2 "Antenna Height" means the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, even if said highest point is an
antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other
appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of the facility site. If the
support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest
grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
14.3 "Colocation" means the use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one
wireless telecommunications provider.
14.4 “Designated Scenic Resource” means that specific location, view, or corridor, as
identified as a scenic resource in the Harpswell Comprehensive Plan or by a State or federal
agency that consists of:
14.4.1 a three dimensional area extending out from a particular viewpoint on a
public way or within a public recreational area, focusing on a single object, such as a
mountain, resulting in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, such a downtown
skyline or mountain range, resulting in a panoramic view corridor; or
14.4.2 lateral terrain features such as valley sides or woodland as observed to either
side of the observer, constraining the view into a narrow or particular field, as seen
from a viewpoint on a public way or within a public recreational area.
14.3 “Expansion” means the addition of antennas, towers, or other devices to an existing
structure.
14.4 "FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration, or its lawful successor.
17
14.5 "FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
14.6 "Height" means the vertical measurement from a point on the ground at the mean finish
grade adjoining the foundation as calculated by averaging the highest and lowest finished
grade around the building or structure, to the highest point of the building or structure. The
highest point shall exclude farm building components, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, domes, water towers, bell towers, church spires, processing towers, tanks,
bulkheads, or other building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the
main roofs of buildings.
14.7 "Historic or Archaeological Resources" means resources that are:
14.7.1.1 Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or eligible
for listing on the National Register;
14.7.1.2 Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered
historic district;
14.7.1.3 Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
14.7.1.4 Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified by Secretary of the
Interior through the Maine Historic Preservation Commission; or
14.7.1.5 Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission as having significant value as an historic or archaeological
resource and any areas identified in the municipality’s comprehensive plan, which
have been listed or are eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places.
14.8 "Historic District" means a geographically definable area possessing a significant
concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past
events or aesthetically by plan or physical development and identified in the municipality’s
comprehensive plan, which is listed or is eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places. Such historic districts may also comprise individual elements separated
geographically, but linked by association or history.
14.9 "Historic Landmark" means any improvement, building or structure of particular
historic or architectural significance to the Town relating to its heritage, cultural, social,
economic or political history, or which exemplifies historic personages or important events in
18
local, state or national history identified in the municipality’s comprehensive plan, which
have been listed or are eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
14.10 “Line of sight” means the direct view of the object from the designated scenic
resource.
14.11 "Parabolic Antenna" (also known as a satellite dish antenna) means an antenna which
is bowl-shaped, designed for the reception and or transmission of radio frequency
communication signals in a specific directional pattern.
14.12 "Principal Use" means the use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory
to another use on the same premises.
14.13 “Public Recreational Facility” means a regionally or locally significant facility, as
defined and identified either by State statute or in the municipality's adopted comprehensive
plan, designed to serve the recreational needs of municipal property owners.
14.14 “Targeted Market Coverage Area” means the area which is targeted to be served by
this proposed telecommunications facility.
14.15 “Unreasonable Adverse Impact” means that the proposed project would produce an
end result which is:
14.15.1 excessively out-of-character with the designated scenic resources affected,
including existing buildings structures and features within the designated scenic
resource, and
14.15.2 would significantly diminish the scenic value of the designated scenic
resource.
14.16 “Viewpoint” means that location which is identified either in the municipally adopted
comprehensive plan or by a federal or State agency, and which serves as the basis for the
location and determination of a particular designated scenic resource.
14.17 "Wireless Telecommunications Facility" or “Facility” means any structure, antenna,
tower, or other device which provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile
wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile
radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange phone services, specialized
mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange access services,
and personal communications service (PCS) or pager services.
Section 15. Effective Date
This ordinance becomes effective on March 6, 1999.