CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF
LEWISTON, MAINE
________
Published by Order of the City Council
________
Approved February 7, 1995
Effective March 9, 1995
________
OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
LEWISTON, MAINE
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
________
John T. Jenkins
Mayor
________
Paul J. Poliquin
Frank J. Kelly
Lionel R. Goulet
Normand Poulin
George R. Ricker
Peter R. Grenier
Barry J. Putnam
City Council
________
Robert J. Mulready
City Administrator
________
Isaacson & Raymond
City Attorney
________
Gerald P. Berube
City Clerk
No. 95-3
Effective: 3/9/1995
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE
CITY OF LEWISTON
THE CITY OF LEWISTON HEREBY ORDAINS:
A new Code of Ordinances for the City of Lewiston is hereby adopted including
provisions for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein; provisions for a penalty for
the violation thereof; and provisions for the manner of amending such code.
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CITY OF LEWISTON, MAINE
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Lewiston, Maine," published
by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 19,
1994, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are
repealed.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any
ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this
ordinance.
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in
pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each act of violation
and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the
amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory
ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the council may pursue other remedies
such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate
the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 19, 1994, that amend or refer to ordinances that
have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of
the Code.
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:1
PART I
CITY OF LEWISTON
CHARTER*
Article I. Grant of Powers to the City
Sec. 1.01. Corporate existence retained.
Sec. 1.02. Powers and duties.
Sec. 1.03. Construction.
Sec. 1.04. Intergovernmental relations.
Article II. City Council
Sec. 2.01. Composition, eligibility, wards, elections and terms.
Sec. 2.02. Compensation, expenses.
Sec. 2.03. Mayor.
Sec. 2.04. President of the council.
Sec. 2.05. Prohibition.
Sec. 2.06. Forfeiture of office of councilor.
Sec. 2.07. Forfeiture of office of mayor.
Sec. 2.08. Secretary to the council.
Sec. 2.09. Investigations.
Sec. 2.10. Procedure.
Sec. 2.11. Ordinances in general.
Sec. 2.12. Emergency ordinances.
Sec. 2.13. Initiative and referendum.
Article III. City Administrator
Sec. 3.01. Appointment, qualifications, compensation.
Sec. 3.02. Powers and duties of the city administrator.
Sec. 3.03. Acting city administrator.
Sec. 3.04. Removal.
Sec. 3.05. Noninterference.
Article IV. Administrative Organization
Sec. 4.01. General provisions.
Sec. 4.02. Personnel ordinance.
Sec. 4.03. Reserved.
Sec. 4.04. City attorney.
Sec. 4.05. Planning board.
Sec. 4.06. Board of appeals.
Sec. 4.07. Forfeiture of office.
Sec. 4.08. Limitation of terms.
Article V. School Administration
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:2
Sec. 5.01. School committee.
Sec. 5.02. Chairman.
Sec. 5.03. Powers and duties.
Sec. 5.04. General supervision over finances.
Sec. 5.05. Meetings.
Sec. 5.06. Quorum.
Sec. 5.07. Record.
Sec. 5.08. Voting.
Article VI. Financial Procedures
Sec. 6.01. Fiscal year.
Sec. 6.02. Submission of budget and budget message.
Sec. 6.03. Budget message.
Sec. 6.04. Budget.
Sec. 6.05. Capital program.
Sec. 6.06. Council action on budget.
Sec. 6.07. Council action on capital program.
Sec. 6.08. Public records.
Sec. 6.09. Amendments after adoption.
Sec. 6.10. Lapse of appropriations.
Sec. 6.11. Administration of the budget.
Sec. 6.12. Annual postaudit.
Sec. 6.13. Temporary borrowing.
Sec. 6.14. Bond issues.
Sec. 6.15. Finance committee.
Article VII. Nominations and Elections
Sec. 7.01. Conduct of elections.
Sec. 7.02. Nomination by petition.
Sec. 7.03. Names on ballots.
Sec. 7.04. Order of candidate surnames.
Sec. 7.05. Write-In Candidates.
Sec. 7.06. Election posting.
Sec. 7.07. Determination of election results.
Sec. 7.08. Wardens and ward clerks.
Article VIII. General Provisions
Sec. 8.01. Terms of officers and employees.
Sec. 8.02. First council meeting.
Sec. 8.03. Swearing in officers.
Sec. 8.04. Personal financial interest.
Sec. 8.05. Prohibitions.
Sec. 8.06. Employee protection.
Sec. 8.07. Failure of appointment by mayor.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:3
Sec. 8.08. Reference to statute.
Sec. 8.09. Periodic Charter Review.
Sec. 8.10. Separability.
Article IX. Transitional Provisions
Sec. 9.01. Pending matters.
Sec. 9.02. Municipal laws.
Sec. 9.03. State laws.
*Editor's note: Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Lewiston, Maine, being Ordinance No. C79-1, as
adopted at a special municipal election on June 19, 1979, and effective on January 7, 1980. Amendments to the
Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note
indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected
without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has
been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:4
ARTICLE I. GRANT OF POWERS TO THE CITY
Sec. 1.01. Corporate existence retained.
The inhabitants of the City of Lewiston shall continue to be a body politic and corporate
by the name of the City of Lewiston, and shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights,
immunities, powers, privileges and franchises and shall be subject to all the duties, liabilities and
obligations provided for herein or otherwise, pertaining to or incumbent upon said city as a
municipal corporation or to the inhabitants or municipal authorities thereof; and may enact
reasonable by-laws, regulations and ordinances for municipal purposes, not inconsistent with the
constitution and laws of the State of Maine, and impose penalties for the breach thereof to be
recovered for such uses as said by-laws, regulations or ordinances shall provide.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 1.02. Powers and duties.
(a) The administration of all the fiscal, prudential and municipal affairs of said city, with the
government thereof, except the general management, care, conduct and control of the
schools of said city, which shall be vested in a school committee as hereinafter provided,
and also except as otherwise provided by this Charter, shall be and are vested as the
mayor and council, all of whom shall be qualified voters of said city, and shall be sworn
in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
(b) The mayor and members of the city council shall be and constitute the municipal officers
of the City of Lewiston for all purposes required by statute and, except as otherwise
herein specifically provided, shall have all powers and authority given to, and perform all
duties required of, municipal officers and mayors of cities under the laws of this state.
The mayor, when acting as a municipal officer, shall be entitled to vote to break a tie,
when a council vacancy exists, when a councilor is absent from a meeting, when a
councilor has been recused due to a conflict of interest.
(c) All other powers now or hereafter vested in the inhabitants of said city, and all powers
granted by this Charter, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be vested in the mayor
and city council.
Sec. 1.03. Construction.
The Charter shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all the powers
necessary or convenient for the conduct of its municipal affairs, including all powers the city
may assume pursuant to state laws and to the provisions of the state constitution.
Sec. 1.04. Intergovernmental relations.
The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may
participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with any
one or more municipalities, quasi-municipal bodies, the State of Maine or any agency thereof, or
of the United States or any agency thereof, in accordance with the terms of the Interlocal
Cooperation Act and other statutory provisions.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:5
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2.01. Composition, eligibility, wards, elections and terms.
(a) Composition. The city council shall consist of a mayor and seven (7) councilors. The
mayor shall be nominated and elected by the qualified voters of the entire city. The
qualified voters of each of the seven (7) wards of the city shall nominate and elect a
councilor who shall be qualified to vote in the ward from which elected. Nominations and
elections shall be conducted as provided in Article VII.
(b) Wards. For the purpose of all elections, the city shall be divided into seven (7) wards
which shall contain, as nearly as possible, the same number of inhabitants. The city
council may, by ordinance, divide the wards into precincts for voting purposes.
(c) Elections and terms. The mayor and the ward councilors shall be elected at each regular
election to serve two-year terms. The mayor shall not be eligible to serve for more than
three (3) full successive terms.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.02. Compensation, expenses.
The mayor and each of the councilors shall receive an annual salary as set by ordinance.
The council may also, by ordinance, provide for compensation for elected officials who are
appointed by the council, the mayor, or the council president to represent the city on the
governing bodies of any joint agency, quasi-governmental organization or non-profit
organization. Such compensation shall be on a per diem basis for any day on which the elected
official attends a meeting of such governing body. No ordinance increasing such salaries shall
take effect during the term for which the mayor or the councilors were elected. The mayor and
members of the council shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties of office. During the term of office for which they have been elected,
neither the mayor nor any councilor shall hold the office of city administrator, acting city
administrator or any other office or employment, compensation for which is payable by the city.
No former mayor or councilor shall hold employment in any position created during their term or
terms of office until one (1) year after the termination of their last term of office. Nothing herein
shall prevent a councilor serving on the finance committee from receiving as additional
compensation the salary authorized by section 6.15(b) or a councilor serving on the school
committee from receiving as additional compensation the salary authorized by section 5.01(b).
(Ord. No. C86-1, § 1, 1-1-87; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.03. Mayor.
The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council and shall be entitled to vote only
to break a tie, when a council vacancy exist, in the absence of a councilor, or when a councilor
has been recused due to conflict of interest. The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes. He shall solely make appointments to committees and
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:6
boards created under this Charter, to statutory boards and commissions as are required by the
Statutes of the State of Maine to be made by the municipal officers and shall solely appoint
citizens to ad hoc advisory committees. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.04. President of the council.
The council shall elect for a two-year term, from among its members, a president who
shall act as mayor during the temporary absence or temporary disability of the mayor, but the
president shall have appointive powers only when the temporary absence or temporary disability
of the mayor exceeds 45 consecutive calendar days. When the president of the council acts as
presiding officer in the temporary absence of the mayor, the president shall be entitled to vote
only as a councilor. In the event of the absence of both the mayor and president of the council at
any duly scheduled meeting, the council shall elect from its members a temporary presiding
officer. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.05. Prohibition.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person who holds an appointive office in the
city government or is an employee of the city shall hold an elective office in the city government.
However, a person holding an elective office shall be eligible, during a term in office, to become
a candidate for the same or another elective office. In the event such person is elected to the
second office, a vacancy shall exist in the first office when such person qualifies for the second
office. No person shall be a candidate for more than one (1) city elective office in the same city
election.
Sec. 2.06. Forfeiture of office of councilor.
(a) A vacancy in the office of councilor shall exist if a councilor:
(1) Dies;
(2) Resigns;
(3) Moves from the ward from which elected or appointed;
(4) Is convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment of one year or more or a
crime of a sexual nature or of dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the
punishment while in office; or
(5) Is found in violation of section 8.04 of this Charter.
(6) Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the city council without
being excused by the mayor or president of the council, such excuse to be
documented with the city clerk.
(b) In the event that a vacancy in the office occurs as a result of the failure to elect a
candidate at the regular city election, the remaining members of the council shall, within
thirty (30) calendar days after the vacancy exists, either appoint an eligible person to fill
the term or order that a special election be held.
(c) If a vacancy in the office occurs one (1) year or more prior to the next regular municipal
election for reasons other than that set forth in section 2.06(b), the vacancy for the
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:7
unexpired term shall be filled by a special election. Such election shall be called and held
and nominations made as in other elections.
(d) If a vacancy in the office occurs less than one (1) year prior to the next regular municipal
election, the remaining members of the council may appoint an eligible person to fill the
unexpired term within thirty (30) calendar days after the vacancy exists. If the Council
fails to make such appointment within said thirty (30) calendar days, the mayor shall
appoint an eligible person to fill the unexpired term within ten (10) calendar days
thereafter.
(e) If, at any time, more than three (3) vacancies in the office of councilor exist, an election
shall be held to fill such vacancies. Such election shall be called and held and
nominations made as in other elections, except a majority of the remaining councilors
may call such an election.
Sec. 2.07. Forfeiture of office of mayor.
(a) A vacancy in the office of mayor shall exist if the mayor:
(1) Dies;
(2) Resigns;
(3) Moves from the city;
(4) Is convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment of one year or more or a
crime of a sexual nature or of dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the
punishment while in office; or
(5) Is found to be in violation of section 8.04 of this Charter.
(6) Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the city council without
being excused by the council president or city council.
(b) If a vacancy in the office occurs twelve (12) months or more prior to the next regular
municipal election, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election for the unexpired
term. Such election shall be called and held and nominations made as in other elections.
(c) If a vacancy in the office occurs less than twelve (12) months prior to the next regular
municipal election, the president of the council shall serve the remainder of the unexpired
term as the mayor of the city with all the powers, privileges and authority of the mayor.
In such event, the vacancy in the city council caused by the president of the council
becoming the mayor shall not be filled.
Sec. 2.08. Secretary to the council.
The city clerk shall be the secretary of the council. The clerk shall keep the journal of
proceedings and perform such other duties as are assigned to the clerk by law, by this Charter,
and by the city council. The clerk shall also give notice of council meetings to its members and
shall post a notice of each meeting on a bulletin board in the city building and through such
appropriate electronic means as the council may direct. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.09. Investigations.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:8
Upon the affirmative vote of at least six (6) members of the council, the council may
make investigations into the affairs of any city department, office or agency, and for this purpose
shall enact an ordinance providing for the conduct of such investigations.
Sec. 2.10. Procedure.
(a) Meetings. The council shall meet regularly, at least once in every month at such times
and places as the council may prescribe by order. Special meetings may be held on the
call of the mayor or of four (4) members by causing a notification to be given in hand or
left at the usual dwelling place of each council member or through such other method of
notification that the council may establish by order. Such notice shall be given not less
than six (6) hours before the special meeting.
(b) Rules and journal. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and
make lawful regulations for enforcing the same. It shall provide for keeping a journal of
its proceedings. This journal shall be a public record and shall be kept in the office of the
city clerk.
(c) Action by council. The city council shall act only by ordinance, order, resolve or other
decision based upon motion.
(d) Voting. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays
shall be recorded in the journal. Four (4) members of the council shall constitute a
quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. No action of the council,
except as provided in the preceding sentence and in section 2.06(d), shall be binding or
valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members of the council,
including the mayor if voting under section 2.03. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.11. Ordinances in general.
(a) Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing. No ordinance shall
contain more than one (1) subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The
enacting clause shall be "The City of Lewiston hereby ordains . . . ." Any ordinance
which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall set out the ordinance sections or
subsections to be repealed or amended.
(b) Procedure. A proposed ordinance may be introduced by any member at any regular or
special meeting of the council. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city clerk shall
distribute a copy to the mayor, each council member and to the city administrator; shall
file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and such other public places
as the council may designate; and shall publish the proposed ordinance, together with a
notice, setting out the time and place for a public hearing thereon and for its consideration
by the council. The public hearing shall follow the publication by at least four (4)
calendar days, may be held separately or in connection with a regular or special council
meeting and may be adjourned from time to time. All persons interested shall have a
reasonable opportunity to be heard. After the hearing, the council may adopt the
ordinance with or without amendment, or reject it.
(c) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, every adopted ordinance
shall become effective at the expiration of thirty (30) calendar days after adoption or at
any later date specified therein.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:9
(d) "Publish" defined. As used in this section, the term "publish" means to print in one (1) or
more newspapers of general circulation in the city:
(1) The ordinance or a brief summary thereof prepared by the city clerk,
(2) The places where copies of it have been filed and the times when they are
available for public inspection, and
(3) The date, time and place of the public hearing.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.12. Emergency ordinances.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the
council may adopt one (1) or more emergency ordinances. An emergency ordinance shall be
introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be
plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a
declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An
emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment at the meeting at which it is
introduced, but at least five affirmative votes shall be required for adoption. It shall become
effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall
stand repealed as of the sixty-first (61st) calendar day following the date on which it was
adopted; but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this
section, if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption
of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency
ordinances. It shall not be necessary to publish the emergency ordinance prior to its enactment,
but public hearing shall be had thereon. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 2.13. Initiative and referendum.
The council shall, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the State of
Maine, Article IV, Part 3, section 21, enact an ordinance relating to initiative. Said ordinance
may provide for one (1) or more methods of exercising such initiative, one (1) of which methods
shall include the public circulation of petitions.
ARTICLE III. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 3.01. Appointment, qualifications, compensation.
The city council shall appoint a city administrator and fix the administrator’s
compensation. The city administrator shall serve at the will of the council. The administrator
shall be appointed on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and his technical
knowledge of municipal management. The administrator need not be a resident of the city or
state at the time of his appointment, but may reside outside the city while in office only with the
approval of the council. The administrator shall give bond to the City of Lewiston for the faithful
discharge of the duties of the office of administrator. The bonds premium shall be paid by the
city.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:10
Sec. 3.02. Powers and duties of the city administrator.
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be
responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the administrator’s
charge by or under this Charter. The administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) Except as may otherwise be provided by this Charter, appoint, without
confirmation by the city council, all department heads, and other officers and
employees responsible directly to the city administrator. The chief financial
officer of the city shall be appointed by the city administrator and confirmed by
the city council.
(b) When deemed necessary for the good of the city, suspend and remove any city
employee or appointive administrative officer provided for, by or under this
Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, by this Charter or by personnel
rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. Where council confirmation is necessary
for appointment, it shall also be required for removal.
(c) To authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the administrator’s
direction and supervision to suspend or remove subordinates in that officer's
department, office or agency.
(d) To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies
of the city, except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by law.
(e) To attend all council meetings, unless excused by the mayor or council president,
and to have the right to take part in discussion but not to vote.
(f) To see that all laws, provisions of the Charter and acts of the council, subject to
enforcement by the administrator or by officers subject to the administrator’s
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
(g) To prepare and submit the annual budget, the annual capital program and annual
financial and administrative reports to the council.
(h) To prepare and submit to the council such reports and perform such duties as the
council may require and make such recommendations to the council concerning
the affairs of the city as deemed desirable.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 3.03. Acting city administrator.
During any vacancy in the office of city administrator and during any temporary absence
or disability of the city administrator of more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, the
council may designate a properly qualified person to perform the duties of city administrator and
fix such person's compensation. During a temporary absence of thirty (30) calendar days or less,
the city administrator may designate a qualified person to perform the duties of administrator
during such absence. While so acting, such person shall have the same powers and duties as
those given to and imposed on the city administrator. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 3.04. Removal.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:11
The council may remove the administrator from office in accordance with the following
procedures:
(a) The council shall adopt, by affirmative vote of at least four (4) councilors, a
preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend
the administrator from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) calendar
days. A copy of the resolution shall be promptly served on the administrator.
(b) Within ten (10) calendar days after being served a copy of the resolution, the
administrator may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This
hearing shall be held at a regular or special council meeting not earlier than fifteen
(15) nor later than thirty (30) calendar days after a request is filed. The
administrator shall file with the council a written reply to the stated reasons not
later than five (5) calendar days before the hearing.
(c) The council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made
effective immediately, by affirmative vote of at least four (4) councilors at any
time after ten (10) calendar days from the date when a copy of the preliminary
resolution was served upon the administrator, if the administrator has not
requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing, if one is
requested.
(d) The administrator shall continue to receive a salary until the effective date of the
final council resolution of removal.
Sec. 3.05. Noninterference.
Except for the purpose of investigation as set forth in section 2.09 of this Charter, the
mayor and the members of the council shall deal with the administrative service solely through
the administrator. Neither the mayor nor members of the council shall give orders to any
subordinate of the administrator either publicly or privately.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
Sec. 4.01. General provisions.
(a) Creation of departments. The council, by ordinance, may create, change and abolish
offices, departments and agencies, other than the offices, departments and agencies
established by this Charter. The council, by ordinance, may assign additional functions or
duties to offices, departments or agencies established by this Charter, but may neither
discontinue nor assign to any other office, department or agency any function or duty
assigned by this Charter to a particular office, department or agency.
(b) Direction by administrator. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and
supervision of the administrator shall be administered by an officer appointed by and
subject to the direction and supervision of the administrator, except as otherwise provided
in this Charter. With the consent of the council, the administrator may serve as the head
of one (1) or more such departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one (1) person as
the head of two (2) or more of them.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:12
Sec. 4.02. Personnel ordinance.
The council shall adopt a personnel ordinance to carry out the purposes of this article.
Sec. 4.03. Reserved.
Editor's note: Charter amendment effective Jan. 1, 2007, repealed § 4.03 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to the Personnel Board.
Sec. 4.04. City attorney.
There shall be a city attorney nominated by the administrator and appointed by the city
council who shall serve at the will of the council. The city attorney shall serve as chief legal
advisor to the council, the administrator, and all city departments, boards, agencies, committees
and commissions. The city attorney shall represent the city in all legal proceedings and shall
perform any other duties prescribed by ordinance and law. The city council shall have the right
to employ or retain special attorneys, if it deems it to be in the best interest of the city.
Sec. 4.05. Planning board.
(a) Appointment. There shall be a planning board consisting of seven (7) members, each of
whom shall be a qualified voter of the City of Lewiston and who shall be appointed by
the mayor. No more than two (2) members may reside in the same ward. All members
shall be appointed for five-year terms.
There shall be, in addition to the seven (7) members of the board, two (2) associate
members of the board, each of whom shall be a qualified voter of the City of Lewiston,
appointed by the mayor. The associate members are subject to the same ward residency
requirements as the regular members. They shall serve for five-year staggered terms, with initial
terms being one (1) associate member serving for four (4) years and one (1) for five (5) years.
An associate member shall serve in the place of a member who is absent, disqualified or
otherwise unable to participate when designated by the chair person to do so.
(b) Compensation. Each member shall receive compensation at the rate established by
ordinance by the city council.
(c) Duties. The planning board shall carry out those duties assigned to it by general law and
by ordinance.
(d) Rules of procedure. The planning board shall adopt appropriate rules of procedure
consistent with the provisions of this Charter to enable it to carry out its functions.
(Amd. effective 1-1-03; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 4.06. Board of appeals.
(a) Appointment. There shall be a board of appeals consisting of seven (7) members, each of
whom shall be a qualified voter of the City of Lewiston and who shall be appointed by
the mayor. No more than two (2) members may reside in the same ward. All members
shall be appointed for five-year terms.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:13
There shall be, in addition to the seven (7) members of the board, two (2) associate
members of the board, each of whom shall be a qualified voter of the City of Lewiston,
appointed by the mayor. The associate members are subject to the same ward residency
requirements as the regular members. They shall serve for five-year staggered terms, with initial
terms being one (1) associate member serving for four (4) years and one (1) for five (5) years.
An associate member shall serve in the place of a member who is absent, disqualified or
otherwise unable to participate when designated by the chair person to do so.
(b) Compensation. Each member shall receive compensation at the rate established by
ordinance by the city council.
(c) Duties. The board of appeals shall carry out those duties assigned to it by general law and
by ordinance.
(d) Rules of procedure. The board of appeals shall adopt appropriate rules of procedure
consistent with the provisions of this Charter to enable it to carry out its functions.
(Ord. No. C95-1, 1-9-96; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 4.07. Forfeiture of office.
A member of the planning board or board of appeals shall forfeit office and a vacancy
therein shall exist, if a member:
(1) Dies;
(2) Resigns;
(3) Moves from the city;
(4) In the case of the planning board and board of appeals, moves into a ward in
which there are currently two (2) members of the same board;
(5) Is convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment of one year or more or a
crime of a sexual nature or of dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the
punishment while in office;
(6) Is found to be in violation of section 8.04 of this Charter; or
(7) Exceeds the tenure authorized for the office.
(8) Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the board without being
excused by the chair or, in the case of the chair, by the board.
If any vacancy should occur, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by
appointment of the mayor.
(Amend. eff. 1-1-07; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 4.08. Limitation of terms.
No member of any board established by this article shall serve more than a full five-year
term on the same board within any ten-year period. Said period shall be deemed to commence at
the time of first appointment.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:14
ARTICLE V. SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 5.01. School committee.
(a) Election and appointment. There shall be a school committee of nine (9) members,
composed of one (1) qualified voter to be elected from each ward, one (1) at-large
member to be elected from any ward, and one (1) city council member to be nominated
by the mayor and appointed by the city council from any ward, all of whom shall serve
two (2) year terms, as set forth herein, and until their successors are elected and/or
appointed and qualified. The qualified voters of each of the seven (7) wards of the city
shall nominate and elect a school committee member who shall be qualified to vote in the
ward from which elected and the qualified voters of the entire city shall nominate and
elect one (1) at-large school committee member who shall be qualified to vote in any
ward. Nominations and elections shall be conducted as provided in Article VII. The
mayor shall nominate one (1) councilor from any ward, who shall be appointed by the
city council, at the first city council meeting in January after each biennial election. If an
elective position on the school committee is not filled at a regular municipal election, the
mayor shall nominate, subject to the consent of the city council, an eligible individual for
appointment to assume the vacant position.
(b) Compensation. Each member shall receive compensation at the rate set by ordinance by
the city council.
(c) Forfeiture of office. A member of the school committee shall forfeit office and a vacancy
therein shall exist if the member:
(1) Dies;
(2) Resigns;
(3) For the seven (7) members elected by ward, moves from the ward in which
elected;
(4) For the one (1) at-large member, moves from the city;
(5) Is convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment of one year or more or a
crime of a sexual nature or of dishonesty or false statement, regardless of the
punishment while in office;
(6) Is found to be in violation of section 8.04 of this Charter; or
(7) For the councilor member, is no longer a member of the city council.
(8) Fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the school committee
without being excused by the chair or, in the case of the chair, by the school
committee.
If any vacancy in office of any elected member occurs, the vacancy shall be filled from the same
ward for the remainder of the unexpired term by nomination of the mayor, subject to the consent
of the city council, except that the at-large school committee member may be from any ward. If
there is any vacancy in the office of the city council member, it shall be filled by nomination of a
councilor by the mayor subject to consent by the city council.
(Ord. No. C86-1, §§ 2--4, 1-1-87; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:15
Sec. 5.02. Chairperson.
At its first meeting, or as soon thereafter as possible, the school committee shall elect by
majority vote of the entire committee, one (1) of its members as chairperson of the school
committee for a one-year term. The said committee may fill for the unexpired term any vacancy
in the office of chairperson that may occur. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the
school committee and shall have a vote as other members of said committee.
Sec. 5.03. Powers and duties.
(a) General powers and duties. The school committee shall have all the powers and shall
perform all duties necessary for care and management of the city’s public schools
pursuant to the general laws of the State of Maine, which grant these powers and
responsibilities to the school committee, except as otherwise provided by this Charter.
The school committee shall accomplish its duties within the financial limitations
established by the city council in its annual appropriation resolve and such supplemental
appropriations voted by the city council, together with such other revenues it may receive
from the federal or state governments, as well as gifts, grants, and payments from other
sources. The school committee shall submit to the city council at least three (3) months
prior to the end of the current fiscal year, for inclusion in the budget submitted to the city
council under Article VI, budget estimates for the various sums required for the support
of public schools for the ensuing uniform school fiscal year and shall thereafter provide
the city council with such information relating to such estimates as the city council shall
require. The school committee shall comply with all Charter provisions contained under
Article VI.
(b) Employees. All school department employees, including the superintendent of schools
shall be hired by the school committee. The school committee shall choose a
superintendent of schools solely on the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications. The superintendent of schools need not be a resident of the city at the time
of appointment, but shall be a resident of the city during tenure in office unless otherwise
approved by the school committee.
(Ord. No. C87-1, 11-3-87; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 5.04. General supervision over finances.
The city administrator shall establish a system of bookkeeping, auditing, purchasing and
records pertaining to all financial transactions of the school committee, and may establish rules
governing such procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of law, of this Charter or the
Ordinances of the city. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 5.05. Meetings
The school committee shall meet at such time and place as it determines by rule.
Meetings of the school committee other than executive session shall be open to the public as
required by state statute, and the school committee shall promote public participation in and
public notice of its meetings in the contemporary means of information sharing. Agendas and
supporting information for meetings shall be available to the public at the superintendent of
schools’ office at least two business days prior to the meeting as well as electronically through
the city’s or school’s website, if available. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:16
Section 5.06. Quorum
A majority of the voting members of the school committee shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn or compel attendance of absent
members. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Section 5.07. Record
The school committee shall keep a record of its own proceedings which, except for
executive sessions, shall be available to the public. . (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Section 5.08. Voting.
A roll call vote shall be taken on the passage of any order or resolve when requested by
any member. Any action by the school committee shall require at least five affirmative votes.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
ARTICLE VI. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
Sec. 6.01. Fiscal year.
(a) Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the city shall be established by the council by resolution.
(b) School committee subject to Article VI. The school committee shall comply with and be
subject to all the provisions of this article, in addition to provisions of general law
relating to a uniform school fiscal year.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.02. Submission of budget and budget message.
At least three (3) months prior to the end of the current fiscal year, the administrator shall
submit to the council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. The
council may establish regulations and procedures to carry out the purpose of this article,
including the referral of the budget to the finance committee for its review.
(Ord. No. C87-1, 11-3-87)
Sec. 6.03. Budget message.
The administrator's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of
the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing
fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the
current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such
changes, summarize the city's debt position and include such other material as the administrator
deems desirable. It shall also describe the tax impact of the proposed budget.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:17
Sec. 6.04. Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the
ensuing fiscal year, and except as required by this charter, shall be in such form as the
administrator deems desirable or the council may require. In organizing the budget, the
administrator shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund,
organization unit, program, purpose or activity and object. It shall begin with a clear general
summary of its contents, shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed
property tax levy and all proposed expenditures including debt service for the ensuing fiscal
year, and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income
and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding
fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections:
(a) Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year,
detailed by offices, departments and agencies in terms of their respective work
programs, and the method of financing such expenditures;
(b) Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by offices,
departments and agencies when practicable and the proposed method of financing
each such capital expenditure;
(c) Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned
or operated by the city and the proposed method of its disposition (subsidiary
budgets for each such utility giving detailed income and expenditures information
shall be attached as appendices to the budget); and
(d) Comparative statements reflecting actual expenditures for the current year and
estimated expenditures for the next succeeding fiscal year shall be set forth in
parallel columns. An increase or decrease in any item shall be indicated.
The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income.
Sec. 6.05. Capital program.
(a) Submission to council. The administrator shall each year prepare and submit to the
council a five-year capital program, including the capital program proposed for the
school department, at least five and one-half (5 1/2) months prior to the end of the current
fiscal year. The administrator shall concurrently refer the capital program to the planning
board for its review.
(b) Contents. The capital program shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents;
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the
five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to
the necessity for such improvements;
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each
improvement; and
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be
constructed or acquired.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:18
The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
(c) Planning board review. The planning board shall review the proposed capital program
each year, and following public hearing thereon, shall forward its recommendations to the
city council at least four and one-half (4 1/2) months prior to the end of the current fiscal
year.
(Ord. No. C87-1, 11-3-87)
Sec. 6.06. Council action on capital program.
(a) Notice and hearing. The city council shall publish in one (1) or more newspapers of
general circulation in the city the general summary of the capital program and a notice
stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for
inspection by the public;
(2) The time and place, no less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) calendar
days after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program.
(b) Copy at public library. A copy of the capital program shall be filed in the Lewiston
Public Library.
(c) Notice in city building. Notice shall also be posted in the city building.
(d) Electronic Availability. Notice of the budget or the budget itself shall be made available
through the city web site or other current technologies as the city council deems
appropriate.
(e) Adoption. The council by resolution shall adopt the capital program with or without
amendment after the public hearing and at least four (4) months prior to the end of the
current fiscal year. Adoption as provided herein shall not constitute the appropriation of
funds.
(Ord. No. C87-1, 11-3-87; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.07. Council action on budget.
(a) Notice and hearing. The city council shall publish in one (1) or more newspapers of
general circulation in the city the general summary of the budget and a notice stating:
(1) The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for
inspection by the public, and
(2) The time and place, no less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) calendar
days after such publication, for public hearing on the budget.
(b) Copy at public library. A copy of the budget message and the budget shall be filed in the
Lewiston Public Library.
(c) Notice in city building. Notice shall also be posted in the city building.
(d) Electronic Availability. Notice of the budget or the budget itself shall be made available
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:19
through the city web site or other current technologies as the city council deems
appropriate.
(e) Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing the council may adopt the budget
with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or
amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures
required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no
amendments to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater
than the total of estimated income.
(f) Adoption. The council shall by resolution adopt the budget not later than one (1) month
prior to the end of the then current fiscal year. In the event the council fails to adopt the
budget at least one (1) month prior to the end of the then current fiscal year, the
administrator and school committee shall, within seventy-two (72) hours thereafter,
present a final budget to the council. If the council shall fail to adopt a budget at least
twenty (20) calendar days prior to the end of the then current fiscal year, the
administrator's and school committee's final budget shall be deemed to be automatically
adopted. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified
therein as expenditures from the funds indicated.
(g) The percent budget increase, beginning in fiscal year 1996, when compared to the
preceding fiscal year budget, shall not exceed the percent increase of the Gross National
Product-Implicit Price Deflator (Source: Survey of Current Business, Department of
Labor) as compiled for the 12-month period ending September 30 of the previous year.
(h) Exception: When deemed necessary by the city council, the provisions of subsection (g)
of this section may be waived by five affirmative votes of the municipal officers.
(Ord. No. C87-1, 11-3-87; Ord. No. C95-2, 1-9-96; Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.08. Public records.
Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall
be made available for inspection by the public at the Lewiston Public Library at such other
places as may be designated by the council, and through appropriate electronic methods.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.09. Amendments after adoption.
(a) Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the administrator certifies that
there are available for appropriation, revenues in excess of the total estimated in the
budget, the council by resolution after public hearing, may make supplemental
appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess.
(b) Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or
the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations
may be made by resolution. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated
revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by resolution authorize the
issuance of temporary notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the temporary
notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal
year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:20
(c) Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to
the administrator that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount
appropriated, the administrator shall report to the council without delay, indicating the
estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken, and recommendations as to
any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems
necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by resolution
reduce one or more appropriations.
(d) Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the administrator may
transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a
department, office or agency and, upon written request by the administrator, the council
may by resolution transfer part or all of any unencumbered balance thereof to another
department, office or agency.
(e) Limitations; effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or
transferred and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be
appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The
supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations
authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption.
Sec. 6.10. Lapse of appropriations.
Every budgetary account shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has
not been expended or encumbered.
Sec. 6.11. Administration of the budget.
The administrator or designee may make allotments to departments, offices and agencies
in accordance with estimated seasonal or periodic needs and may revise such allotments. No
expenditure may be made or obligation incurred unless the administrator or designee first
certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the appropriate allotment or
appropriation. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the
provisions of this Charter may be cause for removal of the person who knowingly authorized or
made such payment or incurred such obligations. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of
this section, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent
the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be
financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or
lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is made
or approved by council resolution.
Sec. 6.12. Annual postaudit.
Council shall appoint an accounting firm, whose minimum qualification shall include
certified public accountants on staff, for the purpose of conducting the annual postaudit of the
current fiscal year's municipal finances, as required by law. The council may enter into multiyear
contracts pursuant to the competitive bid process for terms not to exceed five (5)
consecutive fiscal years. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.13. Temporary borrowing.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:21
Money may be borrowed temporarily in anticipation of taxes or of the issuance of bonds,
in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5771, as amended.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.14. Bond issues.
The city may issue general obligation and revenue obligation securities for funding or
refunding all or any part of its debt or for any purpose for which it may raise money in
accordance with Maine Statutes. Before passage of an order or orders providing for the issuance
of bonds, the city council shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall be advertised at least
once in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in Lewiston, such publication to be
made not less than seven (7) calendar days and no more than fifteen (15) calendar days before
the public hearing. Final action on the order or orders must take place no later than sixty (60)
calendar days following the public hearing. In addition to the public hearing required herein,
where the amount of any single purpose bonds authorized for an individual project exceeds
fifteen (15) percent of the property tax levy of the preceding fiscal year, such authorization must
be approved by the voters at a regular or special election prior to issuance.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 6.15. Finance committee.
(a) Appointment. There shall be a finance committee composed of five (5) members, who
shall be appointed as follows: The president of the city council shall appoint two (2)
members of the city council to serve two-year terms; the mayor shall appoint three (3)
qualified voters of Lewiston to serve staggered three-year terms. All terms shall be for
three (3) years. No non-city-council member shall serve on the finance committee for
more than six (6) consecutive years.
(b) Compensation. The members of the finance committee shall receive compensation at the
rate established by ordinance by the city council. Compensation paid to members of the
finance committee may be changed by ordinance, but no such ordinance increasing
compensation for a member of the finance committee who is a member of the city
council shall take effect during the term for which the councilor was elected.
(c) Duties. The finance committee shall:
(1) Approve contracts for the purchase of materials and services procured through the
competitive bid process;
(2) Determine the amount of bonds required of officers and agents of the city; and
(3) Serve as the pension board of the city.
(d) Appeal. Any party, including employees of the city, aggrieved by action of the finance
committee taken under section 6.15(c), may appeal such action to the council within
seven (7) calendar days from the date of the action which is the subject of the appeal.
(e) Advisory functions. The finance committee shall also advise the council on such financial
matters as the council may refer to it.
(f) Rules of procedure. The finance committee shall adopt appropriate rules of procedure
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:22
consistent with the provisions of this Charter and policies adopted by the city council, to
enable it to carry out its functions.
(g) Forfeiture.
(1) A member of the finance committee appointed by the mayor shall forfeit office
and a vacancy therein shall exist if the member:
a. Dies;
b. Resigns;
c. Is convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment of one year or more
or a crime of a sexual nature or dishonesty or false statement, regardless of
the punishment while in office;
d. Is found to be in violation of section 8.04 of this Charter; or
e. Exceeds the tenure authorized for the office.
If any vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term by appointment of the mayor.
(2) A member of the finance committee who is a member of the city council shall
forfeit office and a vacancy therein shall exist if that member is no longer a
member of the city council.
If any vacancy shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by a member of the city
council appointed by the president of the council for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
ARTICLE VII. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 7.01. Conduct of elections.
The regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November of odd-numbered years. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the provisions
of Title 21[-A] and Title 30[-A] of the Revised Statutes, as amended, shall apply to elections
held under this Charter. All elections called for under this Charter shall be conducted by the
election officials established under Title 21[-A]. For the conduct of elections, for the prevention
of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in cases of fraud or doubt, the council
shall adopt, by ordinance, all regulations which it considers desirable, consistent with law and
this Charter. "Qualified voter" shall mean any person qualified and registered to vote under law.
Sec. 7.02. Nomination by petition.
(a) Petitions. Candidates for elective office in the City of Lewiston shall be nominated by
petition. Any eligible and qualified voter of the city may be nominated for election to the
office of mayor by a petition signed by not less than one hundred (100) nor more than
two hundred (200) qualified voters of the city. Any eligible and qualified voter of a ward
may be nominated for election to the office of city councilor by a petition signed by not
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:23
less than fifty (50) nor more than one hundred (100) qualified voters of the ward. Except
for the office of at-large school committee, any eligible and qualified voter of a ward may
be nominated for election to the office of school committee by a petition signed by not
less than fifty (50) nor more than one hundred (100) qualified voters of the ward. Any
eligible and qualified voter of the city may be nominated for election to the office of atlarge
school committee by a petition signed by not less than fifty (50) nor more than one
hundred (100) qualified voters of the city.
(b) Nomination petitions. The signatures to a nomination petition need not all be affixed to
one paper, but each separate paper of a petition shall contain an affidavit executed by its
circulator stating the number of signers of the paper, that each signature on it was affixed
in the circulator’s presence, and that the circulator believes each signature to be the
genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Such signatures shall be
executed in ink or pencil. Each signer shall indicate next to the signer’s signature the
street address where the signer resides. The nomination petitions shall be on forms
prepared by the city clerk. No nomination petitions shall be issued by the city clerk or
circulated for signatures more than one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to
election day.
(c) Filing and acceptance of nomination petitions. All separate papers comprising a
nomination petition shall be assembled and filed with the city clerk as one (1) instrument
not earlier than one hundred twenty (120) calendar days nor later than 4:30 p.m. on the
sixtieth (60th) calendar day before the election. If the sixtieth (60th) calendar day falls on
a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the final filing date shall be the next regular business
day. The council may, upon recommendation of the city clerk, set a shorter time period
for the filing of nomination petitions for special elections. Under no conditions shall the
time period for circulating petitions be less than ten (10) calendar days, nor the last filing
date closer than two (2) weeks prior to the date of the election. The clerk shall make a
record of the exact time when each petition is filed. No nomination petition shall be
accepted unless accompanied by a signed acceptance of the nomination.
(d) Objections to candidate. All objections to the regularity or validity of the petition of any
person shall be made within five (5) calendar days after the final filing date by written
notice filed with the city clerk setting forth the grounds of objections. In case no such
objection is filed within the five-day period herein prescribed, the regularity or validity of
the nomination petition shall not be contested thereafter.
(e) Certification of petition validity. Upon receiving a nomination petition and statement of
acceptance of any candidate, the city clerk shall then have the board of registration certify
the validity of any petition having a sufficient number of proper signatures. If a petition is
found insufficient, the clerk shall return it immediately to the person who filed it with a
statement setting forth wherein it is found insufficient. Within the regular time for filing
petitions, such a petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition or a different
petition may be filed for the same candidate. The clerk shall keep on file all petitions
found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term for which the candidates are
nominated in those petitions.
(f) Eligibility. The candidates for election as councilor and school committee members,
except for the at-large school committee member, must be at least twenty (20) years of
age and have been registered voters and qualified to vote in their respective wards for a
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:24
period of at least three (3) months next prior to the last date on which the nomination
papers are to be filed. The candidates for election as at-large school committee member
must be at least twenty (20) years of age and have been registered voters and qualified to
vote in the City of Lewiston at least three (3) months next prior to the last date on which
the nomination papers are to be filed. The candidates for election as mayor must be at
least twenty (20) years of age and have been registered voters and qualified to vote in the
City of Lewiston at least six (6) months next prior to the last date on which the
nomination papers are to be filed.
(Ord. No. C86-1, §§ 5, 6, 1-1-87; Ord. No. C87-2, 11-3-87)
Sec. 7.03. Names on ballots.
(a) Candidates for mayor. The full names and street addresses of all candidates nominated
for the office of mayor, except those who have died or become ineligible, shall be printed
on the official and specimen ballots without party designation under a heading which
reads "For Mayor."
(b) Candidates for city council. The full names and addresses of all candidates nominated for
the office of councilor, except those who have died or become ineligible, shall be printed
only on the official and specimen ballots for their respective wards, without party
designation, under a heading which reads "For Councilor."
(c) Candidates for school committee. The full names and addresses of all at-large candidates
nominated for the office of school committee, except those who have died or become
ineligible, shall be printed only on the official and specimen ballots, without party
designation, under a heading which reads "For School Committee At-Large," except that
the full names and addresses of all candidates nominated for the office of school
committee by wards, except those who have died or become ineligible, shall be printed
only on the official and specimen ballots for their respective wards, without party
designation, under a heading which reads "For School Committee."
(Ord. No. C86-1, § 7, 1-1-87)
Sec. 7.04. Order of candidate surnames.
Where two (2) or more candidates have been nominated for the same office, the names of
said candidates shall appear on the ballot in alphabetical order.
Sec. 7.05. Write-In Candidates.
In order for ballots cast for a write-in candidate to be counted, such candidate must (a)
register as a candidate with the City Clerk at least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the
election and (b) be eligible for the office sought.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 7.06. Election posting.
The city clerk or designee shall post a properly executed copy of the election warrant and
specimen ballot at the places where the election is to be held. Said notice shall be posted at least
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:25
seven (7) calendar days before the date of said election.
Sec. 7.07. Determination of election results.
(a) Number of votes. Each voter shall be entitled to vote for as many candidates as there are
vacancies to be filled.
(b) Absentee voting. Each qualified voter who desires to cast an absentee vote at a regular
city election or special election shall be entitled to an official ballot and the right to cast
such ballot in accordance with the provisions of 21-A M.R.S.A. subchapter IV, as
amended.
(c) Plurality. Except where otherwise provided, elections shall be determined by plurality
vote. In case of a tie vote for any elective office, a new election shall be held on a date to
be determined by the city council, said date to be no more than forty-five (45) calendar
days from the date of the regular municipal election, but the only names appearing on the
ballot shall be those candidates who receive the tie vote.
(d) Mayoral runoff election. If it should appear that no person has received a majority of all
votes cast for mayor, a special election to be known as a runoff election shall be held on a
date to be determined by the city council, said date to be no more than forty-five (45)
calendar days from the date of the regular municipal election. The candidate receiving the
highest number of votes at such election shall be declared to be elected. The names to be
placed upon the ballot at said election shall be determined as follows:
(1) If but one (1) candidate has received the highest number of votes and but one (1)
candidate has received the next highest number of votes, their names only shall be
placed upon the ballot.
(2) If two (2) or more candidates have received the same number of votes and a
number higher than those received by any other candidates, only the names of
such candidates, whether they be two (2) or more, shall be placed upon the ballot.
(3) If one (1) candidate has received the highest number of votes and two (2) or more
candidates have received the same number of votes, which number shall have
been next lower than that received by the candidate receiving the highest number,
only the name of the candidate who has received the highest number and the
candidates, whether two (2) or more, who have received the next highest number
of votes shall be placed upon the ballot.
(e) Write-In Candidates. In order to be eligible to be elected, a write-in candidate must
receive at least the same number of votes as are required for nomination for the position
for which the write-in candidate is competing.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 7.08. Wardens and ward clerks.
(a) Appointment by city clerk. The city clerk shall, with the approval of the city councilors,
appoint a warden and ward clerk for each of the voting precincts. The wardens and ward
clerks shall serve for two-year terms concurrent with the terms of the members of the city
council.
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:26
(b) Vacancy. In the case of a vacancy in the office of warden or ward clerk, the city clerk
shall appoint a person for the remainder of the term.
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 8.01. Terms of officers and employees.
(a) Elected officers. The term of any elected officer shall date from the first Monday in
January next following election, except that in the event the first Monday shall fall on a
holiday or the day following a holiday, then on the following Tuesday. If a person is
elected to fill a vacancy in office, that person’s term shall begin immediately upon taking
the oath of office.
(b) Appointive officers and employees. Except as may otherwise be provided in this Charter,
all city officers, employees and appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing
power.
(Amd. effective12-6-12)
Sec. 8.02. First council meeting.
The city council shall convene on the first Monday in January next following its election;
except that in the event the first Monday shall fall on a holiday or the day following a holiday,
then on the following Tuesday.
(Amd. effective12-6-12)
Sec. 8.03. Swearing in officers.
All officers provided for in this Charter, whether elective or appointive, shall, before
assuming their respective duties, qualify by being sworn to the faithful performance thereof
before the city clerk or some magistrate thereto qualified.
Sec. 8.04. Personal financial interest.
If any elected or appointed official, officer or employee or the spouse of any such person
has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city or in the purchase or sale
of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city, that
official shall make known that interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating in the capacity of an elected or appointed official, officer or employee, in the
making of such purchase or sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any such
person who willfully conceals a personal financial interest or that of a spouse, or willfully
violates the requirements of this section, shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and
shall forfeit the office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or
implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a purchase from or a sale to the
city, shall render the contract, purchase or sale voidable by the city.
Sec. 8.05. Prohibitions.
(a) Activities prohibited. No person shall be appointed to or removed from or in any way
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:27
favored or discriminated against with respect to any city position or appointive city
administrative office because of race, sex, political or religious opinions or affiliations or
on any other basis prohibited by statute of general application.
(b) Penalties. Any person convicted of any crimes involving falsification in official matters,
bribery, corrupt practices or obstructing governmental administration, as these crimes are
defined in the Revised Statutes of Maine, as amended, shall be ineligible for a period of
two (2) years following said conviction to hold any city office or employment, except as
otherwise provided by law.
Sec. 8.06. Employee protection.
Wage supplements to which city employees, retirees and beneficiaries may be entitled
under the Charter, adopted March 6, 1939, and amendments thereto, as it is in force as of the
effective date of this Charter, shall be maintained, all as presently being provided, unless altered
by general law enacted by the Maine State Legislature. Nothing contained in this Charter shall be
held to deprive any employee, retiree or beneficiary of wage supplements under the 1939 Charter
and amendments by private or special laws thereto. The term "wage supplements," as herein set
forth, shall mean pensions, retirement, holidays, vacations and sick leave.
Sec. 8.07. Failure of appointment by mayor.
Whenever there is a vacancy for sixty (60) calendar days or more in any office created
under this Charter requiring appointment by the mayor, then such appointment shall be made by
order of the city council, and not the mayor.
Sec. 8.08. Reference to statute.
Whenever reference is made to a statute, it shall include the statute as amended, and as
hereafter amended, revised or replaced.
Sec. 8.09. Periodic Charter Review.
In calendar years ending in 1, the Mayor shall appoint a charter review committee
composed of seven members who shall be residents of the city and who the Mayor determines to
have a background in or understanding of city government and its operations. The committee
shall undertake a comprehensive review of this charter and shall recommend to the city council
amendments to the charter designed to improve the operations of city government, such
recommendations to be made no later than the date established by the Mayor at the time the
committee is established. (Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Sec. 8.10. Separability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall
not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby. If any provision of this Charter is held invalid by
reason of any conflict with state or federal law, the provisions of the applicable state or federal
law shall automatically become incorporated in this Charter in place of the invalid Charter
CHARTER
Lewiston Code Charter
CHT:28
provisions.
ARTICLE IX. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01. Pending matters.
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall
continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and in each case shall be
maintained, carried on, or dealt with by the city department, office or agency appropriate under
this Charter.
Sec. 9.02. Municipal laws.
All ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations in force at the time that this Charter
takes effect not inconsistent with this Charter shall continue in force until amended or repealed.
All rules and regulations of the municipal officers or of any office of the City of Lewiston in
force at the time that this Charter takes effect not inconsistent with the provisions hereof shall
continue in force until amended or repealed.
Sec. 9.03. State laws.
Upon the effective date of this Charter, all private and special state laws relating to the
City of Lewiston which are inconsistent, in whole or in part, with the provisions of this Charter
are hereby repealed.
(Amd. effective 12-6-12)
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:1
PART II
CITY OF LEWISTON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines, history notes and references.
Sec. 1-4. Amendments to Code.
Sec. 1-5. Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code.
Sec. 1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
Sec. 1-7. Severability of parts of Code.
Sec. 1-8. General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations.
Sec. 1-9. Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:2
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be
designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Lewiston, Maine," and may be so cited.
(Code 1982, § 1-1)
State law references: Municipal authority to codify, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and definitions set out in
this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not
be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such
construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be
fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, such
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code
imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the
Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be
controlling.
Charter. The words "the Charter" or "this Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of
Lewiston, Maine.
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Lewiston, Maine.
City council, council. Whenever the words "council" or "city council" are used, they shall
be construed to mean the city council of the City of Lewiston, Maine.
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of
Lewiston, Maine.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a
certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given,
or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such
proceeding is to be held shall be counted.
Corporate or city limits. The terms "corporate limits" or "city limits" shall mean the legal
boundaries of the City of Lewiston, Maine.
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Androscoggin
in the State of Maine.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a
department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed
to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or
section specify otherwise.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:3
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to
females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
Inhabitant. The word "inhabitant" shall mean a person having an established residence in
the city.
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers
shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.
May. The word "may" is permissive.
Mayor. The term "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
M.R.S.A. The abbreviation "M.R.S.A." shall mean the latest edition of the Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated, as amended.
Municipal officers. The term "municipal officers" shall mean the members of the city
council.
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation, when affirmation is allowed. Affirmation
is allowed when a person required to be sworn is conscientiously scrupulous of taking an oath.
Officials, boards, commissions. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards and
commissions by title only, i.e., "city council," "city clerk," "the mayor," etc., they shall be
deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the City of Lewiston, Maine.
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property
except real property, as defined in this section.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next
after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:4
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline
and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when
the person cannot write.
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Maine.
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, and shall include all areas
thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use.
Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall
include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and
present.
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any
representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Code 1982, § 1-2)
State law references: Similar provisions, 1 M.R.S.A. § 72.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines, history notes and references.
(a) The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted.
(b) The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes
scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have
no legal effect.
(Code 1982, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. Amendments to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect
this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed
for inclusion in this Code, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any
part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code
by the omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such
subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 1-4)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:5
Sec. 1-5. Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portions of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to
alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to
be misrepresented thereby.
(Code 1982, § 1-5)
Sec. 1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself
repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revise such former ordinance, clause or
provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided.
(b) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the
repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the
repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
(Code 1982, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-7. Severability of parts of Code.
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable,
and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section of this Code shall be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections and sections of this
Code. (Code 1982, § 1-7)
Sec. 1-8. General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations.
(a) Every person who shall be guilty of violating any provision of this Code to which a
particular penalty is not annexed shall forfeit and pay a sum, in accordance with the city's
policy manual as approved by the city council, to be recovered for the use of the city on
complaint or by other appropriate action before the district court.
(b) The imposition of a penalty for violation of any ordinance shall not excuse the violation,
or permit it to continue; such violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time, and
for each ten days that the violation is permitted to continue a separate offense will accrue.
(c) The application of a penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions. The imposition of penalties for violation of this Code or any
ordinance shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting an appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, removal, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a
violation or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to prevent an
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any premises.
(Code 1982, § 1-8; Ord. No. 08-06a, 8-14-08)
Charter references: Penalty for violation of ordinances, § 1.01.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 1
CH 1:6
Sec. 1-9. Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance:
(1) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the
issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or
any contract or obligations assumed by the city;
(2) Containing any administrative provisions of the council not in conflict or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code;
(3) Prescribing rates for city utility services;
(4) Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor;
(5) Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening,
vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city;
(6) Making any appropriation;
(7) Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code;
(8) Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
(9) Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
(10) Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city;
(11) Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers,
employees or agents, not inconsistent herewith;
(12) Pertaining to zoning;
(13) Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent
nature;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city
clerk.
(b) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act
committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right
established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:1
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
*Cross references: Civil emergencies, ch. 30; elections, ch. 32; general assistance, ch. 46; personnel, ch. 58.
Article I. In General
Sec. 2-1. Seal described.
Sec. 2-2. Preservation of records.
Sec. 2-3. Lettering required on official vehicles.
Sec. 2-4. Council may enter into mutual aid pacts.
Sec. 2-5. Authority of police or fire departments to assist other municipalities.
Sec. 2-6. Form of bond, approval required.
Sec. 2-7. Signatures required on bonds.
Sec. 2-8. Notice of meetings.
Secs. 2-9--2-30. Reserved.
Article II. City Council
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-31. Council action on budget increase.
Sec. 2-32. Alternative financing.
Sec. 2-33. Public notice.
Sec. 2-34. Council action on bond issue authorization.
Sec. 2-35. Exception.
Sec. 2-36. Unassigned fund balance.
Sec. 2-37. Target amounts.
Sec. 2-38. Use of unassigned fund balance.
Secs. 2-39--2-45. Reserved.
Division 2. Investigations
Sec. 2-46. Institution of investigation proceedings.
Sec. 2-47. Instituting investigation; report.
Sec. 2-48. Notice.
Sec. 2-49. Presiding officer.
Sec. 2-50. Conduct of hearing.
Sec. 2-51. Witnesses.
Sec. 2-52. Deliberation.
Sec. 2-53. Record of hearings.
Secs. 2-54--2-75. Reserved.
Article III. Officers and Employees
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-76. Salaries of elected and appointed officials.
Sec. 2-77. Conflict of interest.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:2
Sec. 2-78. City employees prohibited from striking.
Secs. 2-79--2-90. Reserved.
Division 2. City Administrator
Sec. 2-91. Chief executive and general powers.
Secs. 2-92--2-100. Reserved.
Division 3. City Clerk
Sec. 2-101. Appointment; residency.
Sec. 2-102. Recordkeeping; reports; custodian of bonds, other evidence of indebtedness;
notice to appointees.
Sec. 2-103. Duties as to licenses and permits.
Sec. 2-104. Animal control functions.
Sec. 2-105. Functions as to elections.
Sec. 2-106. Custodian of city seal.
Secs. 2-107--2-120. Reserved.
Division 4. Assessor
Sec. 2-121. Office created.
Sec. 2-122. Primary assessing unit.
Sec. 2-123. Appointment.
Sec. 2-124. Qualification.
Sec. 2-125. Tenure.
Sec. 2-126. Duties.
Sec. 2-127. Removal.
Secs. 2-128--2-150. Reserved.
Article IV. Boards, Commissions, Committees and Bureaus
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-151. Parliamentary procedure.
Secs. 2-152--2-160. Reserved.
Division 2. Board of Appeals
Sec. 2-161. Purpose.
Sec. 2-162. Authority.
Sec. 2-163. Organization and rules.
Sec. 2-164. Hearings.
Sec. 2-165. Record of proceedings; notice of decision.
Sec. 2-166. Jurisdiction and manner of taking appeals.
Sec. 2-167. Administration.
Sec. 2-168. Appeals from decisions of board.
Secs. 2-169--2-180. Reserved.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:3
Division 3. Finance Committee
Sec. 2-181. Purpose.
Sec. 2-182. Authority.
Sec. 2-183. Organization and rules.
Sec. 2-184. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-185. Administration.
Secs. 2-186--2-195. Reserved.
Division 4. Reserved
Secs. 2-196--2-210. Reserved.
Division 5. Voter Registration Appeals Board
Sec. 2-211. Purpose.
Sec. 2-212. Authority; powers.
Sec. 2-213. Compensation of members.
Sec. 2-214. Organization; rules.
Secs. 2-215--2-219. Reserved.
Division 6. Board of Assessment Review
Sec. 2-220. Appointment; vacancies.
Sec. 2-221. Qualifications.
Sec. 2-222. Powers and duties.
Sec. 2-223. Hearings and appeals/quorum.
Sec. 2-224. Burden of proof.
Division 7. Housing Committee
Secs. 2-225. Purpose.
Secs. 2-226. Duties.
Secs. 2-227. Composition and appointment.
Secs. 2-228. Vacancies.
Secs. 2-229. Procedures.
2-230. Reserved.
Division 8. Reserved
Sec. 2-231—2-235. Reserved.
Article V. Departments
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2-236. Departments designated.
Sec. 2-237. Oaths of office.
Sec. 2-238. Administrative policy and procedures.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:4
Secs. 2-239--2-250. Reserved.
Division 2. Department of Economic and Community Development
Sec. 2-251. Created.
Sec. 2-252. Duties of the director of economic and community development.
Sec. 2-253. Duties of the department.
Secs. 2-254--2-265. Reserved.
Division 3. Department of Education
Sec. 2-266. Created.
Sec. 2-267. Program divisions.
Secs. 2-268--2-279. Reserved.
Division 4. Department of Finance
Sec. 2-280. Created.
Sec. 2-281. Director of finance/controller.
Sec. 2-282. Divisions.
Sec. 2-283. Award of contracts.
Secs. 2-284--2-294. Reserved.
Division 5. Department of Fire
Sec. 2-295. Created.
Sec. 2-296. Duties of fire chief.
Sec. 2-297. Divisions.
Sec. 2-298. Fire apparatus.
Secs. 2-299--2-324. Reserved.
Division 6. Department of Human Resources
Sec. 2-325. Created.
Sec. 2-326. Duties of director of human resources.
Secs. 2-327--2-335. Reserved.
Division 7. Department of Law
Sec. 2-336. Powers and duties of city attorney.
Secs. 2-337--2-344. Reserved.
Division 8. Department of Library
Sec. 2-345. Created.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:5
Sec. 2-346. Duties of library director.
Secs. 2-347--2-355. Reserved.
Division 9. Department of Management Information Services
Sec. 2-356. Created.
Sec. 2-357. Duties of the MIS director.
Secs. 2-358--2-364. Reserved.
Division 10. Department of Planning and Code Enforcement
Sec. 2-365. Created.
Sec. 2-366. Duties of the director of planning and code enforcement.
Sec. 2-367. Duties of the department.
Secs. 2-368--2-379. Reserved.
Division 11. Department of Police
Sec. 2-380. Created.
Sec. 2-381. Duties of chief of police.
Sec. 2-382. Duties of deputy police chief.
Sec. 2-383. Divisions.
Sec. 2-384. Powers of officers.
Sec. 2-385. Appointment of constables and officers.
Sec. 2-386. Certain fees to be accounted for.
Secs. 2-387--2-399. Reserved.
Division 12. Department of Public Works
Sec. 2-400. The Department of Public Works is hereby established.
Sec. 2-401. Duties of director of public works.
Sec. 2-402. Divisions.
Secs. 2-403--2-434. Reserved.
Division 13. Department of Social Services
Sec. 2-435. Department created.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:6
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Seal described.
The corporate seal shall be a circular disc with the words "Lewiston, Incorporated 1795"
and "Became a City 1863" on the periphery, and shall be as follows:
City Seal
(Code 1982, § 2-1)
Sec. 2-2. Preservation of records.
Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records
under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing such records. No public
records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be
destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the
local government records board.
(Code 1982, § 2-2)
State law references: Municipal Records Law, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 1704 et seq.
Sec. 2-3. Lettering required on official vehicles.
(a) All motor vehicles, namely automobiles, cars, trucks, trailers and the like, owned and
operated for and by the city shall bear on both the right and left doors or on both the right
and left sides of the vehicle, painted letters designating that such vehicles are the city's
property, except for certain vehicles used by the city police department and the city
administrator.
(b) Each of the vehicles referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be lettered by the
appropriate words designating which particular department or agency of the city operates
such vehicle.
(c) Each of the vehicles referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall bear the words "for
official use only."
(Code 1982, § 2-4)
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:7
Sec. 2-4. Council may enter into mutual aid pacts.
The city, by and through the city council, may enter into mutual aid pacts with
surrounding municipalities which would regulate the activities described in section 2-5 of this
Code.
(Code 1982, § 2-5)
Sec. 2-5. Authority of police or fire departments to assist other municipalities.
The chief of the police department or the chief of the fire department with the officer in
charge of the respective department is authorized to issue such orders as may be necessary for
the use of city police or fire department personnel outside the boundaries of the city and to direct
such personnel to place themselves under the operational control of the superior officer in charge
of the police or fire department of the city or town requesting assistance from this city.
(Code 1982, § 2-6)
Sec. 2-6. Form of bond, approval required.
The bonds issued in behalf of the city may be either coupon or registered. The form of the
bond shall be any particular bond in general use as may be recommended by the fiscal agent
employed by the city to handle the particular bond issue. The form of the bond, however, shall be
subject to the approval of the council.
(Code 1982, § 2-28)
Charter references: Bond issues, § 6.14.
Sec. 2-7. Signatures required on bonds.
All notes and bonds given in behalf of the city shall be signed by the treasurer and by the
mayor, or if the mayor is absent or fails to sign such bonds, by any member of the council when
duly authorized by such council, and the coupons attached to such bonds shall be signed by the
treasurer or shall have his lithographed or facsimile signature thereon and a copy of the same
attested by the treasurer and the mayor or president of the council as provided in this section,
together with the date of the resolution of the council by the authority of which such notes or
bonds are given, shall be preserved in the treasurer's office in a book kept for that purpose.
(Code 1982, § 2-9)
Charter references: Temporary borrowing of money, § 6.13; bond issues, § 6.14.
Sec. 2-8. Notice of meetings.
Notice of the time and place of all meetings of the city council and of all city boards and
commissions shall be kept conspicuously posted in the city hall.
(Code 1982, § 2-11)
Secs. 2-9--2-30. Reserved.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:8
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-31. Council action on budget increase.
The percent budget increase, beginning in fiscal year 1985, when compared to the
preceding fiscal year budget, shall not exceed the percent increase of the Gross National Product-
Implicit Price Deflator (Source: Survey of Current Business, Department of Labor) as compiled
for the 12-month period ending September 30 of the previous year.
(Code 1982, §§ 2-12, 2-13; Ord. No. 95-17, 11-8-95)
Sec. 2-32. Alternative financing.
Financing of the purchase, acquisition or development of real estate or the construction of
buildings, of more than ten years, shall be subject to article VI, section 6.14, of the Charter.
(Code 1982, § 2-14)
Sec. 2-33. Public notice.
Whenever by statute or ordinance, general public notice or individualized notice is
required to be given by the municipal officers, except where the statute or ordinance expressly
requires such notice to be given upon vote of the municipal officers, the city clerk is authorized
to effectuate such notice on behalf of the municipal officers. Whenever an item or matter is
requested by a city councilor, the mayor or city administrator to be placed upon the agenda of the
city council, the city clerk shall take such steps as are reasonably necessary to post or otherwise
provide timely notice of such item or matter to the public and to parties who are by statute or
ordinance entitled to notice.
(Ord. No. 02-18, 10-17-02)
Sec. 2-34. Council action on bond issue authorization.
The amount of debt to be authorized for issuance, in any fiscal year, shall not exceed 80% of the
average amount of annual debt being retired over the 3 previous fiscal years unless the debt is
financed through sources other than general property taxes, such as Tax Increment Financing,
State or Federal subsidy opportunities or enterprise funds which are paid from user fees.
(Ord. No. 09-04, 10-22-09; Ord. No. 11-14, 01-19-12)
Sec. 2-35. Exception.
When deemed necessary by the City Council, the provisions of section 2-34 may be waived by
five votes of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 09-04, 10-22-09)
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:9
Sec. 2-36. Unassigned fund balance.
Unassigned Fund Balance is that portion of the City’s resources which cannot be properly
classified in one of the other four categories of fund balance as established by Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles. The other four categories are: non-spendable; restricted;
committed; and assigned. (Ord. No. 11-05, 08-18-11)
Sec. 2-37. Target amounts.
The City shall seek to maintain a targeted minimum unassigned fund balance in the General
Fund of 8% of general fund revenues and a targeted maximum of 12% of said revenues to be
measured on a Generally Accepted Accounting Principles basis. (Ord. No. 11-05, 08-18-11)
Sec. 2-38 Use of unassigned fund balance.
Five affirmative votes of the City Council shall be required to approve any action that
temporarily reduces unassigned fund balance below the minimum target level. Amounts in
excess of the targeted maximum of 12% of unassigned fund balance may be used in accordance
with a policy adopted by the City Council. (Ord. No. 11-05, 08-18-11)
Secs. 2-39--2-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. INVESTIGATIONS*
Sec. 2-46. Institution of investigation proceedings.
Investigative proceedings may be instituted under this article by adoption of a resolution
at a regular meeting of the city council in accordance with section 2.09 of the Charter. The
resolution which institutes investigation proceedings shall:
(1) State the name of the department, office or agency against whom the proceedings
are to be instituted;
(2) Enumerate one or more of the grounds as a basis for institution of the
proceedings;
(3) Name the person or persons who will be conducting the investigation; and
(4) Set a date for a hearing on the charges, which date shall not be less than 30 nor
more than 60 days from the date of the resolution.
(Code 1982, § 2-601)
Sec. 2-47. Instituting investigation; report.
Upon the adoption of a resolution instituting investigation proceedings, the person or
persons named in section 2-46(3) shall investigate all alleged grounds and shall prepare a written
report thereon. The report shall include the names of all witnesses available to testify at the
hearing and shall set forth the matters which are expected to be proven. Copies of the report shall
be provided to the city clerk, all members of the city council, the city administrator and the head
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:10
of the department, office or agency being investigated at least seven days prior to the hearing.
(Code 1982, § 2-602)
Sec. 2-48. Notice.
The city clerk shall publish a notice of the hearing under this division in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least seven days in advance of the investigative hearing.
(Code 1982, § 2-603)
Sec. 2-49. Presiding officer.
The mayor shall be the presiding officer in all investigative proceedings under this
division, except in cases wherein the mayor's office is being investigated. In those cases wherein
the mayor's office is being investigated, then the council president shall be the presiding officer.
The presiding officer shall have authority to compel employees to testify and to produce books,
papers, titles or documents in their possession which may be necessary to the matter or matters
under investigation.
(Code 1982, § 2-604)
Sec. 2-50. Conduct of hearing.
The presiding officer shall preside at hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this
division, and he shall administer the oath to all witnesses, rule on the admissibility of evidence,
set the order for the hearing and maintain order throughout. The city attorney, or other counsel
named by the city council if the department of law is being investigated, shall act as prosecutor
and shall conduct the examination of all witnesses. The head of the department, office or agency
being investigated may be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses, and may
present witnesses of his own. No formal rules of evidence need be followed, and the ruling of the
presiding officer shall be final, unless overruled by a majority of those council members
constituting the hearing panel. No person shall refuse to obey a lawful order of the presiding
officer given during the course of the hearing.
(Code 1982, § 2-605)
Sec. 2-51. Witnesses.
Witnesses who are compelled to give testimony at a hearing under this division shall be
entitled to the same privileges and immunities as are allowed witnesses in civil cases before the
courts.
(Code 1982, § 2-606)
Sec. 2-52. Deliberation.
At the conclusion of the evidence, the council members who are conducting the hearing
under this division shall meet in closed session for a discussion of the merits of the investigation.
Following the closed session, the council shall be reconvened for the purpose of introducing and
acting upon a resolution, which shall be prepared by the prosecutor named in section 2-50. The
resolution shall outline the findings of the council and action, if any, to be taken as a result of the
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:11
investigation. No such resolution shall be adopted except upon the concurring vote of five
members of the council.
(Code 1982, § 2-607)
Sec. 2-53. Record of hearings.
A verbatim record shall be made of all hearings held pursuant to this article.
(Code 1982, § 2-608) *Charter references: Investigations, § 2.09.
Secs. 2-54--2-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-76. Salaries of elected and appointed officials.
Elected and appointed officials shall receive the following annual salaries, payable
monthly:
(1) Mayor. The mayor shall receive an annual salary of $4,500.00, payable monthly.
(2) City council. Each of the councilors shall receive an annual salary of $2,700.00,
payable monthly.
(3) School committee. Each member of the school committee shall receive a salary at
the rate of $1,200.00 per year, payable monthly.
(4) Planning board. Each member of the planning board shall receive a salary at the
rate of $600.00 per year, payable monthly.
(5) Board of appeals. Each member of the board of appeals shall receive a salary at
the rate of $600.00 per year, payable monthly.
(6) Personnel board. Each member of the personnel board shall receive a salary at the
rate of $600.00 per year, payable monthly.
(Code 1982, § 2-15; Ord. No. 11-13, 12-15-11) *Cross references: Personnel, ch. 58.
Sec. 2-77. Conflict of interest.
The city shall not enter into any contract for the purchase or sale of goods, labor or
services with an elected or appointed official, officer or employee of the city who has a ten
percent or greater financial interest in the transaction or in the company or corporation which he
represents, except when the purchase or sale is through a competitive bid process with a
minimum of one other person participating, providing that, in the event that the nature of the
goods, labor or services are such that, but for the provisions of this section, the finance
committee, acting pursuant to the duly adopted purchasing policy, would be authorized to waive
competitive bidding, and the official, officer or employee discloses his or her interest and
abstains from participating in any official action in connection with the contract, the city may
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:12
proceed to enter into such a contract.
(Code 1982, § 2-10; Ord. No. 00-13, 6-15-00)
Sec. 2-78. City employees prohibited from striking.
No city employee, whether a member of any municipal employee organization or not,
shall directly or indirectly participate, assist, cooperate in or consent to any strike, work
stoppage, walkout or slow-down against the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-7)
State law references: Similar provisions, 26 M.R.S.A. § 964(2)(c).
Secs. 2-79--2-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CITY ADMINISTRATOR*
Sec. 2-91. Chief executive and general powers.
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government,
shall enforce the laws of the city and require the faithful performance of all administrative duties,
and shall, in addition to the powers and duties granted by the Charter:
(1) Appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to the administrative service
and shall have the power to dismiss, suspend and discipline, in accordance with
the personnel system, all officers and employees in the administrative service
under his control. He shall also have the power to authorize a department head or
officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under that
department head or officer.
(2) Designate himself or some other officer or employee to perform the duties of any
office or position in the administrative service under his control which is vacant
or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent.
(3) Prepare and present to the council an annual report of the city's affairs, including a
summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as the council
shall require.
(4) Assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources of the city for each
ensuing year, and shall prepare a program of activities within the financial power
of the city, embodying in it a budget document with proper supporting schedules
and analyses.
(5) Have the power to assign any employee of the city to any department or branch
thereof requiring services appropriate to the personnel system classification of the
employee so assigned.
(6) Have the power to prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary
or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority,
and he shall have the power to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of
the administrative service by whomever prescribed, and safeguard those adopted
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:13
by the city council.
(7) Have the power, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the
purpose by him, to investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or
operation of any department, division, bureau or office; and when so authorized
by the consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations,
examinations or inquiries.
(8) Have the power to set aside any action taken by a department head and may
supersede him in the functions of his office except in those cases where the
authority is specifically vested by state law or ordinance to a particular
department or head thereof.
(9) Have the power to direct any department, division or bureau to perform the work
for any other department, division or bureau.
(10) Have the power to designate from the administrative service such committees and
the officers thereof as he shall find necessary for the proper consideration of
administrative problems. Such committees shall meet at the request of the city
administrator and shall make such recommendation on matters referred to them as
they shall find necessary for the best interest of the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-31) *Charter references: City administrator generally, art. III.
Secs. 2-92--2-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-101. Appointment; residency.
The city clerk shall be appointed by the city administrator and confirmed by the city
council. He need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment, but may reside
outside the city while in office only with the approval of the council.
(Code 1982, § 2-76)
Sec. 2-102. Recordkeeping; reports; custodian of bonds, other evidence of indebtedness;
notice to appointees.
(a) The city clerk shall keep full records of the doings of the city council and of the
municipal officers. The city clerk shall perform all duties and exercise all powers by law
incumbent upon or vested in town and city clerks generally and shall perform such other
duties as the city council or the municipal officers may prescribe.
(b) The city clerk shall:
(1) Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and shall authenticate
such ordinances.
(2) Publish, when required, ordinances and resolutions of the council, and all legal
notices required by law or ordinance.
(3) Prepare, attest and report on the vital statistics of the city.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:14
(4) Be charged with the custody of the official bonds of city employees and with the
custody of all deeds, mortgages, contracts, judgments, notes, debts and choses in
actions.
(5) Make and keep a record of the qualification of all such city officers as qualify
before him and shall require and record certificates from the proper magistrates of
the qualification of all such officers as qualify before them.
(6) Cause all persons appointed to office by the mayor seasonably to be notified of
their appointment; seasonably notify each member of the city council of all
meetings of the council.
(7) Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the term of office
of a member of any board or commission, such notice to be given at least 30 days
before such expiration.
(Code 1982, § 2-77) Charter references: Clerk to be secretary of council, § 2.08.
Sec. 2-103. Duties as to licenses and permits.
(a) The city clerk shall countersign and issue all permits and licenses which shall be duly
granted and signed by any other officer or board of the city and make and keep a record
of such permits and licenses. Any duly authorized license or permit shall be deemed to be
properly issued if it shall bear the signature of the city clerk and shall recite the source of
its authority.
(b) The city clerk shall be responsible for the proper administration and issuance of all
licenses required by state law.
(Code 1982, § 2-78)
Sec. 2-104. Animal control functions.
The city clerk shall be responsible for the enforcement of all dog licensing and animal
control laws.
(Code 1982, § 2-79) Cross references: Animals, ch. 14.
Sec. 2-105. Functions as to elections.
The city clerk shall be the supervisor of all state and municipal elections held in the city,
and shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in
connection with elections. The city clerk shall appoint, subject to confirmation of the council, the
chairman of the board of voter registration, and a warden and ward clerk for each of the voting
precincts.
(Code 1982, § 2-80) Charter references: Elections, art. VII.
Sec. 2-106. Custodian of city seal.
The city clerk shall be the custodian of the seal of the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-82)
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:15
Secs. 2-107--2-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. ASSESSOR
Sec. 2-121. Office created.
The office of municipal tax assessor is hereby created pursuant to the provisions of 36
M.R.S.A. § 471.
(Code 1982, § 2-61)
Sec. 2-122. Primary assessing unit.
Upon city council petition and by order of the state tax assessor, Lewiston, a body
corporate and the municipal officers as the governing board, is designated a primary assessing
unit pursuant to the provisions of 36 M.R.S.A. § 304.
(Code 1982, § 2-62)
Sec. 2-123. Appointment.
The chief assessor shall be appointed by the city administrator and confirmed by the city
council.
(Code 1982, § 2-63)
Sec. 2-124. Qualification.
No person shall be eligible to perform the duties of a chief assessor of the city, being a
primary assessing unit, unless such person shall have been issued a certificate of eligibility by the
state tax assessor.
(Code 1982, § 2-64) State law references: Similar provisions, 36 M.R.S.A. § 312.
Sec. 2-125. Tenure.
(a) A certified chief assessor shall serve a probationary period of two years. Thereafter, the
certified chief assessor shall have tenure and may only be removed as provided in this
division.
(b) A chief assessor having tenure in any primary assessing area, upon moving from another
primary assessing area to the city, a primary assessing unit, shall serve a probationary
period of no longer than one year, but such probationary period may be waived by
agreement of the parties.
(Code 1982, § 2-65) State law references: Similar provisions, 36 M.R.S.A. § 313.
Sec. 2-126. Duties.
The chief assessor shall supervise the assessor's office and shall:
(1) Supervise personnel engaged in gathering information for assessment purposes,
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:16
recording and filing information concerning property ownership; measuring and
photographing buildings; estimating building replacement costs based on
prescribed formulas and pricing schedules, and allowing for depreciation; and
analyzing reports of real estate and personal property sales information for
purposes of modifying or establishing value-determining factors.
(2) Prepare all work in connection with assessment of property and the preparation of
all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices.
(3) Discuss values with property owners and explain appraisal methods and local and
state laws governing taxation.
(4) Assist other city departments and offices by providing information which is
readily available to the assessors on the public purchase or rental value of real
estate.
(5) Perform all other duties and responsibilities required by statute or ordinance.
(Code 1982, § 2-66)
Sec. 2-127. Removal.
The chief assessor may be removed from office as follows:
(1) A chief assessor serving a probationary term may be removed by the city
administrator upon council confirmation upon 30 days' written notice stating the
reason therefor.
(2) A chief assessor having tenure may be removed for cause by the city
administrator upon council confirmation on the form and manner provided in 30-
A M.R.S.A. § 2633. The chief assessor shall hold office for an indefinite term
unless otherwise specified by contract.
(3) A chief assessor whose certification is revoked by the state tax assessor shall be
immediately removed from office.
(Code 1982, § 2-67) State law references: Similar provisions, 36 M.R.S.A. § 314.
Secs. 2-128--2-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND BUREAUS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-151. Parliamentary procedure.
(a) All boards of the city government shall conduct their meetings by parliamentary
procedure.
(b) In all cases where parliamentary procedure questions arise in the conduct of municipal
affairs, the newly revised edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall be taken as the source
of authority to decide the orderly course of the proceedings.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:17
(Code 1982, § 2-3) *Charter references: Planning board, § 4.05; school committee, § 5.01.
Cross references: Library board of trustees, § 48-21 et seq. *Charter references: Board of appeals, § 4.06.
State law references: Board of appeals, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
Secs. 2-152--2-160. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BOARD OF APPEALS*
Sec. 2-161. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to establish the organization, authority and responsibilities
of the city board of appeals.
(Code 1982, § 2-516)
Sec. 2-162. Authority.
The board of appeals is established under authority of article VIII, part 2, of the Maine
Constitution.
(Code 1982, § 2-517)
Sec. 2-163. Organization and rules.
(a) A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting of the board of appeals shall consist
of at least four members.
(b) The board shall elect annually a chairperson, and other officers deemed necessary from
its membership, and a secretary who need not be a member. All seven members enjoy the
same rights and privileges regardless of any board of appeals office that they may hold.
(c) The chairperson shall call meetings of the board as required. The chairperson shall also
call meetings of the board when requested to do so by a majority of the members, the
mayor, or the municipal officers.
(d) The secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all meetings of the board of appeals
and all correspondence of the board. The secretary shall be responsible for maintaining
those records which are required as part of the various proceedings which may be brought
before the board. All records to be maintained or prepared by the secretary are deemed
public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
(e) Except as otherwise provided by the ordinance governing the matter subject to appeal, the
following voting requirements shall apply:
(1) The concurring vote of at least four members is required to constitute an action on
any matter requiring a public hearing.
(2) The concurring vote of a majority of the members present at an official meeting is
required to constitute an action on any matter not requiring a public hearing.
(f) No member of the board of appeals shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any
matter in which he has an interest. Any questions of whether a member has a conflict of
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:18
interest sufficient to disqualify the member shall be decided by a majority vote of the
members presents, except the member whose possible conflict is being examined; where
such vote results in a tie, the subject member shall be disqualified.
(g) The chairperson shall appoint an associate member to act for a full member who is
disqualified from voting, unable to attend the hearing, or absent from a substantial
portion of the hearing due to late arrival. The associate member will act for the full
member until the appeal(s) is/are heard.
(h) Upon appointment by the chairperson, an associate member acting for a full member
shall enjoy the same rights and privileges as the full members for the duration of
appointment.
(i) Associate members shall attend all scheduled hearings and, if called upon by the
chairperson, be prepared to act for a full member.
(j) The board of appeals may adopt statements of policy, along with its rules of procedure,
consistent with the Charter and any applicable ordinance, to enable it to perform its
function.
(k) In addition to other provisions for amending the board's rules of procedure, any rule
adopted by the board of appeals relating to the conduct of any hearing may be waived by
the chairman upon good cause shown.
(Code 1982, § 2-518; Ord. No. 96-1, 2-22-96)
Sec. 2-164. Hearings.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by the ordinance governing the matter subject to appeal, all
public hearings shall be posted in the office of the city clerk at least seven days before the
date of the hearing. The board of appeals, at its discretion, may determine that a given
matter is of particular importance or interest to the community such that, in addition to
posting as required in this section, it may insert a paid notice of the public hearing in one
or more newspapers of general circulation in the city.
(b) The board may receive any oral or documentary evidence, but shall provide as a matter of
policy for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. Every
party shall have the right to present his case or defense by oral or documentary evidence,
to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for
a full and true disclosure of the facts.
(Code 1982, § 2-519)
Sec. 2-165. Record of proceedings; notice of decision.
The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests
filed in the proceedings before the board of appeals, shall constitute the record. All decisions
shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions, as
well as the reasons or basis therefor, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion
presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall be
mailed or hand delivered to the petitioner, his representative or agent, the planning office and the
city clerk within seven days of its decision.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:19
(Code 1982, § 2-520)
Sec. 2-166. Jurisdiction and manner of taking appeals.
The board of appeals may hear an appeal from a decision, order, rule or failure of any
municipal entity to act relating to the following matters, except as otherwise specifically
provided for in the ordinance or codes:
(1) Actions of the director of code enforcement regarding appendix A, zoning, of this
Code.
(2) Actions of the director of code enforcement regarding section 18-26 et seq. of this
Code.
(3) Actions of the electrical inspector regarding chapter 18, article V, of this Code.
(4) Actions of the director of fire prevention regarding chapter 38, fire protection and
prevention, of this Code.
(5) Actions of the health officer regarding chapter 34.
(6) Actions of the code official regarding section 18-51 et seq.
(7) Actions of the city council regarding the issuance of special amusement permits
for dancing and entertainment in accordance with section 10-61 et seq.
(8) Actions of the police chief regarding applications to purchase handguns in
accordance with section 50-121 of this Code.
(9) Any other duty which may be delegated by ordinance or state law.
(10) Actions of the code enforcement official regarding appendix A to this Code.
(11) Actions of the Department of Public Service pertaining to requests for the
installation or removal of street lighting according to the Streetlight Policy.
Any person who requests a hearing before the board of appeals shall file a written petition for
appeals at the office of the director of code enforcement. Unless otherwise required by ordinance
or code, the petition shall include a statement of the reason(s) why the petitioner believes the
appeal should be granted, the petitioner's proposal of what is intended to be done and, if
applicable, a plan of work to be done. The fee for filing an appeal shall be set by the city council
on the recommendation of the director of code enforcement.
(Code 1982, § 2-521; Ord. No. 09-06, 12-31-09)
Sec. 2-167. Administration.
The director of code enforcement shall provide for the administration of the affairs of the
board of appeals, including preparing agendas and minutes, posting public hearings, handling
correspondence, and maintaining all official records.
(Code 1982, § 2-502)
Sec. 2-168. Appeals from decisions of board.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:20
An appeal may be taken, within 30 days after the decision is rendered by the board of
appeals, by any party to superior court from any order, relief or denial in accordance with the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, rule 80B. The hearing before the superior court shall be without
a jury. The chairman of the board of appeals shall advise all parties who have been denied an
appeal to the board of their rights to a hearing before the superior court. The city attorney shall
notify the board of the hearing, be present at the hearing, and represent the city's interest at the
hearing.
(Code 1982, § 2-523)
Secs. 2-169--2-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. FINANCE COMMITTEE*
Sec. 2-181. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to establish the organization, authority and responsibilities
of the city finance committee.
(Code 1982, § 2-551)
Sec. 2-182. Authority.
The finance committee is established under authority of article VIII-A of the Maine
Constitution, and section 6.15 of the Charter.
(Code 1982, § 2-552)
Sec. 2-183. Organization and rules.
(a) A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting of the finance committee shall consist
of at least three members and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary to
constitute an action on any matter.
(b) All five members of the finance committee shall enjoy the same rights and privileges
regardless of any finance committee office that they may hold.
(c) The mayor or chairman may call special meetings of the finance committee.
(d) Any request for a recommendation by the city council shall be acted upon by the finance
committee within 30 days of the city council action, except as otherwise provided for by
statute or ordinance or unless a longer period is specified by the city council.
(e) The finance committee may adopt statements of policy, along with its rules of procedure,
consistent with the Charter and this division, to enable it to perform its function.
(f) No member of the finance committee shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any
matter in which such member has an interest. Any questions of whether a member has a
conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify the member shall be decided by a majority vote
of the members present, except the member whose possible conflict is being examined;
where such vote results in a tie, the subject member shall be disqualified.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:21
(Code 1982, § 2-553)
Sec. 2-184. Powers and duties.
(a) The finance committee shall approve contracts for the purchase of materials and services
procured through the competitive bid process in accordance with purchasing ordinances
and policies which may be adopted by the city council.
(b) The finance committee shall require all city officers, agents, appointees and employees
whose duties require the receiving, handling or disbursement of monies belonging to the
city to give bond to the city in a penal sum and with surety or sureties acceptable to the
committee, conditioned for the true accounting for and proper disposition of all such
monies. Premium charges for such bonds shall be paid by the city.
(c) The finance committee, upon receiving the proposed budget and accompanying message
from the city administrator, shall review and comment upon the documents and shall
seasonably forward its recommendations to the mayor and council and city administrator.
In any event, the finance committee shall submit a comprehensive analysis of the budget
program no later than May 1 of each fiscal year.
(d) The city administrator shall refer to the finance committee, no later than January 15, the
capital improvement program for its review and comments upon the document. The
finance committee shall seasonably forward its recommendations to the mayor and
council and city administrator. In any event, the finance committee shall submit a
comprehensive analysis of the capital improvement program no later than February 15 of
each fiscal year.
(e) The finance committee shall serve as the pension board of the city pursuant to provisions
contained in this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 2-554)
Sec. 2-185. Administration.
The finance director shall be responsible to provide for the administration of the affairs of
the finance committee, including preparing agendas and minutes, posting public hearings,
handling correspondence, and maintaining all official records.
(Code 1982, § 2-555) *Charter references: Finance committee, § 6.15.
Secs. 2-186--2-195. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. RESERVED
Secs. 2-196--2-210. Reserved. (Energy Saving Committee Repealed Ord. No. 16-10, 11-17-16)
DIVISION 5. VOTER REGISTRATION APPEALS BOARD
Sec. 2-211. Purpose.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:22
The purpose of this division is to establish the organization, authority and responsibilities
of the city voter registration appeals board.
(Code 1982, § 2-576; Ord. No. 95-14, 10-19-95)
Sec. 2-212. Authority; powers.
The voter registration appeals board is established under authority of 21-A M.R.S.A. §§
103, 104, and shall have all the powers and duties prescribed for voter registration appeals
boards by the general law of the state.
(Code 1982, § 2-577; Ord. No. 95-14, 10-19-95)
Sec. 2-213. Compensation of members.
The two regular members of the voter registration appeals board shall receive
compensation for each meeting as determined by the city council. The salary of the chairman of
the board shall be set by the municipal officers. Members of the board, when employed by the
city, shall be paid an hourly rate to be set by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 2-578; Ord. No. 95-14, 10-19-95)
Sec. 2-214. Organization; rules.
(a) The voter registration appeals board shall meet at such times and places as the chairman
of the board may prescribe. Special meetings of the board may be held on the call of the
chairman.
(b) The voter registration appeals board shall, annually and in writing, adopt rules necessary
to carry out its proper functions.
(Code 1982, § 2-579; Ord. No. 95-14, 10-19-95)
Secs. 2-215--2-219. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
Sec. 2-220. Appointment; vacancies.
There shall be a board of assessment review to consist of five members, who shall be
appointed by the mayor to serve for terms as follows: Following adoption of this division, two
members shall be appointed to serve for one year; two members shall be appointed to serve for
two years, and one member shall be appointed to serve for three years; thereafter all subsequent
appointees shall be appointed for a term of three years. Compensation, if any, to such members
shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. Vacancies in the
membership of the board shall be filled by appointment from the mayor for the unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 96-13, 11-14-96; Ord. No. 07-03, 5-17-07)
Sec. 2-221. Qualifications.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:23
All members of such board shall be selected upon the basis of their good judgment and
knowledge of the subject of taxation, appraisal of property values and shall at the time of their
appointment be residents of the city and shall continue as residents during their terms of office. If
a member of such board shall cease to be a resident, his office shall thereby become vacant. No
elected official of the city shall serve as a member of the board.
(Ord. No. 96-13, 11-14-96)
Sec. 2-222. Powers and duties.
The board of assessment review shall have conferred upon it such powers of review and
abatement as are conferred upon boards of assessment review by statute. The board may adopt
such rules of procedure, consistent with law, as shall seem appropriate. Such board shall
annually choose from its membership a chair and secretary, except that in lieu of one of the
members of such board serving as secretary, the council may authorize such board to appoint
either a full-time or part-time nonmember secretary and to fix his or her compensation. Such
board shall have power within the limits of its budget appropriation to employ such other
necessary clerical assistance as may be necessary from time to time in the performance of its
duties. The board shall be required to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings, which shall
be available for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 96-13, 11-14-96)
Sec. 2-223. Hearings and appeals/quorum.
All hearings and appeals therefrom shall be in such manner as prescribed by statute. A
quorum of the board shall consist of three members. In addition to the certification of abatement
to the director of finance, the board, through its secretary, shall notify the chief assessor of such
determination, who shall make such correction upon the assessment roll and duplicate.
(Ord. No. 96-13, 11-14-96)
Sec. 2-224. Burden of proof.
In all proceedings the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish that the
applicant is entitled to the abatement sought.
(Ord. No. 96-13, 11-14-96)
DIVISION 7. HOUSING COMMITTEE
Sec. 2-225. Purpose
The Housing Committee is charged with advising the City Council on the full range of housing
issues facing the community with the goal of ensuring the quality and safety of the City’s
residential housing stock, expanding the diversity of housing options and types, and providing
safe and healthy housing alternatives for current and future residents of every socioeconomic
status. (Ord. No. 19-05, 10-03-19)
Sec. 2-226. Duties
The Committee shall:
(1) Monitor and assist in the implementation of the Housing recommendations outlined in the
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:24
City’s comprehensive plan, Legacy Lewiston, and recommend updates and revisions to
that section of the plan;
(2) Monitor and assist in the implementation and evaluation of the City’s rental registration
program;
(3) Review and advise the City Council on residential development projects requiring actions
by the City Council;
(4) Recommend measures the City might undertake to improve the quality and diversity of
the residential housing stock in Lewiston;
(5) Review and advise staff and City Council on housing programs funded through the
Federal Community Development Block Grant Program and other federal and state
funding sources;
(6) Develop and recommend policies and guidance for ensuring safe, healthy, and lead free
housing throughout Lewiston by 2043;
(7) Undertake other assignments as the City Council may request from time to time.
(Ord. No. 19-05, 10-03-19)
Sec. 2-227. Composition and Appointment.
The Committee shall be composed of eleven members appointed by the Mayor and individually
confirmed by the city council for staggered three-year terms, with the exception of the City
Council member who shall be appointed for a one-year term annually in January of each year.
Except as noted below, members shall reside in Lewiston unless a qualified Lewiston resident
cannot be found who is willing to accept appointment to fill a specific position. Initial terms
shall be assigned at the time of initial appointment as follows:
(1) One owner of a multi-unit property in Lewiston, initially appointed to a one-year term;
(2) One owner of a multi-unit property in Lewiston, initially appointed to a two-year term;
(3) One tenant of a multi-unit property in Lewiston, initially appointed to a one-year term;
(4) One tenant of a multi-unit property in Lewiston, initially appointed to a two-year term;
(5) One Lewiston home owner, initially appointed to a one-year term;
(6) One Lewiston home owner, initially appointed to a two-year term;
(7) One representative of the LA Public Health Committee who may or may not be a resident
of the city, initially appointed to a three-year term;
(8) A representative of a financial institution with a presence in Lewiston that lends to home
owners and/or residential developers and who possesses knowledge or expertise
regarding housing issues, including financing or development, initially appointed to a
three-year term;
(9) A residential developer or real estate professional who possesses knowledge of the
housing market in Lewiston, initially appointed to a three-year term;
(10) A representative of an agency or firm that owns or operates a multi-unit property in
Lewiston providing affordable workforce or elderly housing who possesses knowledge of
the financing, development, or operation of such properties, initially appointed to a threeyear
term;
(11) A City Council member.
(12) A member of the prior Ad-Hoc Committee on Rental Registration appointed for a single
one-year term after which this position will be eliminated.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:25
With the exception of the City Council member, the first year of each term of initial appointees
or their replacements will expire as of January 1, 2021.
The members of the Committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as Committee
Chair. (Ord. No. 19-05, 10-03-19)
Sec. 2-228. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Committee shall be filled by the Mayor in accordance with the requirements of
Section 2-227. (Ord. No. 19-05, 10-03-19)
Sec. 2-229. Procedures.
(1) A quorum shall consist of at least six (6) members of the Committee.
(2) In the absence of rules and procedures adopted by the Committee by a majority of
members present and voting, the Committee shall operate under Roberts Rules of Order.
(3) The City Administrator or designee shall be responsible for supporting the work of the
committee and handling committee logistics.
(4) The Committee shall meet at least twice a year with the City Council in February and
October.
(Ord. No. 19-05, 10-03-19)
Secs. 2-230. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. RESERVED
Sec. 2-231—2-235. Reserved. (Downtown Advisory Board Repealed Ord. No. 16-10, 11-17-16)
ARTICLE V. DEPARTMENTS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-236. Departments designated.
The administrative service of the city shall be divided under the administrator into the
following departments and heads thereof:
Department Head
Department of assessment Chief assessor
Department of city clerk City clerk
Department of economic and community development
Director of economic and community development
Department of education School committee
Department of finance Finance director/controller
Department of fire Fire chief
Department of human resources Human resources director
Department of law City attorney
Department of library Library director
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:26
Department of management information services MIS director
Department of planning and code enforcement Director of planning and code enforcement
Department of police Chief of police
Department of public works Director of public works
Department of social services Director of social services
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03 Ord. No. 19-17, 01-09-20)
Sec. 2-237. Oaths of office.
Each of the following officers and employees in the administrative service shall be
required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his duties, which oath
shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the
city clerk:
(1) The city administrator and each officer.
(2) Every member of the department of police, including any private, special,
temporary or substitute police officers which the city might find it necessary to
appoint.
(3) Every member of the department of fire who serves on a full-time basis.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-238. Administrative policy and procedures.
(a) Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, this
Code and the ordinances of the city, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as
may be required by the administrator.
(b) The head of each city department shall:
(1) Be immediately responsible to the administrator for the effective administration of
their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto.
(2) Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall
inaugurate, with the approval of the administrator, such new practices as appear to
be of benefit to the service and to the public.
(3) Submit reports of the activities of his department to the administrator as may be
required.
(4) Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in
sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the
administrator.
(5) Have power, when authorized by the administrator, to appoint and remove,
subject to personnel system regulations for personnel, all subordinates under him.
(6) Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used
in his department.
(c) Each department shall furnish, upon the direction of the administrator, any other
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:27
department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such
department and as its own facilities permit, through the same procedure and subject to the
same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred.
(d) All units in the administrative service shall:
(1) Be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays and shall be
closed Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except as otherwise provided.
(2) Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from
the public.
(3) Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner in this Code.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-239--2-250. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 2-251. Created.
The department of economic and community development is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-252. Duties of the director of economic and community development.
The director of economic and community development shall:
(1) Administer comprehensive economic development, community development and
grant-in-aid programs in the interest of the entire community.
(2) Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred on and imposed by
law on the city for purposes of its development program.
(3) Advise the city administrator and city council and planning board of all matters
affecting the physical growth and development of the city.
(4) Provide information to the public on the economic and community development
programs and problems.
(5) Integrate and coordinate all individual projects and programs relating to the
economic development and community development of the city.
(6) Coordinate the relationship between the city, urban renewal authority, housing
authority and other special purpose entities involved with the development of the
city.
(7) Perform such other duties as are prescribed by the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-253. Duties of the department.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:28
Under the supervision of the director of economic and community development, the
department shall promote the development of a viable community by expanding economic
opportunity, by providing public facilities, decent housing and suitable living environments.
The department shall direct its activities toward the following specific objectives:
(1) Assist with the development of planning projects
(2) Conduct economic analysis for the city
(3) Provide direct technical assistance to businesses
(4) Provide support in the retention and recruitment of city-wide businesses
(5) Develop tax increment financing proposals
(6) Work with representatives from regional, state and federal agencies to match
available business assistance with Lewiston businesses
(7) The elimination of slums and blight and the prevention of blighting influences and
the deterioration of property in neighborhoods and community facilities of
importance to the welfare of the community.
(8) The elimination of conditions which are detrimental to health, safety and public
welfare, through code enforcement, demolition, interim rehabilitation assistance
and related activities.
(9) The conservation and expansion of the city's housing inventory to provide a
decent home and a suitable living environment for all persons.
(10) The expansion and improvement of the quantity and quality of community
services which are essential for sound community development in the city.
(11) Promotion of an increase in the diversity and vitality of the city's neighborhoods.
(12) The restoration and preservation of properties of special value for historic,
architectural or aesthetic reasons.
(13) The performance of all other related functions as may be required by the city
council or by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, Public Law
93-383.
(14) Perform such other duties as the city administrator or director of development
may require.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-254--2-265. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Sec. 2-266. Created.
A department of education is hereby created pursuant to the provisions of Article V of the
Charter, under the supervision of the school committee, which shall have all the powers and
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:29
duties prescribed for superintending school committees by the general laws of the state except as
otherwise provided by the Charter.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-267. Program divisions.
The department of education shall be divided into the following program divisions:
(1) Division of administration, supervised by the superintendent of schools, which
shall be responsible for overall departmental operations and programs. It shall
also be the location for the operation of business and maintenance functions,
nutrition, transportation and attendance requirements, personnel administration
for the department of education, and general control and supervision of federal
and state programs.
(2) Division of common schools, supervised by the director of elementary education
and building principals, which consists of all elementary schools of grades
kindergarten through grade six. This division is responsible for basic elementary
instruction in the major areas of reading, mathematics, language arts and all other
curricular areas, to include social studies, science, foreign language, art, music
and physical education.
(3) Division of junior high school, supervised by a principal, consists of grades seven
and eight. This division is responsible for instruction in the major areas of
language arts, mathematics, science, social studies, foreign languages, and all
other curricular areas of home economics, industrial arts, physical education, art
and music.
(4) Division of senior high school, supervised by a principal, consists of grades nine
through 12. This division is responsible for instruction in the areas of English,
mathematics, science, social studies, foreign languages, home economics,
industrial arts, business, physical education, fine arts, and maintains and
encourages active student participation in a varied extracurricular program.
(5) Division of special education, supervised by a director of special education, is
responsible to provide for instructional programs to meet the needs of exceptional
children between the ages of five and 20 years.
(6) Division of vocational education, supervised by a director of vocational
education, consists of vocational programs for residents and regional students in
grades 11 and 12. This division is responsible to provide entry level skills in many
vocational areas.
(7) Division of adult education, supervised by a director of adult education and
summer school, which is responsible to provide for diploma programs, basic
education, vocational programs and general education to meet the needs of the
adult community.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-268--2-279. Reserved.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:30
DIVISION 4. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Sec. 2-280. Created.
The department of finance is hereby created. The department shall be divided into four
divisions: The division of the treasury, the division of accounts, the division of purchasing and
the division of central services.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-281. Director of finance/controller.
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any other department or office, it
shall be the duty of the director of finance/controller to plan, organize, direct, promote, secure
and preserve the financial and property interests and activities of the city. The director of
finance/controller shall serve as the city treasurer. The director of finance/controller shall:
(1) Exercise general supervision over all officers of the city regarding the proper
management of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices.
(2) Advise the city administrator on fiscal policy and supervise all financial activities.
In providing budget assistance, the director of finance/controller shall:
a. Make departmental work measurement studies for development and
administration of performance budget systems;
b. Prepare and assemble budget estimates and assist the city administrator in
preparing budget documents;
c. Act as agent of the administrator in controlling the administration of the
budget;
d. Conduct studies relative to improvements in administrative organization
and procedures;
e. Direct the city's risk management program and administer the insurance
programs;
f. Direct and administer the city's debt management program;
g. Coordinate the accounting and financial systems; and
h. Represent the city on designated committees.
(3) Provide direct supervision over the internal audit program and shall:
a. Conduct independent protective and constructive audits to review
effectiveness of controls, financial records and operations;
b. See that officers receiving money pay such monies into the city treasury,
when thereto required, and that all necessary financial reports are
submitted on a timely basis; and
c. Report the default of any officer of the city to the administrator.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:31
Sec. 2-282. Divisions.
The department of finance shall be divided into the following divisions and supervisors
thereof:
(1) A division of the treasury supervised by the city treasurer, who shall:
a. Keep, in proper books, a full and accurate account of all the monies
received and disbursed by the treasurer in behalf of the city.
b. Receive and have custody of all monies paid to the city and shall disburse
city funds upon proper warrant of the city auditor.
c. Pay city employees upon presentation of the properly certified payrolls.
d. Collect all taxes, special assessments and property tax liens in the manner
authorized and required by law and collect all utility bills and other
revenues.
e. Demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the city whenever any
person is indebted to the city in any manner. When any claims shall not be
collectible, be shall report such claims to the city attorney for collection or
prosecution.
f. Manage the city's investment program. Deposit the proceeds of all sales of
bonds immediately after the city treasurer shall have received the same,
and, until such deposit, the city treasurer shall be responsible for the
amount thereof. Keep and administer all securities, bonds or other forms
of negotiable instruments owned by or belonging to the city.
g. Make a daily settlement with the city auditor of the amounts received and
paid out during the day.
(2) The division of accounts headed by the city auditor, who shall:
a. Keep the city's financial records in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles and applicable legal requirements.
b. Pre-audit all claims for correctness of amount and authorization of
expenditures; check, verify and transmit payroll data for processing;
prepare and issue all vouchers and checks; maintain or supervise cost
accounting and accounting for grant-in-aid programs; and reconcile bank
statements.
c. Bill city accounts receivables, journal entries, and other financial
recordkeeping activities.
d. Prescribe the form of accounts and reports to be rendered to him.
e. Render assistance in the preparation of the budget as may be required.
f. Maintain inventory records of all municipal property.
g. Transmit to the finance director interim and annual financial reports and
statements of cash on hand of classified unencumbered appropriation
balances in any city fund, and such other financial statements as the
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:32
finance director may from time to time require. Keep all departments
currently informed of their classified unencumbered appropriation
balances.
(3) A division of purchasing headed by the director of purchasing who shall:
a. Perform all duties and functions required for the procurement, lease or sale
of contractual services, supplies, materials, equipment, land and buildings
for city departments, divisions or agencies and authorize issuance of
purchase orders.
b. Establish standards and supervise preparation of specifications and tests
and inspect materials and supplies sold to the city and evaluate contractual
services rendered to city departments, divisions and agencies.
c. Provide staff services to the finance committee as directed by director of
finance/controller.
d. Assist the finance director/controller in assembling and supervising the
printing of the budget document.
(4) A division of central services headed by the tax collector/investment officer who
shall be responsible to supervise central services such as duplicating, printing,
central supply room, central switchboard, the office clerical pool, etc.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-283. Award of contracts.
Upon giving due consideration of the recommendation of the director of purchasing, the
finance committee shall award all contracts for the purchase of materials and services procured
through the formal competitive bid process.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-284--2-294. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. DEPARTMENT OF FIRE
Sec. 2-295. Created.
The department of fire is hereby created. The department shall be divided into two
divisions: The firefighting division and the fire prevention division.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 17-02, 04-06-17)
Sec. 2-296. Duties of fire chief.
The fire chief shall be charged with the prevention of fires and the protection of life and
property against fire and shall:
(1) Report all fire losses to the assessor.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:33
(2) Be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property and equipment used
by his department.
(3) Provide for the overall training, direction and supervision of the department.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 17-02, 04-06-17)
Sec. 2-297. Divisions.
The department of fire shall be divided into the following divisions thereof:
(1) A firefighting division supervised by a commissioned officer, who shall be
responsible for:
a. The extinguishment of fires;
b. The saving of life and property from fire; and
c. The performance of various miscellaneous public services of an
emergency nature.
(2) A fire prevention division supervised by a commissioned officer, who shall be
responsible for:
a. The inspecting of potential fire hazards;
b. The abatement of existing fire hazards; and
c. The conducting of an educational fire prevention program.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 17-02, 04-06-17)
Sec. 2-298. Fire apparatus.
The department shall maintain and budget for the maintenance and staffing of five frontline
firefighting units, to include pumpers and one or more aerial units as recommended by the
Chief and approved by the City Council. Five affirmative votes of the City Council shall be
required to reduce the number of front-line units supported in the annual operating budget.
(Ord. No. 17-02, 04-06-17)
Secs. 2-299--2-324. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
Sec. 2-325. Created.
The department of human resources is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-326. Duties of director of human resources.
(a) The director of human resources shall be responsible for all matters relating to an
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:34
equitable and uniform system of personnel administration for the city to attract the best
and most competent persons available, and to assure that appointments and promotions of
employees will be based on merit and fitness. The director of human resources shall:
(1) Enforce the provisions of the federal and state non-discrimination laws in the
recruitment, selection and placement of job applicants.
(2) Assist to negotiate labor agreements within the guidelines set forth by the city
administrator and city council with employee organizations. He shall assist city
departments in the administration of contract terms.
(3) Conduct wage and salary surveys to determine equitable salary ranges for specific
classifications.
(4) Prepare, recommend and maintain a position classification plan; prepare job
descriptions; and allocate positions to proper classifications.
(5) Administer wage supplement programs, including life and health insurance,
educational programs, retirement, worker's compensation, unemployment
compensation, sick leave and vacations.
(6) Develop and administer a citywide performance evaluation system during city
employees' probationary periods.
(7) Establish and maintain comprehensive central personnel records on all city
employees.
(8) Develop and coordinate a citywide safety program and maintain records of all
occupational injuries and illnesses.
(9) Consult with department heads and make recommendations regarding
departmental organization and manpower utilization to the city administrator;
administer manpower programs and provide technical assistance to the personnel
board in its various capacities and to all departments, divisions and agencies in
complying with appropriate federal, state and local laws and administrative
policies.
(b) The director of human resources shall be responsible to coordinate the administration of
the personnel system with the director of finance to assure full integration of fiscal
implications in the performance of assigned duties and responsibilities.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-327--2-335. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Sec. 2-336. Powers and duties of city attorney.
The department of law shall be directed by the city attorney, who shall enforce all laws
and act to protect the interests of the city and who shall:
(1) Advise the council or its committees or any city officer in their official capacities,
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:35
when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city
business.
(2) Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee
thereof.
(3) Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by majority
resolution of the council or any of its committees, or by any city officer. A copy
of all opinions shall be filed with the city clerk within 72 hours of issuance.
(4) Give his opinion upon legal matter or questions arising in the conduct of city
business, submitted to him by a duly adopted resolution by any board or
commission created pursuant to the provisions of the Charter.
(5) Prepare for execution contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and
shall approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city.
(6) In any prosecution for violation of any regulation adopted by any board or
commission while acting in its official capacity or created under authority of the
Charter, the city attorney shall act under the direction of such board or
commission, subject to such paramount control as is given to the council by the
Charter.
(7) Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise or submit to arbitration any action,
causes of action, accounts, debts, claims, demands, disputes and matters of favor
of or against the city or in which the city is concerned as debtor or creditor now
existing or which may arise, not involving or requiring payment to exceed
$250.00, and with the permission of the administrator may do likewise in matters
not involving or requiring payment to exceed $1,000.00, provided the money to
settle claims generally has been appropriated and is available therefor.
(8) Make the following reports:
a. An immediate report of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has
an interest, by issuing a copy of such report to the administrator and city
clerk.
b. An annual report, to the administrator and council, as of December 31, of
all pending litigation in which the city has an interest and the condition
thereof.
(9) Have charge of all legal services auxiliary to council action in connection with the
appropriating of property to public use and in the levying of assessments.
(10) Prepare and approve under direction and assistance of the appropriate department
head all unemployment and worker's compensation litigation and shall investigate
all cases in which unemployment or worker's compensation is involved and be
responsible for the filing of all appropriate documents and papers required by the
unemployment and worker's compensation acts of the state.
(11) Keep the following records:
a. A complete record of all suits in which the city had or has an interest,
giving the names of the parties, the court where brought, the nature of the
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:36
action, the disposition of the case, or its condition if pending, and the
briefs of counsel.
b. A complete record of all written opinions furnished by him and of all
certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the city, or any
department or official thereof.
(12) Deliver all records, documents and property of every description in his possession
belonging to his office or to the city, to his successor in office.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-337--2-344. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. DEPARTMENT OF LIBRARY
Sec. 2-345. Created.
The department of library is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-346. Duties of library director.
The library director shall plan, direct, administer and supervise the operations of the
public library; develop policies and procedures for the library; and act as a technical assistant to
the board of library trustees.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-347--2-355. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SERVICES
Sec. 2-356. Created.
The department of management information services is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-357. Duties of the MIS director.
The director of MIS shall be responsible for:
(1) Evaluate, design, implement and maintain the city's data processing systems;
(2) Prepare analysis of applications and perform cost/benefit studies of various
applications to resolve questions of program results; and
(3) Compile documentation of program development and revisions.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:37
Secs. 2-358--2-364. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 2-365. Created.
The department of planning and code enforcement is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-366. Duties of the director of planning and code enforcement.
The director of planning and code enforcement shall:
(1) Administer comprehensive planning, code enforcement and land use regulation
programs in the interest of the entire community.
(2) Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred on and imposed by
law on the city for purposes of its development program.
(3) Advise the city administrator and city council and planning board of all matters
affecting the physical growth and development of the city.
(4) Provide information to the public on the planning and development programs and
problems.
(5) Integrate and coordinate all individual projects and programs relating to the
planning and development of the city.
(6) Administer the affairs of the historic preservation review board.
(7) Perform such other duties as are prescribed by the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-367. Duties of the department.
Under the supervision of the director of planning and code enforcement, the department's
primary function shall be to promote and coordinate rational land use in the city in accordance
with the comprehensive plan and all applicable laws and ordinances shall provide for an
efficient, coordinated municipal inspection and code enforcement service. The department shall
coordinate the following:
Planning:
(1) Conduct research studies and prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan as
defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq., including inventories and analyses of
existing conditions, policies to address the issues raised in the inventories,
including a future land use plan and strategies to implement the plan.
(2) Promote a more rational utilization of land and other natural resources in the
better arrangement of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and other
needed activity centers.
(3) Review and prepare comments on all proposals to amend the zoning ordinance,
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:38
subdivision ordinance, official map and other ordinances as may be referred to the
division. From time to time, it shall make recommendations for the revision of
ordinances relating to planning of the city.
(4) Prepare and recommend, and assist other departments of the city in the planning
of specific projects intended to complement the comprehensive plan.
(5) Prepare recommendations on all proposals to acquire or dispose of municipally
owned land.
(6) Coordinate the preparation of the annual capital improvement program.
(7) Serve as principal technical advisor and secretary to the planning board.
(8) Perform such other duties as the city administrator may require.
Code Enforcement:
(1) Provide the following capabilities:
a. Building inspection;
b. Property maintenance inspection;
c. Plumbing inspection;
d. Electrical inspection;
e. Fire inspection (in concert with the fire department);
f. Sanitary inspection (in concert with the health officer);
g. Zoning ordinance enforcement.
(2) Provide for the cross qualification of inspectors to the extent feasible.
(3) Advise the public on applicable codes for all development activities.
(4) Provide staff services to the board of appeals as directed by the city administrator.
(5) Provide inspection services as required to support development programs.
(6) Perform such other duties as the city administrator may require.
Public Health:
(1) The city health officer shall serve as the point of contact between the city and the
state department-bureau of health. The city health officer shall serve as the
hearing officer for dangerous dog declarations under this City Code and he shall
execute all administrative responsibilities as directed by the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-368--2-379. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
Sec. 2-380. Created.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:39
The department of police is hereby created.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-381. Duties of chief of police.
The chief of police shall direct the police department and shall issue such lawful orders as
are necessary to assure the effective performance of the department. He shall assign officers to
each division of the department. Reassignment from one division to another shall only be made
by the chief of police.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-382. Duties of deputy police chief.
The deputy police chief shall be responsible for the planning, research and training in law
enforcement and related activities of the department. He shall be responsible directly to the chief
of police.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-383. Divisions.
The department of police shall be divided into the following program divisions and
supervisors thereof:
(1) A patrol division supervised by a commissioned officer who shall have charge of:
a. The motor and foot patrol units; and
b. Related police investigations.
(2) An investigation division supervised by a commissioned officer who shall have
charge of:
a. The investigation of crimes;
b. The enforcement of federal, state and local laws and ordinances;
c. The preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal cases; and
d. The crime laboratory.
(3) A narcotics division directed by the chief of police who shall have charge of:
a. The investigation of illegal drug trafficking;
b. Overseeing the investigation of undercover agents;
c. Coordinating the division's operations with the state division of special
investigations; and
d. Receiving and transferring to the appropriate agencies all illegal drugs
seized and confiscated.
(4) A youth division directed by a supervisor who shall have charge of:
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:40
a. Controlling juvenile crimes and preventing juvenile delinquency;
b. Fostering cooperation between community and police matters concerning
juveniles.
(5) A records and traffic division directed by a supervisor who shall have charge of:
a. Conducting traffic studies;
b. The traffic educational program;
c. The school patrols;
d. The coordination of traffic accident reporting;
e. The issuance of various permits;
f. The maintenance of traffic signals and erection and maintenance of traffic
signs;
g. The painting of street and crosswalk lanes; and
h. Providing direct supervision of the court officer.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-384. Powers of officers.
All subordinate members of the police department, save the civilian employees, shall
have and exercise within the limits of the city all the common law and statutory powers of
constables, except service of civil process, and all powers given to police officers by the statutes
of the state, by the Charter and by the ordinances, bylaws and regulations of the city, and such
special powers as may be conferred upon them.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-385. Appointment of constables and officers.
The chief of police shall appoint such number of constables, who should be city residents,
as he may determine for the term of one year and shall appoint all other officers for the
performance of police duty as he may deem expedient.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Sec. 2-386. Certain fees to be accounted for.
All fees paid to the chief of police, lieutenants or any patrol officers in their respective
capacities, from cases in the district court, and all fees received for serving subpoenas in cases
involving criminal procedure in the superior court held in the county shall be accounted for by
such officers, and turned into the treasury of the city when received by them.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Secs. 2-387--2-399. Reserved.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:41
DIVISION 12. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 2-400. The department of public works is hereby established.
The Department shall be divided into nine divisions: Administration; Engineering and
Asset Management; Water, Sanitary Sewer and Stormwater Utilities; Electrical Infrastructure;
Highways and Open Spaces; Public Buildings; Municipal Garage; Recreation; and Solid Waste
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 19-17, 01-09-20)
Sec. 2-401. Duties of director of public works.
The Director shall be responsible for all matters relating to planning, constructing, maintaining
and operating the city’s physical public infrastructure assets. These assets include public
buildings; streets and highways; electrical devices; recreational and athletic facilities; public
lands; water, sewer and storm water collection and distribution systems; solid waste collection
and facilities; municipal garage and recreation programs. The Public Works Director serves as a
City representative on a number of boards such as the Lewiston Auburn Water Pollution Control
Authority, Lake Auburn Watershed Protection Commission and the Androscoggin
Transportation Resource Center Policy Committee.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 19-17, 01-09-20)
Sec. 2-402. Divisions.
(1) The Director leads the division of administration, which includes the City Engineer,
Deputy for Maintenance and Operations, the Deputy for Utilities, and is supported by the
Department’s Administrative Assistant. These four (4) positons lead and provide
management, administrative, human resource and budgetary support to the department’s
other divisions. Under the Deputy for Maintenance and Operations, payroll and dispatch
services are housed in this division. The Administration Division works with the City
Administrator and City Council to provide strategic direction to the Department.
(2) The following Divisions shall be managed by the City Engineer, who shall be a registered
professional engineer licensed in the State of Maine:
a. Division of Engineering and Asset Management. The City Engineer shall
coordinate and supervise engineering services, including asset management,
capital planning, and design and construction oversight for the Department of
Public Works and for such other departments or public agencies as may from time
to time be required. The City Engineer shall coordinate development of the capital
plan for the department. The Engineer shall manage and supervise the technicians
and engineers within the division.
b. Division of Public Buildings. The Buildings Division shall be responsible for the
management, maintenance, capital planning, and design and construction
oversight of city buildings. The City Engineer shall manage and supervise the
Buildings Operations Manager and provide management direction for all aspects
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:42
of cost effective building management that provides for comfortable, sanitary and
safe space for city employees and the public.
(3) The following Divisions shall be managed by the Deputy for Utilities:
a. Division of Water, Sanitary Sewer and Stormwater Utilities: The Utilities
Division shall be responsible for the maintenance and operation of potable water
distribution and sanitary and stormwater collection systems. This Deputy shall
manage and supervise the Utilities Operations Manager and provide management
direction for all aspects for the maintenance and operation of these utilities. The
Utilities Division shall work closely with the Highways and Open Space Division,
sharing labor seasonally. This Deputy, with assistance from the City Engineer,
shall be responsible for the regulatory compliance function related to these
utilities. This Deputy shall co-supervise, along with the Auburn Water and
Sewer District Superintendent, operations of the joint intake and treatment
facilities at Lake Auburn.
b. Division of Electrical Infrastructure. The Electrical Infrastructure Division shall
be responsible for the maintenance and efficient operation of all electrical and
electronic infrastructure including but not limited to streetlights, traffic control
devices, pump stations, electronic controls/monitors, city communication
conduits, and electrical generation systems. This Deputy shall manage and
supervise the Electrical Operations Managers and provide management direction
for all aspects of the maintenance and operation of these devices and systems.
This Deputy, with assistance from the City Engineer, shall be responsible for
coordination with other stakeholder agencies such as the Maine Department of
Transportation and Androscoggin Transportation Resource Center.
(4) The following Divisions shall be managed by the Deputy for Maintenance and
Operations:
a. Division of Highways and Open Spaces. The Highways and Open Spaces
Division shall be responsible for the maintenance and efficient operation of
streets, highways, sidewalks, open spaces, city trees and non-electronic traffic
control devices. This Deputy shall manage and supervise the Highway
Operations Managers and provide management direction for all aspects for the
maintenance and operation of these systems. The Highways and Open Spaces
Division shall coordinate all snow and ice fighting activities across the
Department. It shall share human resources with other divisions, seasonally as
needed.
b. Division of Solid Waste. The Solid Waste Division shall be responsible for the
collection, management, recycling and disposal of municipal solid waste and
other incidental waste streams as provided by city code of ordinances. This
Deputy shall manage and supervise the Solid Waste Operations Manager and
provide management direction for all aspects of cost effective waste handling,
contracting and disposal. This Deputy shall be responsible for regulatory
compliance related to waste, facilities and landfill management.
ADMINISTRATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 2
CH 2:43
c. Division of Municipal Garage. The Municipal Garage Division shall be
responsible for the acquisition, maintenance, repair, and rental of all light vehicles
and heavy equipment operated by the Department of Public Works. This Deputy
shall manage and supervise the Municipal Garage Operations Manager and
provide management direction for all aspects of cost effective light vehicle and
heavy equipment use. The Municipal Garage Operations Manager will provide
services and expertise to other departments as needed. The municipal garage also
acquires other consumables, such as motor fuel. This Deputy shall be responsible
for regulatory compliance related to the handling of fuels, oils, oily waste and
hazardous materials produced in the garage.
d. Division of Recreation. The Recreation Division shall be responsible for the
planning, promotion, organization and supervision of a comprehensive municipal
recreation program and administering such program in the interest of the entire
community. This Deputy shall manage and supervise a Director of Recreation.
The Director of Recreation shall: supervise the recreational use of playgrounds,
playfields, recreation centers, swimming pools, ball diamonds and such other
recreation areas and facilities as may be made available by the City; conduct and
supervise any form of recreational, cultural or social activity that will employ the
leisure time of the citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner; program and
be responsible for the total operation and management of the Memorial Armory
facilities; and supervise all city athletic fields and playgrounds under the
jurisdiction of the Recreation Division.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 19-17, 01-09-20)
Secs. 2-403 – 2-434. Reserved.
DIVISION 13. DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Sec. 2-435. Department created.
A department of social services is hereby created under direction of the director of social
services, who shall have general supervision of the interests of general assistance and social
services of city residents. The department of social services shall perform all duties incidental to
adequately provide for the public welfare, as overseers of the poor, and the administration of the
general assistance program, and the city's immigrant and refugee services programs.
(Ord. No. 03-05, 7-3-03)
Chapters 3-5
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 6
CH 6:1
Chapter 6
ADVERTISING*
Sec. 6-1. Permit to distribute.
Sec. 6-2. Littering prohibited.
Sec. 6-3. Hours of distribution limited.
Sec. 6-4. Posting on public property restricted.
Sec. 6-5. Posting on another's land.
Sec. 6-6. Attaching to vehicles prohibited.
Sec. 6-7. Campaign material excluded.
*Cross references: Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22; parking to advertise, § 70-146;
vehicles for hire, ch. 82; signs, app. A, art. XII, § 16.
ADVERTISING
Lewiston Code Chapter 6
CH 6:2
Sec. 6-1. Permit to distribute.
No person shall go about the streets or other public places for the purpose of distributing
any poster, handbills, cards, samples of any kind, or other matter used for the purpose of
advertising without first obtaining a permit from the police chief for this purpose. Upon the
refusal of the chief to issue such permit, an appeal may be made to the council, which may grant
such permit if it deems it advisable. The permit authorized by this section does not release the
person to whom the permit is granted from the other provisions of this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 3-1)
Sec. 6-2. Littering prohibited.
Any person who shall distribute, throw, drop or scatter in any street or public place any
posters, handbills, cards, samples of medicines, drugs or pills or other samples, or other matter
used for the purpose of advertising in such a manner as to result in the littering of any street or
public place shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) A person who disposes of less than 15 pounds or 27 cubic feet of litter as defined
above is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 nor less than $100.00 for
the first violation and a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 nor less than $200.00
for a subsequent violation.
(2) A person who disposes of more than 15 pounds or 27 cubic feet of litter but less
than 500 pounds or 100 cubic feet of litter, is subject to a forfeiture of not more
than $500.00 nor less than $200.00 for the first violation and a forfeiture of not
more than $1,000.00 nor less than $500.00 for a subsequent violation.
(Code 1982, § 3-2)
Cross references: Solid waste, ch. 62.
State law references: Maine Litter Control Act, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2261 et seq.
Sec. 6-3. Hours of distribution limited.
No person shall go about the streets or other public places of the city for the purpose of
distributing posters, handbills, cards, samples of any kind, or other matter used for the purpose of
advertising after sunset and before the following sunrise.
(Code 1982, § 3-3)
Sec. 6-4. Posting on public property restricted.
No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, paste or otherwise affix any sign,
advertisement, notice or other matter upon any kind of pole, post or tree in the streets of the city;
or on any fire hydrant or on any bridge, pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or on any building or
any property or thing belonging to the city or located in the public streets or public places, except
that suitable painted signs may be hung on poles, posts and trees, and advertisements and notices
may be posted on public buildings with the consent of the council.
(Code 1982, § 3-4)
ADVERTISING
Lewiston Code Chapter 6
CH 6:3
Sec. 6-5. Posting on another's land.
No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp, paste or otherwise affix any sign,
advertisement or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post, tree or other private
property without first having obtained the permission of the owner or occupant of the premises.
(Code 1982, § 3-5)
Sec. 6-6. Attaching to vehicles prohibited.
No person shall attach any advertising material of any kind, such as handbills, cards or
papers, to the door handle, windshield wiper, or any portion of any motor vehicle parked or
standing in any street or public place, nor shall any person deposit any such material or samples
of any kind, within or upon any such vehicle so parked or standing.
(Code 1982, § 3-6)
Cross references: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
Sec. 6-7. Campaign material excluded.
The distribution of campaign material shall be excluded from the prohibitions in this
section. Campaign material shall be defined as literature and other materials expressing the
support or defeat of a candidate, referendum question, bond issue or other ballot question as
appearing on all ballots for an immediate upcoming election.
(Ord. No. 05-23, 2-16-06)
Chapters 7-9
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:1
Chapter 10
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS*
Article I. In General
Sec. 10-1. Circuses and carnivals, license required.
Sec. 10-2. Theaters, smoking prohibited.
Sec. 10-3. Outdoor pageants, music festivals, concerts, etc.
Secs. 10-4--10-30. Reserved.
Article II. Race Tracks
Sec. 10-31. Intent and purpose.
Sec. 10-32. Definitions.
Sec. 10-33. Local license required.
Sec. 10-34. Proof of insurance required.
Sec. 10-35. State regulations govern.
Sec. 10-36. Other regulations.
Sec. 10-37. Appeals.
Secs. 10-38--10-60. Reserved.
Article III. Special Amusement Permit
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10-61. Purpose.
Sec. 10-62. Definitions.
Secs. 10-63--10-75. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 10-76. Required.
Sec. 10-77. Public hearing.
Sec. 10-78. Denial.
Sec. 10-79. Term.
Sec. 10-80. Inspection.
Sec. 10-81. Suspension or revocation.
Sec. 10-82. Adult-oriented live entertainment prohibited.
Sec. 10-83. Regulations.
Sec. 10-84. Previous ownership.
Sec. 10-85. Penalties.
Sec. 10-86. Additional Criteria – Special amusement permit – Class E.
Secs. 10-87--10-100. Reserved.
Article IV. Adult-oriented Live Entertainment
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10-101. Purpose.
Sec. 10-102. Definitions.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:2
Sec. 10-103. Applicability.
Sec. 10-104. Exceptions.
Sec. 10-105. Violations.
Secs. 10-106--10-120. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 10-121. Required.
Sec. 10-122. Applications.
Sec. 10-123. Public hearing.
Sec. 10-124. Denial.
Sec. 10-125. Duration of licenses; expiration date.
Sec. 10-126. Schedule of fees.
Sec. 10-127. Nude entertainment prohibited.
Sec. 10-128. Inspection.
Sec. 10-129. Suspension or revocation.
Sec. 10-130. Regulations.
Secs. 10-131--10-150. Reserved.
Article V. Nonconforming Use Permit for Adult Business Establishments
Sec. 10-151. Purpose.
Sec. 10-152. Initial permit.
Sec. 10-153. Permit renewal.
Sec. 10-154. Burden of proof.
Sec. 10-155. Decisions and appeals.
Article VI. After Hours Entertainment Events
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10-156. Purpose.
Sec. 10-157. Definitions.
Division 2. License
Sec. 10-158. License required.
Sec. 10-159. Application.
Sec. 10-160. Requirement for license.
Sec. 10-161. Traffic control.
Sec. 10-162. Parking.
Sec. 10-163. Sanitation facilities.
Sec. 10-164. Right of entry.
Sec. 10-165. Appeal.
Sec. 10-166. Duration of license.
Sec. 10-167. Restrictions on sound and noise.
Sec. 10-168. Penalties.
Sec. 10-169. Subsequent application.
*Cross references: Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22. State law references: Municipal authority to regulate
public exhibitions, 8 M.R.S.A. § 501 et seq.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Circuses and carnivals, license required.
Whenever a person desires to run a carnival show or circus or any other amusement of a similar
kind in the city he must file with the city clerk a petition to the municipal officers for a license on forms to
be provided by such clerk.
(Code 1982, § 4-1)
Sec. 10-2. Theaters, smoking prohibited.
(a) No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe in any theater or moving picture
house during any performance or public meeting therein, except in such room as may be
designated as a smoking room and used for that purpose. This provision shall not be construed to
prohibit smoking in the outer lobby of a theater or moving picture house.
(b) This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of a cigar, cigarette or pipe upon the
stage of any such theater, when used in connection with any theatrical performance.
(Code 1982, § 4-2)
Sec. 10-3. Outdoor pageants, music festivals, concerts, etc.
(a) No person shall exhibit, sponsor, hold, promote or operate any outdoor pageant, music festival,
concert, motorcycle meet, snowmobile or other motorized vehicle races, exhibitions or practice
sessions of same within the limits of the city without approval by a majority of the council after
public hearing.
(b) No person shall be granted such permission unless the applicant satisfies the council that sanitary
facilities such as toilets, waste disposal, handwashing facilities, potable water, and first aid
facilities are provided and available in close proximity to the event.
(Code 1982, § 4-3)
Cross references: Police supervision of public gatherings, § 50-10.
State law references: Mass gatherings, 22 M.R.S.A. § 1601 et seq.
Secs. 10-4--10-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RACE TRACKS*
*Cross references: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
State law references: State regulation of harness racing, 8 M.R.S.A. §§ 261--282.
Sec. 10-31. Intent and purpose.
The intention of this article is to provide for the promotion of the safety and general
welfare of the public and of the occupants and users of race tracks in the city when used with the
intent of financial gain to any person by means of harness horse racing.
(Code 1982, § 4-19)
Sec. 10-32. Definitions.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:4
The following words and terms as used in this article shall be deemed to mean and shall
be construed as follows:
Grandstand means any structure on a race track used by spectators during the running of
races.
Meet or meeting means the total number of consecutive days, excluding Sundays during
which races are run.
Permit means a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Race track means any fairgrounds, race track or field in the city which has on it any
structure or grandstand, with a capacity of over 100 persons and which is used by spectators at
races.
Races means a meeting for contests in the running of horses with the intent to financially
benefit any person, including "sulky races," "harness races," and races of horses in any form over
a regular course at a set time, with the exception of and the intent to exclude "running races" with
"runners" so-called.
(Code 1982, § 4-20)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-33. Local license required.
No person shall use any race track for races without first obtaining a local license as
required by the provisions of this article and those of chapter 22.
(Code 1982, § 4-21)
State law references: State license required to hold a harness race where parimutuel betting occurs, 8 M.R.S.A.
§§ 269, 270.
Sec. 10-34. Proof of insurance required.
Upon the request of the city clerk, any person making application for a permit for the
operation of a race track for the running of races, as defined in this article, shall give proof to the
clerk showing that he, the applicant, carries reasonable liability insurance for the protection of
spectators in case of accidents occurring at such races.
(Code 1982, § 4-22)
Sec. 10-35. State regulations govern.
All meets at race tracks shall be set up and run as prescribed by the rules and regulations
of the state harness racing commission and as provided by law.
(Code 1982, § 4-23)
Sec. 10-36. Other regulations.
In order to provide for the safety and general welfare of the public and of the occupants
and users of the race tracks at races, and in order to eliminate fire hazards, the following
provisions shall apply:
(1) The person in charge shall employ at his own expense, during such races, such
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:5
number of police officers as the chief of police feels is reasonably necessary to
carry out the intent of this section.
(2) If, in the opinion of the chief engineer of the fire department such is reasonably
necessary, there shall be a fire truck and crew from the city standing by at the race
track during such races. The services of such crew and use of the fire truck shall
be paid for by the person in charge at a reasonable rate per day, such rate to be set
by the city council and payable to the city.
(3) All gates leading in and out of any grandstand area shall be kept open during the
running of the races.
(4) Exit lights shall be installed in conspicuous and appropriate places in any
grandstand.
(5) Fire extinguishers shall be placed in appropriate places in all grandstands and
underneath such grandstands upon recommendation and under the supervision of
the chief of the fire department.
(6) The grandstands and surrounding area shall be swept clean daily.
(Code 1982, § 4-24)
Sec. 10-37. Appeals.
Appeal from any order issued under this article shall be as provided by law.
(Code 1982, § 4-25)
Secs. 10-38--10-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMIT*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 04-05, effective April 1, 2004, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out.
Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1982; as amended.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 10-61. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate, pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054 et seq., the
issuance of special amusement permits for music, dancing or entertainment in facilities licensed
by the state to sell alcoholic beverages, and to regulate, pursuant to the City of Lewiston’s home
rule authority, the issuance of special amusement permits for dance halls or nightclubs that admit
patrons under the age of 21.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-62. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:6
Entertainment includes any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion for
patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided by professional
entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensee whose incidental duties
include activities with an entertainment value.
Dance hall or nightclub includes any commercial premises a primary function of
which is to offer patrons an opportunity to engage in social activities such as dancing, the
enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by
dancers or other performers, provided that it shall not include (1) events sponsored by
accredited educational institutions and held under the direct supervision of school
authorities, or (2) events sponsored by bona fide nonprofit organizations which limit
admissions to members and guests and which use revenue accruing from admissions
exclusively for the benevolent purposes of the organization.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Secs. 10-63--10-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 10-76. Required.
(a) A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the licensed premises
shall not permit any live music, dancing, or entertainment of any kind on the premises
until he has first obtained a special amusement permit approved by the city council. A
business shall not operate as a dance hall or nightclub that admits persons under the age
of 21 until the business has first obtained a special amusement permit Class E or Class F
approved by the city council. The categories of a special amusement permit are as
follows:
Special amusement permit--Class A. Any licensee of a food service establishment Class
A, B, or C, or holder of an innkeeper license, with entertainment, which does not include
dancing.
Special amusement permit--Class B. Any licensee of a Class A lounge, or holder of an
innkeeper license, with entertainment, which does not include dancing.
Special amusement permit--Class C. Any licensee of a Class A lounge, a food service
establishment Class A, B or C license, or holder of an innkeeper license, with
entertainment, including dancing.
Special amusement permit--Class D. Any business that operates primarily as a function
hall for the rental of space for events and holds a Class A lounge, a food service
establishment Class A, B or C license, or holder of an innkeeper license, with
entertainment, including dancing.
Special amusement permit – Class E. Any business operating as a dance hall or nightclub
that admits persons under the age of 21.
Special amusement permit – Class F. Any business operating as a “chem-free” dance hall
or nightclub that admits persons age 18 years and older, with no liquor service.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:7
(b) Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing to the city clerk
and shall state the name and address of the applicant; the name, address and nature of the
business; and any additional information required by the city council necessary to the
processing of the application, including but not limited to a copy of the applicant's liquor
license.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-77. Public hearing.
Before granting a permit, the city council shall hold a public hearing to determine
whether issuance of the permit would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or
would violate any law, ordinance or regulation. Such determination may include, but is not
limited to:
(a) The violation of any law, ordinance or regulation, either in the past or caused by
the issuance of the same; or
(b) Conditions of record such as waste disposal violations, health, or safety violations
or repeated parking or traffic violations on or in the vicinity of the premises and
caused by persons patronizing or employed by the premises or such conditions
caused by persons patronizing or employed by the premises which unreasonably
disturb, interfere with or affect the ability of persons or businesses residing or
located in the vicinity of the premises to use their property in a reasonable
manner; or
(c) Repeated incidents of record of breaches of peace, disorderly conduct, vandalism
or other violations of law on or in the vicinity of the premises and caused by
persons patronizing or employed by the premises.
(d) Any other incident, behavior or occurrence on or about the location that the city
council deems to be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
The city council may impose conditions for protecting the public health, safety
and welfare on any special amusement permit it issues.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-78. Denial.
If the application for a special amusement permit is denied, the city council shall give the
applicant a written statement of the reasons for the denial.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04)
Sec. 10-79. Term.
A special amusement permit Class A, B, C or D is valid only for the license year of the
applicant's existing license. A special amusement permit Class E or F is valid for one year from
the date of issuance of the permit.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:8
Sec. 10-80. Inspection.
Applicants shall be subject to the inspection provisions of section 22-34.
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a
business which has obtained a special amusement permit are provided for or required by
ordinance or state law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision or state law, it shall be the duty of the permittee, or the person in charge of the
premises to be inspected, to admit any officer, official, or employee of the municipality
authorized to make the inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the city clerk may suspend for a
period of up to 30 days and the city council, after notice and public hearing, may revoke the
special amusement permit of any permittee in the municipality who refuses to permit any such
officer, official, or employee to make an inspection, or who interferes with such officer, official,
or employee while in the performance of his duty, provided that no license or special amusement
permit shall be suspended or revoked unless written demand for the inspection is made upon the
permittee or person in charge of the premises, at the time it is sought to make the inspection.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-81. Suspension or revocation.
The city clerk may suspend any special amusement permit for a period up to 21 days
where there is an immediate risk to the public health, safety or welfare. The city council may,
after a public hearing preceded by notice to interested parties, suspend or revoke any special
amusement permits which have been issued under this article on the grounds that the music,
dancing, entertainment or activities so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health,
safety or welfare; violates any law, ordinance or regulation; or if any duly authorized city official
has been refused admission to make an inspection of the premises after written request.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-82. Adult-oriented live entertainment prohibited.
No entertainment regulated as adult-oriented live entertainment by the provisions of
article IV shall be provided by or on behalf of, or at the licensed premises of the holder of a
special amusement permit or of an FSE-Class E license.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04)
Sec. 10-83. Regulations.
The city council is further authorized, after public notice and hearing, to establish further
written rules and regulations governing the issuance, suspension, and revocation of special
amusement permits, the classes of permits, the music, dancing, entertainment or activities
permitted under each class, and other limitations on these activities required to protect the public
health, safety and welfare whenever the need arises. These rules and regulations may specifically
determine the location and size of permitted premises, the facilities that may be required for the
permitted activities on those premises, and the hours during which the permitted activities are
permitted.
Such rules and regulations shall be additional to and consistent with all sections of this
article.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:9
All permittees shall comply with Policy Number 10, section V(B) of the City Policy
Manual enacted by the city council pertaining to holders of special amusement permits and FSEClass
E licenses and the city council may enact such other or further regulations it deems
necessary or appropriate to carry out the purpose of this article.
(Ord. No. 04-05, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04; Ord. No.11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-84. Previous ownership.
If the applicant has previously owned, operated or managed or been the primary
ownership interest in any company, corporation or other legal entity that has previously held a
special amusement permit or liquor license from this municipality, then such information may be
used as a basis for determination of the issuance of the permit, consistent with section 10-77.
(Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04)
Sec. 10-85. Penalties.
In addition to suspending or revoking a license or permit, the city may prosecute
violations in court. A violation of this division shall be punished by a fine, in accordance with
the city's policy manual as approved by the city council, regardless of the time between offenses.
Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to such penalty, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of this
division by appropriate action. In addition to such penalty, if the court finds for the city, the city
shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts' fees, attorneys' fees and investigative
costs.
(Ord. No. 04-16, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 08-06b, 8-14-08; Ord. No.11-04, 5-19-11)
Sec. 10-86. Additional Criteria - Special amusement permit – Class E.
(a) No one who is under the age of 14 or over the age of 20 shall be admitted as a
patron of the business while the business is operating under this permit
classification.
(b) The business owner shall be responsible for posting a notice in plain view at the
establishment regarding the city’s curfew for minors, as outlined in Chapter 50 of
this Code and shall also be responsible for the enforcement of such curfew, as
outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code.
(Ord. No.11-04, 5-19-11)
Secs. 10-87--10-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ADULT-ORIENTED LIVE ENTERTAINMENT*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 01-2, adopted March 8, 2001, amended the title of Art. IV to read as herein set out.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 10-101. Purpose.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:10
The purpose of this article is to regulate live entertainment and nudity and near nudity as
forms of commercial activity. It has been enacted for the purpose of promoting and protecting
the general welfare, public safety and public order of the city and its citizens, to prevent the
creation of a tawdry atmosphere that adversely affects the quality of life within the city, to
prevent blight and the deterioration of the city's neighborhoods and to prevent the occurrence of
harmful secondary effects such as the incidence of crime, disorderly conduct and juvenile
delinquency associated with adult-oriented live entertainment in general and more particularly
with entertainment such as nude and nearly-nude commercial entertainment. It is not intended to
suppress or inhibit the free exchange of ideas or artistic expression.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01)
Sec. 10-102. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Adult-oriented live entertainment means entertainment that involves near nudity or
conduct which shall be deemed obscene under this Code of Ordinances.
Entertainment means any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion provided by
any performer for the patrons or customers of the licensed premises.
Nude entertainment means entertainment in which any performer appears in such a
manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, buttocks, vulva or
genitals or any simulation thereof, or when any female appears on a licensee's premises in such a
manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast referred to as the areola, nipple or
simulation thereof. Exposed to view shall be interpreted to include, without limitation, clear, seethrough
or otherwise non-opaque clothing.
Performer means any person, without regard to whether compensation is paid by the
establishment, its patrons or customers, who presents or participates in any entertainment,
including, but not limited to, professional entertainers and full-time or part-time employees of
the licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.4, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 02-27, 2-20-03)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 10-103. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all persons who provide entertainment by one or more
performers to members of the general public and who require or accept any valuable
consideration for admission or attendance thereto. This article shall apply to holders of existing
special amusement permits or FSE-Class E licenses issued by the city. The provisions of this
article which require a permit shall not apply to persons who provide entertainment primarily to
persons under the age of 17.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.1, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 02-27, 2-20-03)
Sec. 10-104. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to a theater, dinner theater or similar establishment which is
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:11
primarily devoted to theatrical performances or the presentation of movies.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.2, 1-7-93)
Sec. 10-105. Violations.
Any violation of any provision of this article or of any regulation enacted pursuant to this
article shall be subject to the penalties provided for in sections 1-8 and 22-27.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.11, 1-7-93)
Secs. 10-106--10-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 10-121. Required.
No person shall offer or provide entertainment by one or more performers to members of
the general public and require or accept any valuable consideration for admission or attendance
thereto without having first obtained an adult-oriented live entertainment license approved by the
city council.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.3, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01)
Sec. 10-122. Applications.
Applications for all adult-oriented live entertainment licenses shall be made in writing to
the city clerk on forms which the city clerk shall provide. The application shall state the name
and address of the applicant; address and nature of the entertainment; and any additional
information required by the city council or city clerk as necessary to the processing of the
application.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.5, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01)
Sec. 10-123. Public hearing.
Before granting a license, the city council shall hold a public hearing to determine
whether issuance of the license would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or
would violate any statute, ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.6, 1-7-93)
Sec. 10-124. Denial.
If an application for an adult-oriented live entertainment license is denied, the city
council shall give the applicant a written statement of the reasons for the denial.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.7, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01)
Sec. 10-125. Duration of licenses; expiration date.
All licenses, except when otherwise provided, shall be for 12 months duration and shall
expire one year from the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-1, 1-7-93)
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:12
Sec. 10-126. Schedule of fees.
Unless otherwise provided, no person shall engage in any of the following businesses or
activities in the city without having paid the proper fee and obtained a license or permit therefor.
The fee shall be paid in accordance with the business fee schedule as established by the city
council.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-22, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
Sec. 10-127. Nude entertainment prohibited.
No adult-oriented live entertainment license shall be issued to conduct the activity of
nude entertainment on the applicant's premises or any activity otherwise prohibited by the Code.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a licensee holding an adult-oriented live
entertainment permit to permit nude entertainment or any other activity otherwise prohibited by
this Code on the premises.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.8, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 02-27, 2-20-03)
Sec. 10-128. Inspection.
Applicants shall be subject to the inspection provisions of section 22-34.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.9, 1-7-93)
Sec. 10-129. Suspension or revocation.
The city council may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to interested parties,
suspend or revoke an adult-oriented live entertainment license if it determines that the conduct of
the licensed premises constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare or violates
any statute, ordinance or regulation or if any duly authorized city official has been refused
admission to make an inspection of the premises after written request.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.10, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 01-2, 3-8-01)
Sec. 10-130. Regulations.
All licensees shall comply with Policy Number 10, section V(B) of the city policy
manual enacted by the city council pertaining to holders of special amusement permits and FSEClass
E licenses and the city council may enact such other or further regulations it deems
necessary or appropriate to carry out the purpose of this article.
(Ord. No. 92-33, § 17-139.13, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 02-27, 2-20-03)
Secs. 10-131--10-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. NONCONFORMING USE PERMIT FORADULT BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 10-151. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the issuance and renewal of permits for adult
business establishments, as defined in appendix A, article II, § 2, which are nonconforming by
reason of the density provisions of appendix A, article XI.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:13
(Code 1982, § 17-141)
Sec. 10-152. Initial permit.
(a) Notice. The city clerk shall send a notice by registered or certified mail to the owner, as
shown on the tax records of the city, of any property containing, and to any tenant as
shown on the records of the city clerk, holding any license to operate an adult business
establishment which is apparently nonconforming by reason of the density provisions of
appendix A, article XI. The notice shall advise said owner or tenant that the use of the
property as an adult business establishment is apparently nonconforming and that failure
to apply for and obtain a nonconforming use permit, as provided herein, may result in the
termination of its right to continue such a use.
(b) Time for application. An adult business establishment which is eligible for a
nonconforming use permit, pursuant to appendix A, article IV, § 6, must submit a
complete application, as provided herein, to the city clerk within 90 days from December
20, 1984, or within 30 days from the date of mailing of the notice to the owner or tenant
operating said establishment, whichever is later. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent an eligible nonconforming adult business establishment from applying for a use
permit before a notice is sent by the city clerk, and an application for a use permit shall
be deemed a waiver of the notice requirement.
(c) Contents of application. The application for an initial nonconforming use permit shall be
on a form provided by the city clerk, and a complete application shall contain such
information as deemed necessary by the city clerk including, but not limited to:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant is the owner, tenant, or licensee of the premises.
(3) The type of adult business establishment.
(4) The nature of the goods and/or services which make the entity an adult business
establishment.
(5) Whether during the 12 months prior to December 20, 1984 the applicant met the
qualifications set forth in appendix A, article IV.
The person signing the application shall make an oath or solemn affirmation, as to the truth of
the statements therein, before a notary public or attorney.
(d) Failure to apply. No nonconforming use permit shall be issued to any adult business
establishment which fails to submit a complete application within the time provided in
subsection (b) of this section.
(e) Effective date. Each permit issued under this section shall be made effective as of
December 20, 1984, and shall be valid for a period of one year.
(Code 1982, § 17-142)
Sec. 10-153. Permit renewal.
(a) Time for application. The holder of a nonconforming use permit shall submit a complete
renewal application, as provided herein, within 30 days prior to the expiration date of the
permit.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:14
(b) Notice of proposed termination. If no renewal application is received by the expiration
date, the city clerk shall thereafter send a notice, by registered or certified mail, to the
name and address of the holder of the expired permit as shown on the records of the city
clerk, which notice shall advise the holder that failure to submit a late application, as
provided herein, will result in termination of its right to continue the nonconforming use.
(c) Late application. The holder of an expired nonconforming use permit may obtain a
renewal permit by submitting a complete renewal application, as provided herein,
together with a late fee of $10.00, not later than 15 days from the date of mailing of the
notice.
(d) Contents of renewal application. The renewal application shall be on a form provided by
the city clerk, and a complete application shall contain such information as deemed
necessary by the city clerk; including, but not limited to, such information as is necessary
to establish that during the 12 months immediately following the effective date of the last
issuance of such permit, the adult business establishment met the qualifications set forth
in appendix A, article IV. The person signing the application shall make an oath or
solemn affirmation, as to the truth of the statements therein before a notary public or
attorney.
(e) Failure to apply. No nonconforming use permit shall be issued to any adult business
establishment which fails to submit a complete renewal application within the time
provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section.
(Code 1982, § 17-143)
Sec. 10-154. Burden of proof.
In any initial permit application or renewal application under this article, the burden of
proof as to whether the applicant meets the qualifications for such a permit shall be on the
applicant. The city clerk may require the applicant to produce such documents and records, and
to respond to such interrogatories under oath or affirmation, as is reasonably necessary to
establish that the applicant qualifies for the permit. For purposes of establishing that the
applicant has met the gross receipts requirements of appendix A, article IV, a sworn affidavit of a
certified public accountant, who has personal knowledge of the financial records of the applicant,
shall be accepted as sufficient evidence on such issues.
(Code 1982, § 17-144)
Sec. 10-155. Decisions and appeals.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 22-35 and 22-36, the city clerk shall approve
or disapprove any application for a permit under this article, and the board of appeals shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over any appeal from the denial of a permit under this article. Any such
appeal shall be written, shall state with particularity the grounds upon which the appeal is based,
and shall be filed with the board of appeals, with a copy to the city clerk, not more than 15 days
after notice of the denial is delivered or mailed to the applicant.
(Code 1982, § 17-145)
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:15
ARTICLE VI. AFTER HOURS ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 10-156. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control the issuance of licenses for the conduct of after
hours entertainment events in order to protect the public health, safety, and peace.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-157. Definitions.
An after hours event means an event conducted either indoors or outdoors, normally
occurring between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and dawn, where the participants are invited to
entertainment in a venue which may be advertised as a chemical free. For the purposes of this
chapter, an after hours event will mean a gathering held with the intent to attract the attendance
of 100 or more for the purpose set forth herein.
An event which falls within the above description will be regulated by this chapter even
if its promoters chose to describe it by another name, augment the entertainment by means of
lighting, the use of visual images, or by other means.
The fact that an after hours event might be conducted in a bottle club, or in premises
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages will not exempt it from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-23, 1-9-03)
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 10-158. License required.
No person may conduct an after hours event without having obtained a license to do so
from the city council. The city council shall conduct a public hearing prior to the issuance of a
license.
(1) Time of filing. An application for a license to conduct an after hours event must be
filed no later than 45 days before the event.
(2) Application fee. All applications will require a non-refundable processing fee. The
fee shall be paid in accordance with the business fee schedule as established by
the city council.
(3) General provisions to apply. Except to the extent that this chapter may contain
contrary provisions, the provisions of chapter 10 will apply to after hour event
licenses.
(4) If the applicant is a fixed and established business located within the city, with an
approved entertainment license, sponsoring their own event, and has regularly
scheduled after hours entertainment events held at least on a monthly basis, an
application will be required on an annual basis. Renewal licenses for an annual
after hours entertainment license shall be obtained from the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-09, 5-16-02; Ord. No. 02-23, 1-9-03; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:16
Sec. 10-159. Application.
Applications for an after hours event license will be filed in accordance with chapter 10.
In addition to the requirements of that chapter, an applicant for an after hours event will furnish
the following to the clerk:
(1) An affidavit, identifying all the principal officers of the applicant and their places
of residence at the present time, as well as for the immediately preceding three
years;
(2) A description of the premises for which a license is desired, including such other
material information, description, or plan of that part of the premises where it is
proposed to conduct the after hour event, as the clerk may require;
(3) A floor plan showing the layout of the premises; its dimensions; the location of all
emergency equipment, including, but not limited to, fire exits and sprinkler
systems; rest rooms, including the number and location of all sanitary facilities;
the location and number of each entrance and exit; the location of the main fuse
box; and such other information as may be required by other city departments; the
location of public pay telephones, and
(4) The name, address, date of birth, driver's license number, and state of issuance of
all the applicants employees.
(5) If the application is filed on an annual basis, the applicant will furnish any
changes identifying the principal officers and employees as they occur.
Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-09, 5-16-02)
Sec. 10-160. Requirement for license.
In addition to any other requirement which may be imposed either by this chapter or by
other provisions of the City Code, an applicant for an after hours event license will be required to
provide the following police services at no cost to the city:
Police. The applicant will provide a minimum number of sworn members of the Lewiston
Police Department in accordance with the requirements of the chart below:
Number of
Attendees
Number of Police
1-200
201-400
401-600
601+
1
2
3
One sergeant, and one additional officer for each
200 attendees or portion thereof in excess of 601
Additional officers may be required by the chief of police, or his designee, if alcohol is served at
the event, or as other situations warrant or at the chief's discretion.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-161. Traffic control.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:17
The applicant will provide traffic control in order to ensure the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles on and about the premises where the after hour event will occur as well
as along adjacent public ways. The specific types of control and how they will be provided will
be determined by the city's traffic engineer and its police department.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-162. Parking.
The applicant will provide off-street parking in the vicinity of the site where the after
hour event will be conducted, as follows: One parking space for each 100 square feet or major
fraction thereof used in conjunction with the after hour event, excluding restrooms.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-163. Sanitation facilities.
The applicant will provide free, potable drinking water, hot water for sanitary purposes,
and clean well equipped restroom facilities as directed by the city's health officer or his designee
in accordance with the health code. The applicant may be required to provide portable toilet and
hand washing facilities. (Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-164. Right of entry.
Any law enforcement officer, member of the fire department, or code enforcement officer
of the city will have the right to enter in and upon the premises for which a license is sought,
during business hours, prior to the after hours event as well as during the time when the after
hours event will take place. It is the duty of every licensee as well as the principal officers
thereof to afford free access to every part of the establishment and to render all aid and assistance
necessary to enable the officials to make a full, thorough, and complete examination thereof in
order to determine compliance with this Code and the laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Sec. 10-165. Appeal.
Any applicant who is denied a renewal license may request a hearing before the city
council. The hearing will be held in ten business days by the city council. Any appeal from the
decision of the city council will be to the superior court in accordance with Rule 80B of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-23, 1-9-03)
Sec. 10-166. Duration of license.
Any license granted under this chapter will be valid for a single event which may not
exceed 18 continuous hours in duration. (Ord. No. 00-20, 10-05-00)
Sec. 10-167. Restrictions on sound and noise.
Any other provisions of this Code not withstanding, a licensee may not allow either the
licensed activity or any other activities on the licensed premises to generate sound or noise, after
1:00 a.m., which exceeds 50 decibels, when measured at the property line of the nearest lot
containing a residential dwelling unit.
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Lewiston Code Chapter 10
CH 10:18
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-23, 1-9-03)
Sec. 10-168. Penalties.
In addition to suspending or revoking a license, the city may prosecute violations in
court. A violation of this chapter will be punished by a civil penalty, in accordance with the city's
policy manual as approved by the city council, regardless of the time between offenses. Each act
of violation and every day upon which any violation should occur will constitute a separate
offense. In addition to a civil penalty, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of this chapter
by appropriate action. In addition to a civil penalty, if the court should find for the city, it will be
entitled to its costs of suit, including reasonable experts' fees, attorneys' fees and investigative
costs.
In addition to any civil penalty which may be authorized by this chapter, other provisions
of Lewiston's Code, or state law, it will be a violation of this chapter if the sale of scheduled
drugs should take place on the licensed premises either with the licensee's knowledge or under
circumstances where the licensee, in the exercise of reasonable diligence and care, should have
been aware that such sales were occurring. "Scheduled drugs" are those listed in 17-A M.R.S.A.
Section 1102, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 08-06b, 8-14-08)
Sec. 10-169. Subsequent application.
(a) In addition to the civil penalties provided in the prior section, any person who is found to
be in violation of any provision of this chapter will be barred from obtaining an after
hours event license for a 12-month period. The 12-month period will commence to run at
the time of final adjudication of the violation and may extend beyond the year in which
the license was issued.
(b) The 12-month bar provided in this section will also apply to any private corporation,
business, or other economic entity in which the licensee is, directly or indirectly, the
owner of at least ten percent of the stock of such private corporation or owns at least a ten
percent interest in such business or other economic entity.
(Ord. No. 00-20, 10-5-00)
Chapters 11-13
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:1
Chapter 14
ANIMALS*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 01-7, effective May 31, 2001, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly said
chapter pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. Cross references: City clerk to perform animal
control functions, § 2-104; disposal of dead animals restricted, § 34-37; application of traffic ordinances to animals, § 70-9.
Article I. In General
Sec. 14-1. Definitions.
Sec. 14-2. Penalties.
Sec. 14-3. Enforcement.
Sec. 14-4. Exemption.
Sec. 14-5. Severability clause.
Sec. 14-6. Repealed.
Article II. Animal Care—General
Sec. 14-7. Care of animals.
Sec. 14-8. Prohibited actions.
Sec. 14-9. Number of dogs limited.
Article III. Rabies Control; Quarantine
Sec. 14-10. Rabies inoculation.
Sec. 14-11. Animal bites and scratch reports; submission to quarantine.
Sec. 14-12. Contents of required animal bites and scratch reports.
Sec. 14-13. Authorization for city-wide quarantine.
Article IV. Impoundment, Redemption and Disposition of Animals
Sec. 14-14. Impoundment generally.
Sec. 14-15. Duties of the ACO.
Sec. 14-16. Disposal of dead animals.
Sec. 14-17. Disposal of dead animals found on public property.
Article V. Dangerous Animals
Sec. 14-18. Permit required.
Sec. 14-19. Complaints regarding dangerous animals.
Sec. 14-20. Keeping of dangerous animals.
Sec. 14-21. Dangerous animal enclosures.
Sec. 14-22. Authority to seize dangerous and wild or exotic animals.
Sec. 14-23. Penalties.
Article VI. Right of Entry
Sec. 14-24. Right of entry.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:2
Article VII. Keeping of Non-Domestic Animals
Division 1. Wild or Exotic Animals
Sec. 14-25. Keeping of wild or exotic animals prohibited.
Sec. 14-26. Exemptions to prohibition to keep wild or exotic animals.
Division 2. Livestock
Sec. 14-27. Keeping of livestock generally.
Sec. 14-28. Adequate fences and barriers.
Sec. 14-29. Other places livestock prohibited.
Sec. 14-30. Impounding of livestock.
Division 3. Other Animals
Sec. 14-31. Keeping of fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs.
Sec. 14-32. Keeping of bees.
Division 4. Keeping of Female Chickens on Lots Developed with Single Family
Detached Dwelling Including Mobile Homes on Individual Lots
Sec. 14-33. Purpose.
Sec. 14-34. Number and type of chickens allowed.
Sec. 14-35. Non-commercial use only.
Sec. 14-36. Enclosures.
Sec. 14-37. Odor and noise impacts.
Sec. 14-38. Predators, rodents, insects, and parasites.
Sec. 14-39. Permit requirements.
Sec. 14-40. Separability.
Article VIII. Prohibitions
Sec. 14-41. Placement and baiting of animal traps.
Sec. 14-42. Prohibition of animal poisoning.
Sec. 14-43. Noise prohibition.
Sec. 14-44. Odors and unclean condition prohibitions.
Sec. 14-45. Animals at-large prohibition.
Article IX. Public Lands, Parks and Playgrounds: Control or Prohibition of
Domestic Animals
Division 1. Leash Requirements
Sec. 14-46. Sixteen-foot leash requirements and exceptions.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:3
Division 2. City Property
Sec. 14-47. Parks, cemeteries, playgrounds and athletic fields.
Article X. Nuisances
Sec. 14-48. Public nuisances.
Sec. 14-49. Disposal of excrement.
Sec. 14-50. Trucks, trailers and other vehicles.
Article XI. Damage to Property
Sec. 14-51. Complaint and recovery.
Article XII. Animal Safety
Sec. 14-52. Authority of the ACO.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words used herein shall
be interpreted to read as follows; and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the
context used in 7 M.R.S.A. Chapters 717 through 739 or 17 M.R.S.A Chapter 42 and by ordinary
interpretation, and not as a word of art:
Animal means any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom
including, but not limited to, birds, fish, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human
beings.
Animal control facility means any facility owned, approved, and/or contracted by the City
of Lewiston for the purposes of housing, impounding, quarantine, medical treatment, or
euthanasia of animals.
Animal control officer (ACO) means the person or persons, including but not limited to
the appointed ACO and the members of the city's police department, designated by the City of
Lewiston to act as the representative agent for the city in the impoundment of animals and in the
controlling of stray animals which come into the custody of the city.
At-large refers to dogs and other domestic animals which are legally in compliance with
all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations, other than a domestic cat, that is on any
public right-of-way or publicly owned land unless controlled by a leash of not more than eight
feet in length, except as provided for in section 14-37 and 14-38 of this chapter. A domestic cat
shall be considered at-large when not located on the premises owned or controlled by its owner
and not otherwise under immediate effective control.
City means the City of Lewiston.
Dangerous animal means any animal which demonstrates behavior and/or possesses the
vicious propensity to inflict serious bodily injury or death upon human beings and/or other
animals and constitutes a danger to human life or other animals; or any animal which has
behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows, or reasonably should know, that the
animal is possessed of tendencies to commit unprovoked attacks or to injure human beings or
other animals; or any animal certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine, after observation
thereof, as posing a danger to human beings or animals; or any animal, without provocation, that
assaults an individual or animal; or any animal that commits an unprovoked act that causes a
person, acting in a reasonable and non-aggressive manner, to reasonably believe that the animal
will attack and cause bodily injury to that person or animal.
Dog means both male and female canines.
Domestic animal means any animal whose physiology has been determined or
manipulated through selective breeding, and which does not occur naturally in the wild, and
which may be vaccinated against rabies with an approved rabies vaccine, and has an established
rabies quarantine observation period.
Exotic animal means any non-domesticated animal, other than livestock, that is native to
a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, or was introduced from abroad. This term will
specifically include, but not be limited to, animals such as lions, tigers, jackals, dingoes,
leopards, elephants, pandas, camels, antelope, anteaters, kangaroos, chimpanzees, gorillas,
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:5
orangutans, water buffalo, and species of foreign domestic livestock requiring state and federal
permits.
Fowl means a bird of any kind, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese,
guineas, pigeons, emus, ostriches, rheas, turkeys and pheasants.
Guard dog means a dog trained and used by law enforcement, private security, or in
protective functions where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and used only
for protective functions.
Guide dog means a dog trained to assist a physically challenged person.
Immediate effective control means the confinement of an animal to the premises of its
owner by a fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent an animal from escaping there from;
or contained inside a house or other enclosure; or secured on the premises by a leash of sufficient
strength to prevent the animal from escaping from said premises and so arranged that the animal
will remain upon said premises when the leash is stretched to full length in any direction. An
animal shall also be considered under immediate effective control when used to assist a
physically challenged person or when the animal is under the immediate control of a person by
means of a cage, leash, or effective restraint to control said animal. The term "effective restraint"
as used herein shall include, but not be limited to, training employing audible and/or visual
commands, remote control devices, and/or other means to control the animal.
Kennel means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether
operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards
and/or trains dogs and/or cats or other animals, which may legally be present in such facilities,
for profit. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all
applicable zoning and land use regulations of the city and all state statues and regulations of the
State of Maine. Livestock shall mean, but may not be limited to, any horses, mules, donkeys,
cattle, goats, sheep or swine.
Livestock shall mean, but may not be limited to, any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats,
sheep or swine.
Owner means any person, partnership, corporation or association that harbors, shelters,
keeps, controls, manages, possesses or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant,
owner or head of a household of any premises where an animal remains for 24 hours or more
shall presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purposes of this chapter.
Pet means any animal which may be legally owned in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, normally kept for pleasure rather than utility, excluding livestock, is in the owner's
possession and for which it can be reasonably demonstrated that the care of said pet is the
responsibility of a given individual or individuals.
Pet store means any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether
operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that buys and sells
dogs, cats, and/or other species of pet for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established,
maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations and
all other applicable laws or rules of the city and the State of Maine.
Public auction means any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder.
This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners or other private
owners.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:6
Public park or playground mean any city-owned or operated public park, playground or
school ground.
Public nuisance means the following:
(1) An owner's failure to control, restrain or otherwise allow, either by conduct or
condition, any animal to:
a. Engage in conduct which establishes such an animal as a "dangerous
animal"; or
b. Be at-large; or
c. Cause a disturbance by excessive barking or noise-making near the private
residence or business of another or of any government or public facility; or
d. Produces maggots, flies, odors, or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy
or endanger adjacent property owners, residents or other individuals who
may be reasonably exposed by such conditions; or
e. Chase vehicles or molest, attack or interfere with other persons and
animals on public or private property.
(2) Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private
property and by its presence is a threat to public health and safety or is generally
interrupting the tranquility of the location.
Restraint means to control an animal by physical means, such as a cage, leash, rope or
confinement within an enclosed space or by training or employing audible and/or visual
commands, remote control devices, and/or other means to control the animal.
Stray means an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place,
roadway, street, highway, or the property of another person.
Vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine
that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which
is administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing the animal against
rabies or other diseases.
Veterinary hospital means any establishment that is maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals.
Wild animals mean any animal not normally considered domesticated and which is now
or historically has been found in the wild, or in the wild state, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Reptiles; venomous reptiles; any type of crocodile or alligator; or
(2) Fish: Piranha; or
(3) Birds: Condors, eagles, hawks, falcons, owls; or
(4) Mammals: Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, wolves, dingoes,
coyotes and coyote mixes, jackals, weasels, martens, minks, badgers, skunks,
raccoons, pandas, bears, kangaroos, opossums, sloths, anteaters, armadillos,
monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, porcupines, antelope, deer, fox,
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:7
elephant, lynx, squirrels, chipmunks; or
(5) Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-2. Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of no less than the
amount set in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter, for each of the first and second violation. The minimum
penalty for any subsequent violation of this chapter shall be set in accordance with the city's
policy manual as approved by the city council unless otherwise specified in this chapter, for each
offense. In no case shall the court assess a fine that is less than those defined in state statute if the
city's policy manual minimums are less. Violators of this chapter must pay for all costs
associated with any action taken by the ACO involving the impoundment, treatment or humane
euthanasia by a licensed veterinarian relating to animals of which they are owners. Where
financial hardship is demonstrated, a violator of this chapter may perform community service in
lieu of the financial penalty if such a program is available through the city.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 08-06c, 8-14-08)
Sec. 14-3. Enforcement.
(a) The ACO shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter except as may be provided
herein. Enforcement may be by the filing of a criminal complaint in District or Superior
Court; by civil proceedings to enjoin nuisances; or in any other manner authorized by
federal, state or local law, rule or ordinance.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person being issued a citation to district court or any civil
proceeding to intentionally or knowingly fail to give the ACO their true name and
address or to intentionally or knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a
citation or civil process issued by the ACO.
(c) If the individual who is to receive the citation is not present, the ACO may send the
citation to the alleged offender by certified or registered return receipt mail. If said
citation should come back unclaimed, the citation shall be sent regular mail. If this
regular mailing is returned as unclaimed, the service shall then be deemed as completed.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-4. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to any animal accompanying a physically challenged person
who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-5. Severability clause.
If any part of this chapter shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed severable and
the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this chapter.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:8
Sec. 14-6. Repealed.
All other applicable ordinances are repealed.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE II. ANIMAL CARE--GENERAL
Sec. 14-7. Care of animals.
Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner and
not in violation of any federal, state or local law, rule or ordinance.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-8. Prohibited actions.
A person commits an offense if:
(1) A person fails to provide an animal under his or her control and/or ownership with
adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from
inclement weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; or
(2) A person having charge or custody of an animal, places or confines such animal,
or allows such animal to be placed or confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, or other
enclosure under such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the
health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other
circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal; or
(3) A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by 17
M.R.S.A. Chapter 42.
(4) A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells, or offers for sale any animal
which is used for the purpose of fighting; or to be trained, tormented, badgered or
baited for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to attack human
beings or animals when not provoked, except that this section shall not apply to
guard dogs or dogs used by local, state or federal law enforcement agencies; or
(5) A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This
subsection does not apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or
veterinary medical autopsies, or biology class use of animals for educational
purposes; or
(6) A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person; or
(7) A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an
animal's ears; or castrates an animal; provided, however, this subsection shall not
apply to normal livestock operations occurring within the city; or
(8) A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds; or
(9) A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to
prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle
during normal operation of the vehicle; or fails to effectively restrain an animal so
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:9
as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to passerby. Provided, however, the
provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an effectively
confined or tethered dog(s) in the open bed of a pickup truck; or
(10) A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or
livestock with the corporate limits of the city and fails to report the accident to the
city police department or the ACO as soon as practical; or
(11) A person abandons any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded
animal at the city contracted or owned animal control facility with the intent to
readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees; or
(12) An animal damages or destroys public property while in their possession. If the
person in possession of the animal at the time the property damage cannot be
determined, the owner may be charged under this section if the evidence can
reasonably demonstrate the identity of the animal; or
(13) Permits any public nuisance, as defined in section 14-1, to exist.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-9. Number of dogs limited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city more than four dogs
over four months old in or about any premises, house, barn or other building, or in or
about all buildings on any one premises occupied by any one family, and the keeping or
harboring of dogs as aforesaid is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) The payment of the license or licenses on dogs required by Maine state law, as amended,
shall not be construed to allow the keeping of more than four dogs, as aforesaid, on any
one premises.
(c) The limitations in this section shall not apply to any person, group of persons, or
corporations engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding
of dogs, or operating a veterinary hospital, providing a state kennel license is obtained if
applicable.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 16-03, 05-19-16)
ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL; QUARANTINE
Sec. 14-10. Rabies inoculation.
Before the city clerk issues the required licenses for any animal requiring a rabies
vaccination as stipulated in state statute, the city clerk shall require the owner to prove
immunization against rabies as prescribed by state statute and/or by state rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-11. Animal bites and scratch reports; submission to quarantine.
(a) Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal shall report that fact to the ACO or
the police department within 24 hours. If the person bitten or scratched is a minor under
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:10
the age of 17, the parent or legal guardian of such minor, if he/she has knowledge of the
incident, shall report that fact to the ACO or the city's police department within 24 hours.
(b) A person who owns, keeps, harbors or allows an animal to remain on premises under
his/her control shall report to the ACO or the police department, within 24 hours, any
incident where such animal has bitten or scratched any person.
(c) If the ACO has determined that there is reasonable evidence of an animal biting or
otherwise attacking any person, and such animal has rabies or symptoms thereof, or is
suspected by the ACO of having rabies, or has been exposed to rabies, upon demand of
the ACO or his/her deputies, it shall be surrendered to him/her and shall be impounded by
the ACO at a facility, which in his/her opinion, is properly suited to safely handle the
animal for a period of ten days. The ACO may, upon written request of the owner,
authorize the owner to confine the animal with a chain appropriate to the animal's size,
and in a manner where no person will be bitten by the quarantined animal, for a period of
ten days. During such owner confinement, the animal shall be subject to examination by
the ACO or his/her deputy at any time.
(d) Impoundment at any state or city approved facility for rabies quarantine purposes shall be
at the expense of the owner of the impounded animal, livestock or wildlife. In the event a
harborer of a quarantined animal cannot be identified and located within a reasonable
length of time, the victim, at his/her option (or at the option of the parent or legal
guardian in the case of a minor under the age of 18 year of age), may elect to have the
animal examined by a veterinarian, or to have the tissue submitted for laboratory
examination; and the costs so incurred shall be borne by the victim. No animal, livestock
or wildlife confined for quarantine purposes under the provisions of this section shall be
released to any person until all vaccinations required by state statute have been given.
(e) If the harborer of an attacking animal refuses to release for quarantine such animal, then
it shall be the duty of the ACO to obtain a seizure warrant from an appropriate judicial
official for seizure and quarantine of the animal in question.
(f) The ACO may order that all impoundment fees for the quarantine be paid by the person
bitten or scratched if:
(1) The animal has a rabies vaccination certificate; or
(2) The animal was on property under the control of animal's owner when the bite or
scratch occurred; or
(3) The bite or scratch occurred when the animal was acting to defend its owner or
his/her property, or after reasonable provocation.
(g) The ACO shall use his/her discretion to determine what provisions of this chapter or state
law shall be most appropriate in all matters having to do with the quarantine of any
animal.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-12. Contents of required animal bites and scratch reports.
When an individual is placed under a duty to report an incident in which an animal has
bitten or scratched some person or some animal or to report an animal known or suspected to be
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:11
rabid, that report to the ACO shall include, if the person making the report knows, the following
information:
(1) The location where the bite or scratch occurred.
(2) The location where the animal which committed the act or which is known or
suspected to have rabies or have been exposed to rabies can be located.
(3) The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched.
(4) The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors, or has control
over the premises where the animal committing the act normally can be found.
(5) The names and addresses of the persons who own, keep or harbor any other
animal exposed to rabies can be found.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-13. Authorization for city-wide quarantine.
In the event that the ACO or the state department of health declare that a potential
outbreak of rabies is suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid animals is
reasonably imminent, the city director of public health or his/her designee, shall be authorized to
issue a quarantine proclamation ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring any animal to
muzzle the same or confine it as herein provided for such time as may be specified in such
quarantine proclamation. Upon the publication of such proclamation by the director, any person
keeping or harboring any animal shall restrain the animal from running at-large except that such
animal under the control of an adult person and on a leash, may do so only if the animal is
effectively muzzled. All animals found at-large during the time specified in the proclamation by
the director may be destroyed by the ACO or any law enforcement officer if said agents are
unable, with reasonable effort, to apprehend such animal for impoundment.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE IV. IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS
Sec. 14-14. Impoundment generally.
(a) The ACO is hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable
cause to believe said animal to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law
which authorizes or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to
enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land when deemed necessary for
the protection of public health, safety and welfare. As a matter of policy, the ACO shall
not enter private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the
owner of said property without probable cause to believe that said animal poses a threat,
public nuisance or danger to property, human beings or other animals.
(b) Additionally, it is the responsibility of the ACO to accept any animal delivered to the
ACO or the facility under his/her control (while he/she or other authorized agents of the
city are physically present) pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those
animals that are voluntarily released by their owners. For an animal to be voluntarily
released, the owner must sign an owner release form provided by the ACO.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:12
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, an ACO or
those acting in their capacities as law enforcement agents, from capturing or impounding
any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the ACO,
his/her designees, or any law enforcement agents while carrying out their lawful duties.
(d) Prior to the release from impound, the authorized owner must obtain an impound release
form from the ACO or an official within the police department. The fee for an
impoundment of animal is $50.00. Animal owners who can demonstrate a financial
hardship may request a waiver of the animal impoundment fee; such requests should be
directed to the Chief of Police or his designee.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 10-06, 5-06-10)
Sec. 14-15. Duties of the ACO.
(a) It is the duty of the ACO to capture and impound, when appropriate, wild or nondomesticated
animals in response to citizen complaints of public nuisance or to control
feral populations.
(b) If, by identification tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the ACO
will, as soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of said
impoundment. If the animal is locally owned within the city and telephone contact cannot
be made, the ACO will leave a notice at the owner's last known and verifiable residence
indicating that the animal has been impounded.
(c) All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than eight days, unless the animal is
reclaimed earlier by the rightful owner under conditions acceptable to the ACO.
However, no impoundment period is required for an animal voluntarily delivered and
released into the custody of the ACO by its owner.
(d) After the expiration of any required impoundment period, the impounded animal shall be
released to the animal control facility or veterinary hospital contracted by, or doing
business with, the city. At that time, the animal shall be disposed of by adoption from the
facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, or by humanely
destroying the animal. No record shall be kept by the ACO as to the disposition of an
individual animal after release is made to the animal control facility/veterinary hospital
for the purposes specified in this paragraph.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-16. Disposal of dead animals.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove and properly dispose of a deceased
animal within 24 hours of the animal's death. Proper disposal constitutes bringing such animal to
a licensed veterinarian for cremation or proper burial at a pet cemetery.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-17. Disposal of dead animals found on public property.
It shall be the responsibility of any person to notify the department of public works of the
location of the deceased animal so proper removal and disposal may occur.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:13
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE V. DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sec. 14-18. Permit required.
No person shall knowingly sell, own, offer for sale, breed, possess, keep, buy or attempt
to buy, or train a dangerous animal within the city unless the owner has received the proper
permits and/or authorizations pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-19. Complaints regarding dangerous animals.
(a) Upon receipt of a written sworn notarized affidavit by any person, charging that a
particular animal is dangerous, the city director of public health shall conduct an
administrative hearing within ten days of the receipt of such affidavit, to determine
whether such animal is, in fact, dangerous. Unless the matter is resolved by mutual
agreement of all parties involved prior to the hearing, said animal shall be impounded
until a final disposition is reached. Any written sworn notarized affidavit shall contain at
least the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and witnesses; and
(2) Date, time and location of the incident(s); and
(3) A complete description, to the best of the complainant's ability, of the animal
including breed, color, sex, size, etc.; and
(4) Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner and/or the premises
where the animal is kept, if known; and
(5) A statement that the animal bit or attacked; and
(6) Any other facts that the complainant believes to be relevant to the incident.
(b) The following will apply regarding the administrative hearing to determine whether an
animal shall be declared "dangerous":
(1) The suspect animal shall be seized by the ACO pursuant to a complaint,
impounded and, if necessary, medically examined at the owner's expense if the
animal caused injury to a person requiring medical treatment. An animal causing
such injury shall be held at an animal control facility chosen by the ACO pending
the outcome of such hearing and determination as to whether an animal is, in fact,
classifiable as dangerous. Such hearing to determine if an animal is dangerous
shall be conducted by the city director of public health within ten days after
receipt of the complaint or seizure of the animal by the ACO.
(2) Notice of such hearing shall be provided by the ACO to the owner of the animal
by certified return receipt mail. The complainant in the matter shall also be
notified by certified return receipt mail. At such hearing, all parties shall be given
the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of whether or not such animal is
to be declared dangerous.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:14
(c) Upon conclusion of a dangerous animal hearing, the city director of public health may
find that the animal is not dangerous. In such cases, the animal shall be returned to the
owner, provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and registered and all
applicable fees are paid.
(d) Should the animal be classified as a dangerous animal, the owner shall comply with one
of the following requirements:
(1) Humane destruction of the dangerous animal; or
(2) Provide for the keeping of the animal as detailed in section 14-20 and 14-21 of
this chapter.
(e) No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury or damages caused by
the animal were the result of a willful trespass upon another's property; or the person
injured was tormenting, provoking, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was
committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of the injury.
(f) Findings of the city director of public health pertaining to dangerous animals may be
appealed to the superior court in accordance with the provisions outlined in state law.
During the pendency of such appeal, the findings of the city director of public health shall
be suspended. However, the animal shall continue to be impounded at the owner's
expense at the animal control facility selected by the ACO for observation and to protect
the health and safety of the public until a final disposition is reached.
(g) If an animal that has been declared dangerous causes death or serious bodily injury to a
person or to another animal, the city director of public health may order that the animal
be destroyed in a manner consistent with state law. All related expenses shall be paid by
the owner.
(h) Where the victim of a dangerous animal, specifically a dog, has incurred medical
expenses, veterinary expenses, or any other direct financial loss, the owner of said
dangerous dog shall be ordered to pay restitution to the victim in accordance with the
criteria set forth in 17-A M.R.S.A. § 1325.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-20. Keeping of dangerous animals.
The owner of a dangerous animal shall be required to:
(1) Register the dangerous animal with the ACO; and
(2) Obtain liability insurance in an amount not less than $300,000.00 covering bodily
injury or death of any person or animal, or for damages to any person's or entity's
property, resulting from the keeping of such dangerous animal(s); and
(3) Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of
the owner or in a secure pen enclosure as prescribed in section 14-21; and
(4) Provide to the ACO the name and address of the owner, breed, age, sex, color,
and any other identifying marks of said animal; the location where the animal is
be kept if not at the address of the owner; two color photographs of the dangerous
animal; and the aforementioned certificate of liability insurance; and
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:15
(5) Provide proof of the required documents necessary to register the animal, and pay
the required registration fee of $100.00. The ACO shall provide to the owner a
registration tag designating the animal as dangerous. The owner must place the
tag on the animal's collar and must ensure that the animal wears such tag and
collar at all times; and
(6) Not allow the animal to go outside its pen, cage or enclosure unless the animal is
under physical restraint and securely muzzled. No person shall permit a dangerous
animal to be kept outside its cage, pen or enclosure on a chain, rope or other type
of leash unless the owner is in physical control of the chain, rope or other leach
type. Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees,
posts, buildings, etc. Signs giving notice of the dangerous animal shall be
prominently displayed so that all persons entering said property are immediately
notified a dangerous animal is being kept at the location.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-21. Dangerous animal enclosures.
The pen, cage or enclosure for a dangerous animal must be constructed from materials of
sufficient strength to prevent the animal's escape, and must have secure sides, a secure top
attached to the sides, and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or constructed so
that the sides of the structure are embedded in the ground no less than two feet.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-22. Authority to seize dangerous and wild or exotic animals.
In the event that any animal is declared to be a dangerous animal and/or where a wild or
exotic animal is found in violation of any provision of this chapter or state law, such animal may
be seized immediately and impounded by the ACO. Where said animal is found at large and is
presenting a clear and present danger of imminent bodily injury and/or death to the ACO, other
human beings or animals, the animal may be destroyed and the owner notified if the owner can
be reasonably established.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-23. Penalties.
The financial penalty for a violation of this section is set in accordance with the city's
policy manual as approved by the city council. This penalty shall not be waived by the court.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 08-06c, 8-14-08)
ARTICLE VI. RIGHT OF ENTRY
Sec. 14-24. Right of entry.
(a) The ACO is hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of
land for the purpose of capturing, impounding and/or quarantining any animal upon
having probable cause to believe said animal to: Have bitten, injured or otherwise
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:16
attacked a human being or other animal; to have, or have been expose to rabies or another
communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or
otherwise pose a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This
authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or
danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such
animals will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, ACO's shall not enter upon
private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of
said property without probable cause to believe said animal poses a threat or danger to
property, human beings or other animals.
(b) Furthermore, should the ACO be unable or not permitted to gain entry to a property or
premises where a dangerous animal(s) is believed to be present, the ACO or any law
enforcement agent may seek an ex parte order from the district court or superior court for
authorization to take possession of the dangerous animal.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE VII. KEEPING OF NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS
DIVISION 1. WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS
Sec. 14-25. Keeping of wild or exotic animals prohibited.
Any species of wild or exotic animal, not normally considered domesticated, that poses a
potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, or is protected by international,
federal, or state regulations, or any other wild animal, including birds of prey capable of or
inclined to do serious bodily harm to humans or other animals or fowl, shall not be kept within
the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-26. Exemptions to prohibition to keep wild or exotic animals.
The provisions in section 14-25 above shall not apply to the keeping of wild or exotic
animals if the owner or possessor:
(1) Is a governmental agency or entity; or
(2) Holds a circus, carnival or zoo license from the State of Maine; or
(3) Is a licensed individual, or a member of a non-profit animal rehabilitation
organization holding a permit from the Maine Department of Wildlife and Inland
Fisheries; or
(4) Is an accredited research or educational institution.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
DIVISION 2. LIVESTOCK
Sec. 14-27. Keeping of livestock generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping of livestock on premises
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:17
owned by him/her or under his/her control, except in compliance with the following regulations:
(1) Livestock shall only be kept on lots or tracts of land zoned or designated for rural
or agricultural purposes by the city.
(2) Livestock shall not be kept on lots and tracts of land less than one acre in area.
(3) The provisions of article II Animal care--General herein, relative to animal care in
general, shall specifically apply to the keeping of livestock.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-28. Adequate fences and barriers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on their premises any livestock without
providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from escaping and/or
damaging neighboring flowers, trees, shrubbery and/or other property located on adjacent
property.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-29. Other places livestock prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public
school ground, public park or municipal/school grounds within the city other than public rightsof-
way or areas designated for such purposes. Provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to the riding or showing of horses or other livestock in conjunction with city
authorized parades, carnivals, special events or other school or civic sponsored programs or
events which are in compliance with all city, state and federal law, rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 16-05, 6-16-16)
Sec. 14-30. Impounding of livestock.
The provisions of section 14-14 herein, relative to impounding of animals in general,
shall specifically apply to the impounding of livestock.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
DIVISION 3. OTHER ANIMALS
Sec. 14-31. Keeping of fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs.
Fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a secure pen or
enclosure. Litter and droppings from these animals must be collected and disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of section 14-41, disposal of excrement in general, shall
specifically apply to the disposal of excrement of fowl, rabbits, and guinea pigs. Provided,
however, that the provisions of this section and section 14-41 shall not apply to ducks or other
waterfowl inhabiting natural or manmade water courses or bodies of water.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:18
Sec. 14-32. Keeping of bees.
All persons within the property of the city adhere to the statutes of the state as described
in 7 M.S.R.A. Chapter 521 through 531, as well as:
(1) No person shall have no more than two colonies on one-quarter acre or less; or
(2) No person shall have no more than four colonies on one-quarter to one-half acre;
or
(3) No person shall have no more than six colonies on one-half to one acre; or
(4) No person shall have no more than eight colonies on a tract of land greater than
one acre; and
(5) All colonies' hives shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any inhabited
dwelling other than that of the person keeping such bees; and
(6) There is adequate source of water available at all times to the bees on the owner's
property.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
DIVISION 4. KEEPING OF FEMALE CHICKENS ON LOTS DEVELOPED
WITH SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING INCLUDING MOBILE HOMES
ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS
Sec. 14-33. Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the keeping of domesticated
chickens. It is intended to enable residents to keep a small number of female chickens
on a noncommercial basis while creating standards and requirements that ensure that
domesticated chickens do not adversely impact the neighborhood surrounding the property on
which the chickens are kept. The provisions of this section are not to preclude other sections
of Chapter 14 as applicable.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-34. Number and type of chickens allowed.
(a) The maximum number of chickens allowed is six (6) per lot developed with a single
family dwelling.
(b) Only female chickens are allowed. There is no restriction on chicken species.
(c) Chickens must be purchased from an approved source such as the National Poultry
Improvement Plan (i.e. hatcheries that participate in the National Poultry Improvement
Plan).
(d) This provision shall not apply to allowed agricultural uses.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:19
Sec. 14-35. Noncommercial use only.
Chickens shall be kept as pets and for personal use only; no person shall sell eggs or
engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer production for commercial purposes. The slaughtering
of chickens is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-36. Enclosures.
(a) Chickens must be kept in a fenced area or enclosure at all times. Enclosures must be
clean, dry, and odor free, kept in a neat and sanitary condition, in a manner that will
not disturb the use of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse impact. The
free ranging of chickens is not allowed.
(b) Chickens shall be secured within a henhouse during non-daylight hours.
(1) Henhouses are not allowed to be attached or located in any part of a dwelling
unit. The henhouse shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and
doors. The henhouse must be well maintained.
(c) Chickens shall be kept only in the rear or side yard behind the principle structure of the
lot and must be kept on the property of the owner. Chicken henhouses, fenced areas,
and enclosures shall not be closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-37. Odor and noise impacts.
The keeping of chickens authorized under this section shall not create a nuisance and
shall be conducted in a manner that does not disturb the use of adjacent properties. Odors from
chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken related substances shall not be perceptible at the
property boundaries. Perceptible noise from chickens shall not be loud enough at the property
boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-38. Predators, rodents, insects, and parasites.
The property owner and/or chicken owner shall take all necessary action to reduce
the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites.
Chickens found to be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions
to human habitation may be removed by the City, through the animal control officer, or any
other designee, and the cost of the same shall be borne by the property owner and/or chicken
owner.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-39. Permit requirements.
The keeping of chickens authorized under this section shall require the issuance of a use
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:20
permit as per Appendix A, Article V, Section 5 of the Zoning and Land Use Code. The issuance
of a use permit will include any permitting required for enclosures referenced in Sec. 14-36.
Enclosures.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
Sec. 14-40. Separability.
In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this article shall be declared by
any competent court to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed to affect the
validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this article.
(Ord. No. 16-7, 10-6-16)
ARTICLE VIII. PROHIBITIONS
Sec. 14-41. Placement and baiting of animal traps.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set or bait any trap for the purpose of
catching, wounding or killing of any animal, fowl or reptile without permission or assistance of
the local, state or federally designated ACO. This section, however, does not preclude the use of
commercially sold rat and mouse traps, nor does this section precluded the use of "Have a Heart"
traps for the relocation of animals, fowl or reptiles.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-42. Prohibition of animal poisoning.
It shall be unlawful to place any substance or article which has in any manner been
treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats
or other animals with the intent to harm or kill animals. This section, however, does not preclude
the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's
directions for such use.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-43. Noise prohibition.
The provision of subsection 14-48(1) herein, relative to public nuisance in general, shall
specifically be applied to noise prohibition.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-44. Odors and unclean condition prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean
conditions sufficient to create a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:21
Sec. 14-45. Animals at-large prohibition.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to chase vehicles or molest, attack
or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, or be at-large as defined in
section 14-1 of this chapter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for an animal to be left unrestrained in a parked motor vehicle so as
to allow the animal to project its head from the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE IX. PUBLIC LANDS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS: CONTROL OR
PROHIBITION OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS
DIVISION 1. LEASH REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 14-46. Sixteen-foot leash requirements and exceptions.
Only domestic animals are authorized on all city-owned public ways, sidewalks, and all
publicly owned property within the city. Any such animal shall be on a leash or other tether, in
the control of an individual, of not more than 16 feet in length with the following exceptions:
(1) Any domestic animal in the aforementioned public areas must be on a leash or
other tether of not more than eight feet in length when signs are posted stating
"Maximum Eight-Foot Leash is Required" by the city to accommodate mass
gatherings or public events. The authority to post such areas shall lie with the city
council.
(2) All domestic animals may only be present during the specified hours between
6:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. at the following public
facilities:
a. Montello Track (outside track far left-hand side of the track field closest to the
woods and farthest away from the playground).
b. Sunny Side Park (field area).
(3) The City Administrator or his/her designee may authorize exceptions to this
Section for city approved events. Such exceptions must specify the conditions
under which the animal(s) shall be on the supervised; the time of day and specific
dates that they will be authorized to be on the property; and any other conditions
that may be applicable to the event and to the city property involved.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 08-09, 1-1-09; Ord. No. 16-05, 6-16-16; Ord. No. 19-09, 10-31-19)
DIVISION 2. CITY PROPERTY
Sec. 14-47. Parks, cemeteries, playgrounds and athletic fields.
The City Administrator or his/her designee may authorize exceptions to this Section for city
approved events. Such exceptions must specify the conditions under which the animal(s) shall be on the
supervised; the time of day and specific dates that they will be authorized to be on the property; and any
other conditions that may be applicable to the event and to the city property involved.
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:22
(a) Domestic animals will not be permitted in the following parks and athletic fields for the
period commencing one-half hour prior to and for the duration of any city or school
department scheduled or sanctioned activity or event: Randall Road Softball Complex
and Simard-Payne Police Memorial Park.
(b) Domestic animals may be authorized in all city-owned cemeteries and must be on a leash
or other tether, under the control of an individual, of not more than 16 feet in length
provided, however, that such animals shall be allowed only on the roadways and
walkways of the cemeteries and not on the cemetery lots.
(c) All domestic animals shall not be permitted in the following public parks and playground
areas: Lionel Potvin Park, Jude’s Place at Marcotte Park playground area, Kennedy Park
playground area, Knox Street Playground, Mark W. Paradis Park, Pettingill School Park
playground area and basketball court, River Valley basketball courts and Sunnyside Park
playground area.
(d) All domestic animals shall not be permitted in the following athletic fields: Franklin
Pasture Athletic Complex, Lewiston Athletic Park, Montello multi-use field and Simard-
Payne Police Memorial Park multi-use field.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01; Ord. No. 08-09, 1-1-09; Ord. No. 13-02b, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 15-06, 7-2-15;
Ord. No. 16-05, 6-16-16; Ord. No. 19-09, 10-31-19)
ARTICLE X. NUISANCES
Sec. 14-48. Public nuisances.
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal or bird, which causes annoyance to the
peace of any person, either by:
(1) Excessively barking, howling or making other sounds common to its species; or
(2) Failing to keep any female dog in heat confined at all times. Every bitch in
violation of this section shall be impounded and the owner, keeper or person
harboring such bitch, shall be deemed guilty of an offense; or
(3) Knowingly have any animal, requiring a license or some other form of
registration by the state, run at-large.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-49. Disposal of excrement.
All manure and other excrement shall be disposed of in such a manner so as to prevent it
from becoming a public nuisance or health hazard. With regard to dogs on public or private
property, other than the owner's, the owner shall be responsible for the immediate removal of
excrement.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Sec. 14-50. Trucks, trailers and other vehicles.
A person commits an offense if a person parks or leaves standing any truck, trailer, or
ANIMALS
Lewiston Code Chapter 14
CH 14:23
other vehicle that has been used for the hauling of livestock, animals, fish or fowl in a
residentially zoned area of the city, whereas notified by the city's enforcement agents that such
vehicle is creating a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE XI. DAMAGE TO PROPERTY
Sec. 14-51. Complaint and recovery.
(a) Compliant. Whenever any damage is inflicted on any person and/or property by a dog,
the victim and/or owner may make a complaint to the ACO or city police department
within the next business day following discovery of the damage.
(b) Recovery. If after reviewing the evidence, the ACO and/or police department are satisfied
that a dog committed the damage, they shall estimate values of the injured person or
damaged property. The investigation agents will then determine if the dog can be
reasonably identified and if so, the owner of said dog will be liable for all related
expenses caused by said dog.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
ARTICLE XII. ANIMAL SAFETY
Sec. 14-52. Authority of the ACO.
A person commits an offense if a person parks or leaves any animal in a any type of
vehicle and does not provide for adequate ventilation or allows the animal to protrude its head
out of the vehicle and consequently attack or attempt to attack a passerby.
The ACO shall have, for the purposes of this section, the authority to order the removal
of a vehicle or to remove the animal from any vehicle by any means possible if, in the opinion of
the ACO, it appears that the animal is in distress or the animal poses a threat or public nuisance
to the general public.
(Ord. No. 01-7, 5-31-01)
Chapters 15-17
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:1
Chapter 18
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
*Cross references: Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 62; streets and sidewalks, ch. 66;
utilities, ch. 74; zoning and land use code, app. A.
State law references: Regulation of construction and improvements, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4101 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 18-1--18-25. Reserved.
Article II. Building Codes
Sec. 18-26. Building codes.
Sec. 18-27. Permits required.
Sec. 18-28. Fees.
Sec. 18-29. Violations.
Secs. 18-30--18-50. Reserved.
Article III. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 18-51. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
Sec. 18-52. Amendments to the property maintenance code.
Secs. 18-53--18-75. Reserved.
Article IV. Plumbing Code
Sec. 18-76. Definitions.
Sec. 18-77. Compliance with state law.
Sec. 18-78. Compliance with water division regulations.
Sec. 18-79. Removal of contents of privies, cesspools or septic tanks.
Sec. 18-80. House trap, when required.
Sec. 18-81. Water tank heaters.
Sec. 18-82. Special provisions for flood hazard areas.
Sec. 18-83. Permit fees.
Sec. 18-84. Master oil burner technicians.
Secs. 18-85--18-105. Reserved.
Article V. Electrical Code
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 18-106. Liability established.
Sec. 18-107. Definitions.
Secs. 18-108--18-120. Reserved.
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 18-121. Enforcement officer.
Sec. 18-122. Entry for inspections.
Sec. 18-123. Emergency orders.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:2
Sec. 18-124. Violation orders.
Sec. 18-125. Appeals.
Sec. 18-126. Stop work order.
Sec. 18-127. Penalty for violation of article.
Sec. 18-128. Relief from personal liability.
Secs. 18-129--18-140. Reserved.
Division 3. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 18-141. Permit required; exceptions.
Sec. 18-142. Application for permit.
Sec. 18-143. Prerequisites to issuance of permit.
Sec. 18-144. Fee required.
Sec. 18-145. Installation limited to that described in application.
Sec. 18-146. Transferability.
Sec. 18-147. Suspension of permits.
Sec. 18-148. Prerequisites for electrical installations.
Sec. 18-149. Proof of licensure.
Sec. 18-150. Installations without a permit.
Sec. 18-151. Inspection of wiring before concealment; responsibility.
Sec. 18-152. Application for inspection; examination of work.
Sec. 18-153. Statement of defects.
Sec. 18-154. Certificate of inspection required.
Sec. 18-155. Schedule of fees for electrical permits.
Secs. 18-156--18-170. Reserved.
Division 4. Standards
Sec. 18-171. Installations.
Sec. 18-172. Aluminum wire.
Sec. 18-173. Service entrance equipment; switches, conduit.
Sec. 18-174. Fustat plugs or circuit breakers required.
Sec. 18-175. Installation of rigid conduit.
Secs. 18-176--18-185. Reserved.
Division 5. Poles and Wires
Sec. 18-186. Supports required; owner's consent when buildings are used.
Sec. 18-187. Safe carrying of wires required.
Sec. 18-188. Disposition of scraps, unused coils, loose ends regulated.
Secs. 18-189--18-199. Reserved.
Article VI. Registration Requirement for Multi-Family Buildings
Sec. 18-200. Purpose; intent.
Sec. 18-201. Definitions.
Sec. 18-202. Applicability; exception.
Sec. 18-203. Registration required.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:3
Sec. 18-204. Renewal; term.
Sec. 18-205. Registration process and requirements.
Sec. 18-206. Rejection of registration.
Sec. 18-207. Unregistered multi-family buildings.
Sec. 18-208. Appeals.
Sec. 18-209. Severability.
Secs. 18-210--18-229. Reserved.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1--18-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BUILDING CODES
Sec. 18-26. Building codes.
The City of Lewiston administers and enforces the provisions of the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code pursuant to Title 10, chapter 1103 and Title 25, chapters 313 and 314
of the Maine Statutes and 16-642 CMR chapters 1-6 of the Maine Department of Public Safety
Agency Rules.
(Ord. No. 92-15, § 7-1, 8-13-92; Ord. No. 05-01, 3-10-05; Ord. 15-03, 04-02-15)
Sec. 18-27. Permits required.
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, move, demolish,
or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair
remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of
which is regulated by the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code, or cause any such work to
be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.
(Ord. 15-03, 04-02-15)
Sec. 18-28. Fees.
(a) Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by the Lewiston City
Council have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee,
if any, has been paid.
(b) Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for
each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule as established by the
Lewiston City Council.
(c) Building permit valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit
value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of work, including
materials and labor, for which the permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical,
plumbing equipment and permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the
valuation is underestimated on the application, final building permit valuation shall be set by the
building official utilizing Means Square Foot Costs or similar documents, unless the applicant
can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official.
(d) Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a
building or structure, before obtaining the necessary permit, shall be subject to a belated fee
established by the Lewiston City Council that shall be in addition to the required permit fees.
(e) Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition
for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit
shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are
prescribed by ordinance or law.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:5
(f) Refunds. The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
(Ord. 15-03, 04-02-15)
Sec. 18-29. Violations.
(a) Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use, or occupy any building or structure or equipment
regulated by the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict
with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.
(b) Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order
on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving,
removal, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan
approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the
abatement of the violation.
(c) Service of notice of violation. A notice of violation or order may be served in hand to the
violator or left with a person of suitable age and discretion at the residence or place of business
of the violator or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address. If
the return receipt is not returned, the notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been served
if it is also sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, which is not returned as undeliverable by the
postal service.
(d) Request for appeal. Any person served an order, pursuant to this section, may request a
hearing before the board of appeals by filing a written petition for said hearing at the planning
and code enforcement department within ten (10) days of the date of service of the order. The
board of appeals may sustain, modify, or withdraw such order. The decision of the board of
appeals may be further appealed pursuant to the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure.
(e) Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or
directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Code, shall be liable for one or more citations as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-8 and Chapter
50, Section 50-36 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston. In lieu of or in addition to
the issuance of citations, the building official may initiate a land use complaint pursuant to Rule
80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure and 30-A M.R.S. § 4452 et seq. as amended.
(Ord. 15-03, 04-02-15)
Secs. 18-30--18-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Sec. 18-51. Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:6
An ordinance of the City of Lewiston adopting the 2009 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the City of Lewiston; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees.
That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk of the
City of Lewiston, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code,
2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Lewiston, in the State of Maine for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing
the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition
of such existing structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Lewiston are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in
Section 18-52 of this ordinance.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
That nothing in this ordinance or in the International Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired,
or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 92-8, § 15-1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 11-07, 9-15-11)
Sec. 18-52. Amendments to the property maintenance code.
The property maintenance code adopted in section 18-51 is amended and changed as
follows:
CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
PM-100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Lewiston, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
PM-102.3 Application of other codes: Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lewiston and any other applicable laws, rules or regulations.
102.6 Historic buildings are hereby deleted.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:7
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT
103.1 General. The Director of Planning and Code Enforcement and his designees shall be known as the
code official.
103.2 Appointment is hereby deleted.
103.3 Deputies is hereby deleted.
103.4 Liability. The code official while acting for the jurisdiction, in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official
duties. Any suit instituted against the code official or any subordinate because of an act performed by that
official or subordinate in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
defended by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The
code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.
103.5 Fees is hereby deleted.
104.3 Right of entry. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the code official is
authorized to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections
and performing duties under this code.
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in
accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a civil infraction and the violation shall be deemed
a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the
appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the
removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the code enforcement official
on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a
lien upon such real estate.
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston or state laws. Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
code official from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or
utilization of the building, structure or premises.
107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to
bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:8
5. Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
6. Include a statement of the right to issue citations in accordance with Chapter 50, Article II and/or to
take any other legal action available by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston or by State law
and to file a lien in accordance with Section 106.3.
107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally;
2. Sent by certified and first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the first class letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
109.2 Securing dangerous structures. When, in the determination of the City Administrator, the
Director of the Planning & Code Enforcement Department, the Chief of Police, or the Fire Chief, a
structure poses a serious threat to the public health and safety, a code official may secure the structure
and/or the premises pursuant to 17 M.R.S. § 2856. The code official shall cause notice, as required by 17
M.R.S. § 2851(1), to be given before securing the structure unless the threat requires prompt action, in
which case notice may be given after the premises are secured. The City is entitled to recover its
expenses of securing the structure. Expenses shall include, but not by way of limitation, the costs of title
searches, location reports, service of process, and all costs reasonably related to the securing of the
structure. The City may recover its expenses, including its reasonable attorney's fees, by means of a civil
action brought against the owner or by a special tax pursuant to 17 M.R.S. § 2853. Appeals from a
decision of the code official shall be taken directly to Superior Court.
109.2.1 Removal of trash, debris, or other discarded materials. When, in the determination of the City
Administrator, the Director of the Planning & Code Enforcement Department, the Chief of Police, or the
Fire Chief, a structure or property poses a serious threat to the public health and safety as a result of the
accumulation of trash, debris, or other discarded materials, the code official may:
1. Order that the trash, debris, or other discarded materials be removed.
a. The code official must cause to be served with the order each owner of the
structure or property i) in person, ii) in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, iii) by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, where
receipt is acknowledged, or iv) when the name or address of any owner or coowner
is unknown or is not ascertainable with reasonable diligence, by
publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper generally
circulated in the area.
b. Appeals from an order may be made to the Board of Appeals within ten days of
service.
c. If, within twenty-one (21) days of service, the owner fails to comply with the
order or to appeal the order to the Board of Appeals, the code official may remove
the trash debris, and other discarded materials.
2. Removal of the trash, debris and other discarded materials if the threat to public health
and safety requires prompt action.
a. The code official must cause to be served each owner of the structure or property
with a notice of the action taken i) in person, ii) in accordance with the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure, or iii) when the name or address of any owner or coowner
is unknown or is not ascertainable with reasonable diligence, by
publication once a week for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper generally
circulated in the area.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:9
b. The owner may challenge the removal and/or petition for the return of the trash,
debris, or other discarded materials to the City Administrator, or the Director of
the Planning & Code Enforcement Department, within ten days of service of the
notice.
c. Appeals from the decision of the City Administrator or Director of the Planning &
Code Enforcement Department may be taken to the Board of Appeals within ten
days of the decision.
d. The trash, debris or other discarded materials removed shall be stored at a secure
location until i) the expiration of twenty-one (21) days after service of the notice
on all owners, if no appeal is taken, ii) if an appeal is taken, the later to occur of
a (x) decision by the City Administrator or Director of the Planning and Code
Enforcement Department upholding the decision of the code official; or (y) a
decision by the Board of Appeals upholding the prior decision. After the
expiration of the period described above, and absent a decision requiring return of
the waste, debris, or other discarded materials, such waste, debris, and other
discarded materials may be disposed of by the City.
The City is entitled to recoup any expenses incurred under this section from the owner. Expenses shall
include, but not by way of limitation, the costs of title searches, location reports, service or process, costs
of removing, storing and/or disposing of the trash, debris, and other discarded materials, and all other
costs incurred by the municipality that are reasonably related to the removal and disposal of the trash,
debris, and other discarded materials. The City may recover its expenses, including its reasonable
attorney's fees, by means of a civil action brought against the owner.
109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official may employ the necessary
labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid
by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction may institute appropriate action against the
owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the
time prescribed, the code official may cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through
an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such
demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and
shall be a lien upon such real estate.
110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing
body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell
the salvage and valuable materials. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such
demolition, legal fees and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction,
including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to
any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice
or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, provided that a
written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:10
111.2 Application for appeal is hereby deleted.
111.2.1 Alternate members is hereby deleted.
111.2.2 Chairman is hereby deleted.
111.2.3 Disqualification of member is hereby deleted.
111.2.4 Secretary is hereby deleted.
111.2.5 Compensation of members is hereby deleted.
111.3 Notice of meeting is hereby deleted.
111.4 Open hearing is hereby deleted.
111.4.1 Procedure is hereby deleted.
111.5 Postponed hearing is hereby deleted.
111.6 Board decision is hereby deleted.
111.6.1 Records and copies is hereby deleted.
111.6.2 Administration is hereby deleted.
111.7 Court review is hereby deleted.
111.8 Stay of enforcement is hereby deleted.
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than 1,000.00 dollars for each day that work activity occurs.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the
Maine Uniform Building Code, the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston, and any other duly
adopted codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for
reason including but not limited to being unregistered, uninsured, uninspected, wrecked, abandoned, in a
state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property located in all zoning districts with the exception of the
rural agricultural district shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12". All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:11
other than trees or shrubs provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens,
vegetation grown for agricultural purposes as defined in Appendix A, Article II, Section 2 of the Zoning
and Land Use Code, and areas within 25', horizontal distance, of the normal high water mark of the
Androscoggin River.
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, not more than one inoperative, or
unregistered, or uninsured or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises,
and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work,
provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
302.10 Erosion and sediment control. When determined by the code official that soil erosion is
occurring or is likely to occur beyond the premises or into a protected natural resource as defined by
M.R.S.A, Title 38 § 480-B erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed in accordance with
the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs Pub. No. DEPLW0588, published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Land and Water Quality, (March 2003). Erosion
control measures where required must be maintained until the site is permanently stabilized. Permanent
erosion and sediment control measures shall be achieved with topsoil spread at a minimum compacted
depth of 4 inches in keeping with the applicable best management practices as per the above referenced
document. Lawfully established agricultural fields shall be exempt from this section.
Exception:
The code official may waive the requirement for the use of topsoil as the permanent soil
stabilization method when determined that some other permanent soil stabilization best
management practices method would be more appropriate for a given premises. Any such waiver
must be requested in writing.
302.10.1 Demolition. On any premises located in the Downtown Residential District, the Neighborhood
Conservation “B” District, the Centreville District, and the Riverfront District, the following provisions
shall apply to demolition activity commencing on or after March 31, 2014 resulting in vacant premises:
Temporary erosion and sediment control measures in keeping with the applicable best
management practices as per the above referenced document shall be in place on premises in
these districts as necessary during and after the completion of demolition activity.
Permanent erosion and sediment control measures shall be in place within thirty days after the
completion of demolition activity in these districts and shall be achieved with topsoil spread at a
minimum compacted depth of 4 inches in keeping with the applicable best management practices
as per the above referenced document.
Premises shall be barricaded within thirty days after the completion of demolition with boulders
one cubic yard or larger placed around the entire perimeter of the premises at intervals of not less
than six feet apart. The purpose for this provision is to discourage the unlawful use of any vacant
premises for parking, storage, or related activity; however, such uses may be established subject
to permitting.
Exceptions:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:12
1. The code official may waive the requirement for the use of topsoil as the permanent soil
stabilization method when determined that some other permanent soil stabilization best
management practices method would be more appropriate for a given premises. Any such
waiver must be requested in writing.
2. The code official may extend the thirty day provision for the installation of topsoil as the
permanent soil stabilization method when determined that the redevelopment of the subject
premises will likely occur within twelve months after the completion of demolition or when it
is impractical due to fall and winter conditions. Any such waiver must be requested in
writing.
3. The code official may waive the requirement for the placement of boulders in whole or in
part when it can be demonstrated that structures on adjoining premises, topography, existing
or proposed permanent fences, or other barriers are of such a nature to achieve the purpose of
this section. Any such waiver must be requested in writing.
303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, designed for a water depth of 36 inches
(900 mm) or more shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches (1219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and
doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than
54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool
side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively
close and latch when released from an open position of 6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing
pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a
safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or
utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and
every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or
insect repellent fans, are employed.
308.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply to the occupants in each dwelling
unit an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container.
309.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units including
rooming houses shall be responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the structure, the
exterior property as well as the individual dwelling units, or rooming units.
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:13
each six rooming units.
502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working
condition in accordance with the Maine State Internal Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance
or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of
the premises.
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing
fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system.
All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or
tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Maine State Internal Plumbing Code.
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
602.2 Residential occupancies. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish
heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68
degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms measured at a distance of
3 feet from the exterior walls, 5 feet above floor level. In addition, the heating facilities must be
operated to protect the building equipment and systems from freezing.
602.3 Heat supply. An owner or operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling units or sleeping units and the occupant thereof under a lease or tenancy at will may
enter into an agreement for the owner or operator to provide heat at less than 68 degrees
Fahrenheit. The agreement must:
1. Be in a separate written document, apart from the lease, be set forth in a clear and
conspicuous format, readable in plain English and in at least 12-point font, and be
signed by both parties to the agreement:
2. State that the agreement is revocable by either party upon reasonable notice under the
circumstances:
3. Specifically set a minimum temperature for heat, which may not be less than 62
degrees Fahrenheit; and
4. Set forth a stated reduction in rent that must be fair and reasonable under the
circumstances.
An agreement under this subsection may not be entered into or maintained if a person
over 65 years of age or under 5 years of age resides on the premises. An owner or
operator is not responsible if an occupant who controls the temperature on the premises
reduces the heat to an amount less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit as long as the owner or
operator complies with Section 602.2 or if the occupant fails to inform the owner or
operator that a person over 65 years of age or under 5 years of age resides on the
premises.
CHAPTER 7
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:14
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a
building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the applicable National Fire
Protection Association Codes as per Chapter 38, Article II, Section 38-26(a) of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lewiston.
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the applicable National Fire Protection
Association Codes as per Chapter 38, Article II, Section 38-26(a) of the Code Ordinances of the City of
Lewiston shall be unobstructed.
704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or
control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in
accordance with the applicable National Fire Protection Association Codes as per Chapter 38, Article II,
Section 38-26(a) of the Code Ordinances of the City of Lewiston.
704.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler
systems shall be in accordance with applicable National Fire Protection Association Codes as per Chapter
38, Article II, Section 38-26(a) of the Code Ordinances of the City of Lewiston.
704.2 Smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with Chapter 38, Section 38-26 (c) of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lewiston. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
Title 25 M.R.S.A.§ 2468.
(Ord. No. 92-8, § 15-2, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 92-22, § 15-2, 10-1-92; Ord. No. 11-7, 9-15-11; Ord. No. 13-5,
07-18-13; Ord. No. 14-3, 03-27-14; Ord. No. 14-7, 5-1-14; Ord. No. 18-13, 1-3-19)
Secs. 18-53--18-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 18-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Minor plumbing work or minor installation means:
(1) The cleaning of stoppages and/or repairing of leaks in all water distributing and
drainage pipes, valves and faucets, provided the work does not require the
replacement or relocation of any pipes.
(2) The direct replacement of all existing faucets, valves and plumbing fixtures,
except hot water storage tanks and hot water heaters including tankless water
heaters.
(Ord. No. 93-18, § 22-8, 11-4-93)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-77. Compliance with state law.
All plumbing installed in the city and all permits issued shall conform to the rules and
regulations of the state department of human services in relation to plumbing within the state
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:15
issued under authority conferred by state law, except as amended in this article.
(Code 1982, § 22-1; Ord. No. 93-18, § 22-1, 11-4-93)
Sec. 18-78. Compliance with water division regulations.
All work done on the water services in the city shall conform to the rules and regulations
set forth by the water division of the department of public works.
(Code 1982, § 22-2)
Sec. 18-79. Removal of contents of privies, cesspools or septic tanks.
No person shall remove the contents of any privy, vault, cesspool or septic tank except in
a manner approved by the plumbing inspector.
(Code 1982, § 22-3)
State law references: Cleaning of privies, septic tanks, etc., 30 M.R.S.A. § 4359.
Sec. 18-80. House trap, when required.
A house trap is required only where no storm drain is provided and the building is tied
onto a combined sewer. Such house trap shall be located inside of the building as near the
outside wall as possible. Such house trap shall have at least one cleanout four inches or larger in
dimensions.
(Code 1982, § 22-4)
Sec. 18-81. Water tank heaters.
(a) No water tank heaters shall be used in any dwelling house unless such water tank heater
is equipped with a proper smoke or fume pipe connected with a chimney or flue affording
an outlet to the open air, and unless such chimney or flue shall be maintained in good
repair and free from all deposits.
(b) No water tank heaters shall be installed in a bathroom.
(c) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to electric hot
water heaters.
(Code 1982, § 22-5)
Sec. 18-82. Special provisions for flood hazard areas.
The plumbing inspector shall require new and replacement water supply systems and
sanitary sewer systems located within any A zone on the flood insurance rate map to be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Code 1982, § 22-6)
Sec. 18-83. Permit fees.
The fees for plumbing permits shall be paid by the owner or his agent in accordance with
the plumbing fee schedule established by the city council.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:16
(Ord. No. 93-18, § 22-7, 11-4-93)
Sec. 18-84. Master oil burner technicians.
A plumbing permit shall be required for the installation of domestic water heating
appliances by master oil burner technicians.
(Ord. No. 93-18, § 22-9, 11-4-93)
Secs. 18-85--18-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ELECTRICAL CODE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 18-106. Liability established.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical fixtures,
appliances, devices, equipment or wiring, for damage or injury to any person or property, nor
shall it be construed to impose on the city any liability by reason of the inspection provided for in
this article or by reason of any certificate or license issued under this article.
(Code 1982, § 10-1)
Sec. 18-107. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Board means the board of electrical appeals provided for in section 18-125.
Electrical inspector means the electrical inspector of the city or any deputy, assistant or
acting inspector designated by the city administrator.
Journeyman electrician means any person who customarily performs the work of
installing or repairing electrical wires, conduits, fixtures, equipment and other appliances in the
employment of a master electrician and who holds a valid journeyman electrician's license issued
to him by the electricians examining board pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended.
Limited license means a limited electrician's license to install and service the electrical
work related to a specific type of electrically operated equipment or to specific electrical
installations issued by the electricians examining board pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq.,
as amended.
Master electrician means any person engaging in or about to engage in the business of
installing electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures and other electrical equipment and
holding a valid master electrician's license issued by the electricians examining board pursuant to
32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended.
(Code 1982, § 10-2; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-2, 5-7-92)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:17
State law references: Similar definitions, 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101.
Secs. 18-108--18-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 18-121. Enforcement officer.
The electrical inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article so that wires, conduits,
fixtures, apparatus, equipment and other appliances carrying or using electricity for light, heat,
power, transmission of sound and communications purposes shall be so installed, constructed
and guarded as to reduce as far as practicable the danger there from to life and property.
(Code 1982, § 10-21)
State law references: Municipal authority to appoint an electrical inspector, 30 M.R.S.A. § 2555.
Sec. 18-122. Entry for inspections.
The electrical inspector may enter any building with the permission of any person having
control of such building or may apply to a court for process to do so in order to discharge his
official duties, for the purpose of making any inspection, reinspection or test of the installation or
maintenance of electric wiring, devices, appliances and equipment contained therein.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-22, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-123. Emergency orders.
(a) Whenever the electrical inspector determines that:
(1) An existing electrical service, conductors, fixtures, equipment and any other
aspects of electrical systems poses a danger to life or property because of
defectiveness or defective installation; or
(2) Upon making an inspection required under this article, an addition or alteration to
existing lighting, heating or power systems is defective;
he may require that the electrical service be discontinued to the building or premises or that the
electrical current be discontinued to such addition or alteration. The electrical service or current
shall not be reconnected until such defects are remedied or corrected to the satisfaction of the
electrical inspector.
(b) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the electrical inspector to discontinue electrical
service or current may appeal to the board of appeals pursuant to section 18-125. Such
appeal shall in no way stay the decision to disconnect electrical service or current.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-23, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-124. Violation orders.
(a) Whenever the electrical inspector determines that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article, an order to correct such violation shall be issued to the person
(hereinafter "violator") owning or having any control of any land, building, structure,
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:18
sign, licensed or permitted business or operation which is in violation. Notice of the
violation may be served in hand to the violator or left with a person of suitable age and
discretion at the residence or place of business of the violator or mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to his last known address. If the return receipt is not returned, the
notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been served if it is also sent by regular
mail, postage prepaid, which is not returned as undeliverable by the postal service. If the
electrical inspector finds that the violation is one which requires immediate correction to
protect the public health or safety, he may provide notice under this article by means of
telephone or facsimile transmission to the violator or to a person of suitable age and
discretion at the residence or place of business of the violator. Any notice under this
article shall describe the violation, including a reference to the ordinance section violated,
specify that reasonable period within which the violation must be corrected, and state the
potential consequence if the violation is not corrected. The notice shall also advise the
violator of any right to appeal to the board of appeals with respect to the electrical
inspector's determination that a violation exists for which the violator is responsible.
(b) The electrical inspector may, upon evidence of noncompliance with an order or decision
of the board of appeals pursuant to section 18-125, request that appropriate legal action
be instituted.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-24, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-125. Appeals.
Any person served with an order pursuant to section 18-124 or aggrieved by the order of
the electrical inspector condemning all or part of any electrical installation material or equipment
or by his refusal to approve any electrical installation for which a permit was issued may request
a hearing before the board of appeals by filing a written petition for such hearing at the office of
the director of planning and code enforcement within ten days of the date of service of order.
Such appeal shall be heard within 30 days of the receipt of a complete petition for appeal. The
board of appeals may sustain, modify or withdraw such order. The decision of the board of
appeals may be further appealed pursuant to the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure. To take advantage of this right, a petition for review must be filed with the
superior court within 45 days of receipt of the decision of the board of appeals.
(Code 1982, § 10-25; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Sec. 18-126. Stop work order.
Upon notice from the electrical inspector that any work on any building, structure,
equipment, etc., is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this article or in an unsafe and
dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in
writing and shall be served in accordance with section 18-124 and shall state the conditions
under which work may be resumed.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-26, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-127. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person or trust who shall violate or with property or equipment violate this article
shall be subject to penalties and/or fines as set forth in section 1-8, and section 50-36 et seq.
and/or as otherwise may be prescribed pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 et seq., as amended
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:19
and 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended. Each day that a violation continues after the notice
has been served in accordance with section 18-124 shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-27, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-128. Relief from personal liability.
The electrical inspector as well as any employee who acts in good faith in the discharge
of duties of enforcement of this article is relieved of all personal liability for any damage
accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the
electrical inspector shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is
instituted by or against the electrical inspector or any employee in the enforcement of this code.
In any of these actions, the electrical inspector or employee shall be defended or represented by
the city's attorney-at-law until the final termination of the proceedings. This section shall remain
in effect regardless of the employment status of the electrical inspector or employee.
(Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-28, 5-7-92)
Secs. 18-129--18-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 18-141. Permit required; exceptions.
(a) No electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment shall be installed within or on any
building, structure or premises nor shall alterations or additions be made in any such
existing wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without first securing a permit therefor
from the electrical inspector, except as otherwise provided in this division.
(b) No permit shall be required for the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable
devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed. A "suitable
receptacle" is hereby defined as one having the proper wiring and capacity to fulfill the
electrical requirements of the portable device.
(c) No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repair of wiring, devices,
appliances or equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence
through the facilities of any duly chartered telephone, telegraph or radio company.
(d) No permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or repairing of electric wiring,
devices, appliances and equipment installed by a public utility for the use of such public
utility in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy; nor
for the work of such utilities in installing, maintaining and repairing on the premises of
customers, service connections, meters and other apparatus and appliances remaining the
property of such utilities after installation; nor for work by a public utility in connection
with the lighting of public or private ways, alleys, parks or squares.
(Code 1982, § 10-36; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-36, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05; Ord. No. 11-09, 10-20-
11)
Sec. 18-142. Application for permit.
Application for a permit required by this article, describing the work to be done, shall be
made in writing on standard forms provided by the city to the electrical inspector by the person
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:20
installing the work. The application shall state the name and address of the person for whom the
work is to be done and shall be accompanied by such plans and specifications as may be
necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the
requirements of this article, and if the applicant has complied with the provisions of this article, a
permit for such installation shall be issued.
(Code 1982, § 10-37)
Sec. 18-143. Prerequisites to issuance of permit.
No permit for the installation or alteration of any electric wiring, devices, appliances or
equipment shall be issued to any person other than a master electrician or a limited license
electrician. Permits to limited license electricians shall be limited to the specific electrical
installations authorized by such licenses. Notwithstanding the above provision, a permit may be
issued to homeowners to do wiring in a single-family residence, provided the following
conditions are met:
(1) The homeowner must obtain a permit and have all work inspected as provided by
section 18-151.
(2) The single-family home must be owned by the individual doing the electrical
work and be his permanent residence or it will be in the event that it is to be
constructed.
(Code 1982, § 10-38; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-38, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Sec. 18-144. Fee required.
No electrical permit shall be issued until the proper fee has been paid. Any person who
commences any work for which a permit is required without having first obtained a permit shall
pay a belated fee in addition to the customary fee for the permit. A belated fee shall not be
assessed for emergency work provided that an application is filed with the code enforcement
division on the next day such division is open following commencement of such work.
(Code 1982, § 10-39; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-39, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-145. Installation limited to that described in application.
The electrical permit when issued shall be for the installation as described in the
application and no deviation shall be made from the installation so described without the written
approval of the electrical inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-41; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-146
Sec. 18-146. Transferability.
No permit issued under this article shall be transferable except with the written approval
of the electrical inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-42; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-147
Sec. 18-147. Suspension of permits.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:21
Any permit issued under this article shall become invalid if the authorized work is not
commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit, if the authorized work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencing the work, or if
the authorized work is not completed within 12 months. The electrical inspector shall have the
authority to extend a permit for the commencement of authorized work beyond the six months or
the completion of authorized work beyond the 12 months when such a request is determined
reasonable by the electrical inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-43; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-43, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-148
Sec. 18-148. Prerequisites for electrical installations.
Electrical work must be performed in accordance with Title 32, chapter 17§ 1101 et seq.
of the Maine Statutes. When the electrical inspector finds that electrical work is being performed
contrary to this requirement he shall issue a stop work order pursuant to section 18-126 and shall
notify the permit holder that future violations of this section shall result in the issuance of a
citation pursuant to section 50-36 et seq. and/or the initiation of a land use complaint pursuant to
rule 80-K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 et seq., as amended.
(Code 1982, § 10-44; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-44, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05; Ord. No. 15-02, 03-19-
15)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-149
Sec. 18-149. Proof of licensure.
Any person performing electrical work as regulated by this article except as otherwise
provided for in section 18-143 and 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq., as amended, shall carry his
electrical license issued by the electricians examining board and upon request shall display it to
the electrical inspector. Failure to display a license upon a request shall be conclusive deemed a
violation of this article.
(Code 1982, § 10-45; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-45, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-150
Sec. 18-150. Installations without a permit.
Whenever any electrical work or wiring is found to have been installed without a proper
permit having first been secured, or not to be in accordance with the provisions of this article, the
electrical inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to render such system inoperative until
a permit has been secured, or the defective work corrected, and the work of wiring reinspected
and approved.
(Code 1982, § 10-46; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-46, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-151
Sec. 18-151. Inspection of wiring before concealment; responsibility.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to cover or conceal, or cause to be so covered or
concealed, any wiring for which a permit has been issued or is required, before such
wiring has been inspected by the electrical inspector.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:22
(b) All new work shall be inspected before it is concealed by wall or ceiling paneling. The
electrical permit holder or owner, or both, shall be held responsible if the inspector has
not been notified for an inspection. The inspector may insist on exposing such concealed
work.
(Code 1982, § 10-47; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-47, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-152
Sec. 18-152. Application for inspection; examination of work.
Upon application being made for the inspection of any electrical work for which a permit
has been issued, the electrical inspector shall make a careful examination of all such work in
order to determine whether it has been done in conformity with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 10-48; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-48, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-153
Sec. 18-153. Statement of defects.
In any case where defective work is found, the electrical inspector shall furnish the
person to whom the permit for the work was issued a verbal statement indicating the defective
work and the nature of such defects. When required in writing by the permit holder, a written
statement indicating the defective work and nature of such defects shall be provided by the
inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-49; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-49, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-154
Sec. 18-154. Certificate of inspection required.
When the electrical inspector finds the work for which a permit was issued done in
conformity with the provisions of this article, where required he shall issue in writing a
certificate of inspection therefor, which shall identify the premises and the work covered by the
permit and shall show that such work has been properly done.
(Code 1982, § 10-50; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-50, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-155
Sec. 18-155. Schedule of fees for electrical permits.
The fees for permits under this article shall be paid by the applicant for such permits in
accordance with a fee schedule established by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 10-51; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-51, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Editor's note: Formerly § 16-156
Secs. 18-156--18-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. STANDARDS
Sec. 18-171. Installations.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:23
All electrical installations shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article and the
approved standards for safety to life and property. Unless otherwise provided by this article,
conformity with NFPA 70 (National Fire Protection Association), National Electrical Code, 2014
Edition shall be deemed as conforming with approved standards for safety to life and property
with the following amendments:
200.6 Means of Identifying Grounded Conductors.
(D) Grounded Conductors of Different Systems. Where grounded conductors of different
systems are installed in the same raceway, cable box, auxiliary gutter, or other type of
enclosure, each grounded conductor shall be identified by system. Identification that
distinguishes each system grounded conductor shall be permitted by one of the following
means:
(1) One system grounded conductor shall have an outer covering conforming to 200.6(A)
or 200.6(B).
(2) The grounded conductor(s) of other systems shall have a different outer covering
conforming to 200.6(A) or 200.6(B) or by an outer covering of white or gray with a
readily distinguishable colored strip other than green running along the insulation.
(3) Other and different means of identification as allowed by 200.6(A) or (B) that will
distinguish each system grounded conductor.
The means of identification shall be permanently posted where the conductors of
different systems originate.
210.5 Identification for Branch Circuits.
(C) Identification of Underground Conductors. Underground conductors shall be identified
in accordance with 210.5(C)(1), (2) and (3).
(3) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized for conductors originating
within each branch-circuit panelboard or similar branch-circuit distribution equipment
shall be permanently posted at each branch-circuit panelboard or similar branch-circuit
distribution equipment.
215.12 Identification for Feeders.
(C) Identification of Ungrounded Conductors.
(1) Feeders Supplied from More Than One Nominal Voltage System.
(b) Posting of Identification Means. The method utilized for conductors originating with
each feeder panel at each branch-circuit panel board or similar branch-circuit distribution
equipment.
334.10 Uses Permitted
(3) Other structures permitted to be of Types III, IV, and V construction except as
prohibited in 334.12.
334.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS cables shall not be permitted as follows:
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:24
(2) Exposed in dropped or suspended ceilings I other than one and two family and
multifamily dwelling is hereby deleted.
338.12 Uses Not Permitted.
(B) Underground Service-Entrance Cable.
(1) For interior wiring of branch circuits and feeders originating and terminating
within the same building.
(2) For aboveground installations except where USE cable emerges from the ground
and is terminated in an enclosure at a location acceptable to the Authority Having
Jurisdiction and the cable is protected in accordance with 300.5(D).
702.4 Capacity and Rating.
(B) System Capacity.
(2) Automatic Transfer Equipment. For other than single-family dwellings, where
automatic transfer equipment is used, an optional standby system shall comply
with (2)(a) or (2)(b).
Code 1982, § 10-66; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-66, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 01-10, 7-5-01; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05;
Ord. No. 11-09, 10-20-11; Ord. No. 15-02, 03-19-15)
Sec. 18-172. Aluminum wire.
No copper-clad aluminum wire smaller than size no. 6 A.W.G. may be used to conduct
electricity. Sizes larger than no. 6 A.W.G. may be used with mechanical lugs and connectors
approved for this purpose by the electrical inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-67; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-67, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-173. Service entrance equipment; switches, conduit.
(a) All new single-family residences shall have an entrance switch rated no smaller than 100-
ampere capacity.
(b) For more than one family or multiple residences, an entrance switch conforming with the
National Electrical Code requirements shall be considered the minimum.
(c) In cases of multiple apartments where the main switch is deemed inaccessible by the fire
or electrical inspector, an accessible location will be required.
(Code 1982, § 10-68; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-68, 5-7-92)
Sec. 18-174. Fustat plugs or circuit breakers required.
(a) It is required on all new and alteration work to use tamperproof fustat plugs or circuit
breakers. This will eliminate overfusing on branch circuits.
(b) The electrical inspector shall be authorized in cases of oversized fusing to require that
fustat or circuit breaker panels replace existing plug fuse panels.
(Code 1982, § 10-70; Ord. No. 92-9, § 10-69, 5-7-92)
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:25
Sec. 18-175. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 15-02, effective March 19, 2015, repealed § 18-175 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to installation of rigid conduit.
Sec. 18-176. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 05-03, effective March 10, 2005, repealed § 18-176 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to spring type backwired snap switches and receptacles as enacted by Code 1982, § 10-1; as amended.
Sec. 18-177. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 05-03, effective March 10, 2005, repealed § 18-177 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to Article 110-26(F)(1)(B) of the 1999 NEC--Foreign systems as enacted by Ord. No. 01-10, adopted July
5, 2001.
Secs. 18-178--18-185. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. POLES AND WIRES
Sec. 18-186. Supports required; owner's consent when buildings are used.
(a) All wires when placed above the surface of the ground shall be suspended from poles or
buildings, or other supports to be maintained by the persons using such wires.
(b) No wire shall be suspended from or attached to any building for the purpose of
conducting electricity, unless by permission of the owner of such building.
(Code 1982, § 10-93)
Sec. 18-187. Safe carrying of wires required.
Every person owning, leasing or operating wires as described in this division shall, within
48 hours after notice served by the inspector, make such substitution or repairs of posts, supports,
crossarms, or stays for the safe carrying of such wires as may be required by the inspector.
(Code 1982, § 10-94)
Sec. 18-188. Disposition of scraps, unused coils, loose ends regulated.
No person shall permit pieces of wires to be left on the surface of any street or sidewalk;
nor permit unused coils or loose ends of wires to remain attached to any crossarm or posts more
than 24 hours. (Code 1982, § 10-95; Ord. No. 05-03, 3-10-05)
Secs. 18-189--18-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT FOR MULTI-FAMILY BUILDINGS
Sec. 18-200. Purpose; intent.
The city has a large number of multi-family buildings, many of which are older and present
property owners and managers significant challenges regarding upkeep and maintenance while
placing a significant burden on the city’s code enforcement efforts. The number of real estate
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:26
proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations that own buildings in the city, sometimes
managed through property management companies, creates challenges to the proper
enforcement of the city’s fire, building, and property maintenance codes, all of which are
designed to ensure the public safety and welfare of residents.
The purpose of this article is to: require disclosure of the ownership of these buildings; identify
those responsible for maintaining them and responding to violations identified through city
inspections; ensure the city has access to contact information on the individual who is
responsible for responding to emergencies; provide basic information on these buildings to
allow the city to effectively develop and implement housing policies and programs; and provide
residents, including both owners and renters, accurate, complete, and transparent data about
the city’s Multi-Family housing stock. Information priorities include:
(a) Accurate, up-to-date, and complete ownership, management, and contact information for
every Multi-Family building;
(b) An accurate inventory of dwelling unit quantity and configuration; and
(c) An accurate assessment of certain items that impact the health and safety of dwelling units.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-201. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined in this article, which are defined in
articles adopted by reference, have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those articles.
Business Operator: A specific individual person, not a corporation or partnership, with a legal
ownership interest in a property who makes financial, maintenance, and policy decisions.
Emergency Contact: The individual who responds to emergency after hour calls from tenants
and public safety personnel.
Legal Owner: The individual or legal entity, such as an LLC or LP, holding the deed to the
property.
Multi-Family Building: A detached building in common ownership interest containing three (3)
or more dwelling units designed for residential use and occupancy by three (3) or more families
living independently of one another, including mixed use buildings, that is not a single-family
dwelling, excluding Boarding and Lodging Houses or such other buildings that are separately
licensed by the City or the State of Maine.
Property Management Company, Property Manager: An individual or business entity, which
may be the Building Owner, Business Operator, or a party that has no ownership stake in a
property, that serves as property manager on behalf of and at the direction of the Business
Operator or Legal Owner; an individual or business entity that maintains and repairs the physical
property and often manages tenant relationships and routine matters involving the property. The
Property Manager serves as the primary contact for the City, its inspectors, and tenants.
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:27
Rent: Payments made for the use of a premises, including, but not limited to, money, services,
trade, or a combination thereof; or the sharing of housing expenses with persons not part of the
homeowner's immediate family.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-202. Applicability; exceptions.
(a) The provisions of this article apply to all Multi-Family Buildings except as noted in (b).
(b) The provisions of this article do not apply to single family dwelling units; dwelling units in
cooperative, condominium, or townhouse buildings where no one entity owns more than
two dwelling units; lodging houses, hotels, motels, or bed and breakfasts; hospitals;
convalescent, rest, or nursing homes; residential care or congregate care facilities or other
institutional beds or rooms used for medical or mental health treatment services otherwise
licensed by the city or state; or mobile home parks.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-203. Registration required.
All Multi-Family buildings in which rental housing is located must be individually registered
with the city, at no cost, under the terms of this article. No person, including without limitation a
legal owner, owner's associate, real estate broker, associate real estate broker, real estate agent,
business operator, or property manager, shall allow any rental housing unit to be occupied, or let
or offer to another any Multi-Family rental housing unit for occupancy, or charge, accept or
retain rent for any dwelling unit, unless the Legal Owner, the Business Operator, or the Property
Manager has registered under the terms of this article. Any person carrying on such a business
activity without registering is in violation of this article.
A registration certificate will be issued to the Legal Owner of the building named on the
approved registration form or, at the request of the Legal Owner, to the Property Manager. One
certificate will be issued for each building. The certificate for each building shall include
emergency contact information for that building.
The registration certificate, or a facsimile thereof, shall be posted and shall remain posted in
close proximity to the main entrance of the structure in an area that is easily accessible to tenants
during the full period the registration is in effect.
Such registration is voided upon the sale or transfer of the building to a new owner.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-204. Renewal; term.
Before March 1 of each year, the Legal Owner, the Business Operator, or the Property Manager
shall submit a registration application for each Multi-Family building. Within 60 days of
purchasing or transferring the ownership of such building, or converting a building into a MultiBUILDINGS
AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:28
Family property including through the addition of more units, the Legal Owner, the Business
Operator, or the Property Manager shall register the building. Newly constructed Multi-Family
buildings must be registered within 30 days of the date the city issues a certificate of occupancy.
All registrations expire at the end of February.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-205. Registration process and requirements.
A registration application shall be made to the City Clerk’s Office on a form furnished by the
City Clerk and shall include the following information:
(a) Name, business or residence address, cell and primary telephone numbers, and email
address of the Legal Owner or owners of the building;
(b) Name, business or residence address, cell and primary telephone numbers, and email
address of the Business Operator of the building;
(c) Name, business or residence address, cell and primary telephone numbers, and email
address of the Property Manager of the building. This is the individual with whom the City
will schedule inspections and who takes responsibility for maintaining the building,
including responding to emergencies occurring during business hours. This individual may
be the Legal Owner or the Business Operator
(d) Emergency Contact. The name, business or residence address, cell and primary telephone
numbers, and e-mail address for the city’s primary contact for after hours emergencies at the
building.
(e) Street address, map and lot, and real estate tax identification number of the building.
(f) Number and type of dwelling units within the building. For each dwelling unit, the floor
number, unit number and/or letter and/or designation, bedroom count, and whether the unit
is or is not occupied must be provided.
(g) The year the building was constructed and documentation, if any, of the buildings lead free
or lead safe status.
(h) Whether the building has a monitored or supervised fire alarm or sprinkler system.
Any Changes to the information required in (a), (b), (c), and (d) that occur more than thirty days
in advance of the date of the next required registration must be reported to the city clerk within
fifteen days of its occurrence.
All owners must allow on-site inspections of their buildings by the city including, without
limitations, all rental units. Failure to allow such inspections will result in revocation of the
building’s registration.
All Multi-family buildings must be registered prior to March 1, 2020.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-206. Rejection of registration.
The city clerk may reject any registration application where the application is incomplete or has
been determined to include inaccurate information. Buildings with rejected registrations will be
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 18
CH 18:29
considered unregistered.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-207. Unregistered multi-family buildings.
Any person failing to register a multi-family building or failing to comply with any other
requirement of this article shall be in violation of this article and subject to a civil penalty
enforced by the code enforcement office and a fine as established by the city council.
Unregistered multi-family buildings are not eligible for any City administered state, federal, or
city-sponsored loans or grants or other city-sponsored or provided programs that are available
through separate applications and which are not universally provided to all multi-family
buildings.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-208. Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made
relative to application and interpretations of this article. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be submitted as otherwise set forth in City Code regarding administrative appeals, subject
to the payment of any fees as may be determined by the municipal officers from time to time.
(Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Sec. 18-209. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, or part of this article shall be adjudged by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
section, article, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered. (Ord. 19-10, 10-31-19)
Secs. 18-210 – 18-229. Reserved.
Chapters 19-21
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:1
Chapter 22
BUSINESSES*
Article I. In General
Sec. 22-1. Purpose and intent of chapter.
Sec. 22-2. Definitions.
Secs. 22-3--22-25. Reserved.
Article II. Licenses
Sec. 22-26. Complying with rules and regulations, paying fee, obtaining license
prerequisite to doing business.
Sec. 22-27. Violations; penalty.
Sec. 22-28. License for each location required.
Sec. 22-29. Procedure for application; payment of fees.
Sec. 22-30. Business beginning after application date.
Sec. 22-31. Authority to waive fees.
Sec. 22-32. Applicants required to furnish information.
Sec. 22-33. Investigation of applicants.
Sec. 22-34. Inspection of applicant's premises, merchandise.
Sec. 22-35. Compliance with rules and regulations required; approval, disapproval by
city officials, council.
Sec. 22-36. Licenses denied; appeal.
Sec. 22-37. Issuance of licenses.
Sec. 22-38. Display of licenses.
Sec. 22-39. Change of location of licensed business.
Sec. 22-40. Nontransferability.
Sec. 22-41. Duration of licenses; expiration date.
Sec. 22-42. Licensees responsible for compliance with rules, regulations; duty to
cooperate with city officials.
Sec. 22-43. City officials to notify police of violators; prosecutions.
Sec. 22-44. Suspensions and revocations; hearings.
Sec. 22-45. Exemptions to licensing provisions generally.
Sec. 22-46. Schedule of fees.
Sec. 22-47. Regulation of business days and hours of class E food service
establishments.
Sec. 22-48. Group care facilities.
Sec. 22-49. Adoption of State of Maine Rules.
Secs. 22-50--22-70. Reserved.
Article III. Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards
Sec. 22-71. Purpose.
Sec. 22-72. Applicability.
Sec. 22-73. Definitions.
Sec. 22-74. Permit required.
Sec. 22-75. Administration.
Sec. 22-76. Penalty for violation of article.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:2
Secs. 22-77--22-95. Reserved.
Article IV. Reserved
Secs. 22-96--22-120. Reserved.
Article V. Flea Markets
Sec. 22-121. Purpose.
Sec. 22-122. Defined.
Sec. 22-123. Permit required; application.
Sec. 22-124. Provisions of section 22-2 not applicable.
Secs. 22-125--22-145. Reserved.
Article VI. Food Service Establishments
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22-146. Definitions.
Sec. 22-147. License required.
Sec. 22-148. Suspension of license; appeal.
Sec. 22-149. Sanitary conditions required.
Sec. 22-150. Running water, toilet facilities required.
Sec. 22-151. Diseased and unhealthy employees.
Sec. 22-152. Certificate of health required.
Sec. 22-153. Physician's duty.
Sec. 22-154. Exceptions to article.
Secs. 22-155--22-165. Reserved.
Division 2. Special Food Handlers and Roving Diners
Sec. 22-166. Intent and purpose.
Sec. 22-167. Approval of health inspector, license required.
Sec. 22-168. Display of license or permit.
Sec. 22-169. Roving diners in streets and public places.
Secs. 22-170--22-190. Reserved.
Article VII. Junk Collectors, Pawnbrokers and Secondhand Dealers
Sec. 22-191. License.
Sec. 22-192. Account of business done and disclosure to consumer.
Sec. 22-193. List of transactions; seller to furnish proof of identification.
Sec. 22-194. Receiving articles from minors, thieves.
Sec. 22-195. Retention of articles purchased.
Sec. 22-196. Periodic inspections of junkyards.
Secs. 22-197--22-220. Reserved.
Article VIII. Mobile Home Parks
Sec. 22-221. License required to operate.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:3
Sec. 22-222. Inspections; access.
Sec. 22-223. Notices, hearings and orders.
Secs. 22-224--22-245. Reserved.
Article IX. Peddlers
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22-246. Use of streets.
Secs. 22-247--22-255. Reserved.
Division 2. License
Sec. 22-256. Application.
Sec. 22-257. Contents.
Sec. 22-258. Exhibition of license.
Sec. 22-259. Suspension and revocation.
Sec. 22-260. Special event license.
Secs. 22-261--22-280. Reserved.
Article X. Sale of Personal Property from Residential Premises
Sec. 22-281. Definitions.
Sec. 22-282. Permit required; conditions.
Sec. 22-283. Signs.
Sec. 22-284. Exemption.
Secs. 22-285--22-305. Reserved.
Article XI. Solicitations
Secs. 22-306--22-315. Reserved.
Sec. 22-316. Required.
Sec. 22-317. Application.
Sec. 22-318. Issuance and duration.
Secs. 22-319--22-340. Reserved.
Article XII. Tattooing
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22-341. Definitions.
Sec. 22-342. Prerequisites to tattooing.
Sec. 22-343. Tattooing procedure.
Sec. 22-344. Care of instruments.
Sec. 22-345. Inspection of tattooing establishment.
Sec. 22-346. Licensed practitioners.
Sec. 22-347. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 22-348--22-360. Reserved.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:4
Division 2. License
Sec. 22-361. Required.
Sec. 22-362. Application fee.
Sec. 22-363. License fee; expiration.
Sec. 22-364. Right to appeal from suspension or denial; procedure.
Secs. 22-365--22-382. Reserved.
Article XIII. Massage Establishments and Massage Therapists
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 22-381. Title.
Sec. 22-382. Purpose.
Sec. 22-383. Definitions.
Sec. 22-384. Exemptions.
Sec. 22-385. General provisions to apply.
Division 2. Licenses
Sec. 22-386. Required.
Sec. 22-387. Compliance of existing therapists and massage establishments.
Sec. 22-388. License fee; expiration.
Sec. 22-389. Application and information.
Sec. 22-390. Qualifications of applicant, officers.
Sec. 22-391. Investigation of applicant, officers.
Sec. 22-392. Basic proficiency.
Sec. 22-393. Obtaining license by fraud.
Sec. 22-394. Use of license.
Sec. 22-395. Standards for denial.
Sec. 22-396. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
Division 3. Operating Requirements
Sec. 22-397. Licenses displayed.
Sec. 22-398. Age restrictions.
Sec. 22-399. Massage tables.
Sec. 22-400. Maintenance and cleaning.
Sec. 22-401. Prohibited activities.
Sec. 22-402. Closing hours.
Sec. 22-403. List of employees.
Division 4. Penalties
Sec. 22-404. Penalties.
Secs. 22-405--22-409. Reserved.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:5
Article XIV. Outpatient Addiction Treatment Clinics
Sec. 22-410. Purpose.
Sec. 22-411. Applicability.
Sec. 22-412. Definitions.
Sec. 22-413. Application requirements.
Sec. 22-414. Administration.
Sec. 22-415. Location criteria.
Sec. 22-416. Screening requirements.
Sec. 22-417. Meetings with the chief of police.
Sec. 22-418. Nonconforming uses.
Sec. 22-419. Penalty for violation of article.
Article XV. Adult Use and Medical Marijuana
Sec. 22-420. Purpose.
Sec. 22-421. Applicability.
Sec. 22-422. Definitions.
Sec. 22-423. License required.
Sec. 22-424. Food establishment license.
Sec. 22-425. Reserved.
Sec. 22-426. Background checks.
Sec. 22-427. Reserved.
Sec. 22-428. Reserved.
Sec. 22-429. Application requirements.
Sec. 22-430. Performance standards for marijuana business.
Sec. 22-431. Reserved.
Sec. 22-432. Reserved.
Sec. 22-433. Inspection of marijuana businesses.
Sec. 22-434. Denial of application.
Sec. 22-435. Disqualifying conviction.
Sec. 22-436. Revocation of license.
Sec. 22-437. Reserved.
Sec. 22-438. License administration for a marijuana business.
Sec. 22-439. Reserved.
Sec. 22-440. Reserved.
Sec. 22-441. Reserved.
Sec. 22-442. Penalty for violation of article.
Sec. 22-443. Confidentiality.
Sec. 22-444--22-449. Reserved.
Article XVI. Reserved
Sec. 22-450--22-459. Reserved.
*Cross references: Advertising, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; vehicles for hire, ch. 82.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:6
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Purpose and intent of chapter.
In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, this chapter is
enacted by the city to control the licensing and regulate the conduct of certain businesses and
business practices.
(Code 1982, § 17-1)
Sec. 22-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Adult amusement device means any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin or the
payment of consideration, operates or may be operated to depict, display, or project, directly or
indirectly, pictures, photography or other visual images of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
(1) Specified anatomical areas are defined as:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region;
2. Buttock;
3. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(2) Specified sexual activities are defined as:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy;
c. Fondling of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
Antiques means those items defined as antiques by the United States Tariff Act of 1930,
as amended.
Billiard and pool halls means any place for the playing of any game of billiards, pool,
bagatelle or similar game.
Blasting means the ignition, detonation or setting off of any charge or explosive or any
solid, liquid or gaseous substance capable of any chemical reaction releasing energy or pressure
in great force.
Bowling alley means any building, structure, enclosure or other place for the playing of
bowls, candlepins, duckpins, tenpins or similar games, other than coin-operated amusement
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:7
devices.
Business means any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, establishment or other
kind of activity or matters, together with all devices, machines, equipment, vehicles and
appurtenances used in connection therewith, any of which are conducted for profit or benefit,
whether directly or indirectly, on any premises or location in this city or within its jurisdiction.
Carnival means any traveling amusement show, excluding circuses, with or without
midway, rides, concessions or other specific attractions. For licensing purposes, the term
"carnival" shall also include rodeos, thrill shows and freak shows.
Charitable purpose means any activity conducted without profit and for a public,
medical, scientific, educational, fraternal or religious purpose.
Circus means any show in which feats of horsemanship, tumbling, strength, etc., are
exhibited, excluding carnivals and harness or running horse races; any show with an enclosed
ring for the exhibition of animals.
Class A lounge means any business establishment which holds a class A lounge license
issued by the state bureau of alcoholic beverages for the sale of spirituous, vinous and malt
liquors.
Coin-operated amusement device means any machine or device which upon the insertion
of a coin may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score, and which is operated for amusement only and
does not dispense any form of payoff, prize or reward except free replays. For the purpose of
licensing, the owner of the establishment where the device is located shall be the party
responsible for obtaining the license.
Doing business means the selling of any goods or services, the soliciting of business or
offering of goods or services for sale or hire, the maintenance or providing of any equipment or
device, or the acquiring or using of any vehicle or other conveyance or any premises in the city
for business purposes.
Fill-in means any goods, wares and merchandise not mentioned in the original inventory
for a sale filed with the application for an auction license.
Flammable liquid means a class 1 flammable liquid as defined in the rules and
regulations issued by the state insurance commissioner.
Food service establishment means any person who prepares, sells, serves or packages
food for consumption on premises within the corporate limits of the city, including but not
limited to restaurants, luncheonettes, diners, snackbars, drive-ins and concession stands. The
term "food service establishment," for the purpose of licensing, shall include any caterer doing
business within the corporate limits of the city, any lessee or subtenant of any premises, business
or dominant lessor (such as recreation or amusement areas, drive-in theaters, sports arenas or
public exhibition halls) who prepares, serves, sells or packages food for consumption on the
premises of any such business or dominant lessor, and any person, club or other establishment
offering for sale malt, spirituous or vinous liquors for consumption on the premises.
FSE--Class A means a food service establishment which holds a license issued by the
state bureau of alcoholic beverages for the sale of spirituous, vinous and malt liquors, except a
class A lounge.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:8
FSE--Class B means a food service establishment which holds a license issued by the
state bureau of alcoholic beverages for the sale of malt and vinous liquors.
FSE--Class C means a food service establishment which holds a license issued by the
state bureau of alcoholic beverages for the sale of malt liquor.
FSE--Class D means a food service establishment serving no malt, spirituous or vinous
liquors.
FSE--Class E means a food service establishment which allows its patrons to bring their
own spirituous, vinous or malt liquors for consumption on the premises.
FSE--Class F means a food service establishment operating for a period not to exceed 30
days.
FSE--Class G means a food service establishment operating for a period not to exceed
three days.
Group care facility means a boarding care facility for more than eight individuals
wherein children under 18 years of age or adults over 16 years of age and not legally related to
the operator are provided personal care, supervision and social or rehabilitative services. Group
care facilities within the meaning of this definition must be licensed by the State of Maine and
may include, but are not limited to, group homes, half-way homes and congregate homes, but do
not include foster family homes.
Jukebox means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token,
plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally to play musical tapes or recordings or used
as a musical entertainment or amusement device, and which does not dispense any payoff, prize
or reward.
Junk means old iron, chains, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, old rope, old
bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber and glass, and
empty bottles of different kinds when less than one gross, and all articles discarded or no longer
used, or a manufactured article composed of any one or more of the materials mentioned.
Junk collector means anyone dealing or trading in junk; anyone who engages in the
collection, storage, transfer or sale of junk.
Licensee means any holder of a valid and current license or permit issued by the city.
Local means of or pertaining to this city.
Lodging place means a building or group of attached or detached buildings that is
permitted by the City under the Code of Ordinances, Appendix A-Zoning and Land Use Codes
as a bed and breakfast establishment; hotel, inn or motel, lodging house; or tourist home.
Malt liquors means all kinds and types of liquors intended for human consumption
produced by the fermentation of malt wholly or partially, or from any substitute therefor, which
contain more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.
Mobile home means a factory-fabricated structure meeting the standards of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development which is built on a permanent chassis, is
designed to be used as a dwelling unit and was constructed after June 15, 1976.
Mobile home park means a contiguous parcel of land with a minimum area of five acres
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:9
designed and/or used to accommodate a minimum of three manufactured housing units on
mobile home lots which are to be rented or leased, but not sold. The management and
maintenance of a mobile home park shall be deemed to be the responsibility of a single owner or
operator, with improved lots and/or services being available under a leasing arrangement.
Motion picture theater means any building or area, including drive-in parks, arenas,
exhibition halls or public buildings, where commercial films, movies or motion pictures,
including previews of motion pictures, closed circuit telecasts and videotape replays, are shown,
or where any cinematograph or similar apparatus is kept, used or exhibited for any commercial
use whatsoever.
Nursing home means a facility which is operated in connection with a hospital, or in
which nursing care and medical services are prescribed by or performed under the general
direction of persons licensed to practice medicine or surgery in the state, for the accommodation
of convalescent or other persons who are not acutely ill and not in need of hospital care, but who
do require skilled nursing care and related medical services.
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or
pledges of personal property or other valuable thing other than securities or printed evidence of
indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal property, or choses in action, or other
valuable thing, and selling or agreeing to sell the same back to the seller at a price other than the
original price of purchase, or in the business of purchasing personal property such as articles
containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or jewels for the purpose of reducing
or smelting them into a different form and reselling the product.
Peddler means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type
of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street carrying,
conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise and offering or exposing the same or
any service for sale; or who without traveling from place to place shall sell, expose or offer any
goods, wares, merchandise or service for sale from any portable, mobile or temporary structure,
or from a wagon, automotive vehicle or other vehicle or conveyance; or who without traveling
from place to place shall sell, expose or offer for sale the same in the entrances to buildings or
other premises or upon vacant lots or other tracts of land within the corporate limits of the city.
The term "peddler" shall not be construed to include the following: vendors of food sold by
wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, vendors of merchandise by sample,
list or catalogue for future delivery, vendors of farm, dairy, orchard, fish and forest products of
their own production, vendors of newspapers and religious literature, route salesmen while
engaged in making deliveries to their regular customers, commercial travelers or selling agents
who, in the usual and customary course of business, make sales to dealers, or persons duly
authorized to conduct tag days, sell poppies or otherwise solicit.
Plumbing means the art of installing in buildings the pipes, fixtures and other apparatus
for bringing in the water supply and removing liquid and water-carried wastes, and shall include
the necessary water piping and water connections to all types of heating apparatus using water.
Premises means all lands, buildings, structures, places and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property
which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with, any such business conducted
on such premises.
Racetrack means any fairgrounds, racetrack or field in the city which has on it any
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:10
structure or grandstand with a capacity of over 100 persons and which is used by spectators at
races.
Roving diner means any portable, and any vehicle, food truck, trailer, cart, wagon,
conveyance or carrier of any kind, capable of being moved from its serving site at any time from
which food is sold or caused to be sold, at retail, from house to house, store to store, building to
building, or along or upon any sidewalk, street, park or other public property in the city; lunch
wagons. The term "roving diner" shall not be construed to include caterers, vendors of dairy
products, ice, bakery products, or similarly employed route salesmen while engaged in making
deliveries to their regular customers or persons making deliveries on order from customers of
retail stores in the city.
Secondhand dealer means any person who engages in the purchase, collection, transfer or
storage for later resale, or who engages in the trading or selling, unless such sale is by auction of
less than four days' duration, of any article, vehicle or material, or portion thereof, of which prior
use has been made in any manner whatsoever. The term "secondhand dealer" shall not be
construed to include pawnbrokers, junk collectors, used car dealers; nor shall it include any
person primarily engaged in the retail sale of new and unused goods, who deals with used goods
only incidentally, such as accepting such goods in trade as part of a transaction involving the sale
of new goods, but only to the extent that such used goods are of the same type as the new goods
sold by such person.
Shelter means a charitable facility operated by either a not-for-profit corporation or a
religious organization providing free temporary overnight housing in a dormitory-style, barrackstyle,
or per-bed arrangement to homeless individuals.
Solicitor means any person using or upon any sidewalk, street park or other public place,
or at any doorway or entranceway immediately abutting thereon, within the corporate limits of
the city for the purpose of begging, collecting or soliciting alms for the poor or funds for any
charitable, philanthropic, civic, musical, athletic, patriotic or related purposes.
Sound amplification means any private conveyance or carrier of any kind having, either
mounted or unmounted, any electronic, mechanical or other appliance, apparatus, equipment or
device used to broadcast or otherwise amplify any announcement, voice, advertisement,
recording, tape or other sound for any purpose other than use during a public emergency, and
traveling upon or using any street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the corporate
limits of the city. The term "sound amplification" shall not be construed to include any private or
public emergency vehicles used to perform a public service.
Special food handler means any person engaged in processing, storing, serving or selling
food for consumption off premises.
Spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage produced by distillation or if produced by
any other process, strengthened or fortified by the addition of distilled spirits of any kind,
intended for human consumption, which contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol
by volume.
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used for the conveyance of passengers for hire from place
to place on the streets of the city, and shall include, in addition to such motor vehicles as are
commonly known as taxicabs, all motor vehicles of every kind, character and description which
are used as taxicabs, cabs, for-hire cars, or livery cars and engaged as such in the conveyance of
passengers for hire. The term "taxicab" shall not be construed to include motor vehicles owned
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:11
by undertakers and used for funeral services, motor vehicles for hire while being used for
services at funerals or weddings or motorbuses.
Vinous liquor means wine.
Wrestling exhibition means any prize fight or wrestling match or event, other than
boxing, exhibited publicly or open to the public, with or without an admission charge.
(Code 1982, § 17-2; Ord. No. 01-4, 4-7-01; Ord. No. 01-21, 1-10-02; Ord. No. 01-22, 1-10-02; Ord. No.
03-13, 9-4-03; Ord. No. 03-14, 9-4-03; Ord. No. 04-20, 9-9-04; Ord. No. 10-01, 3-4-10; Ord. No. 10-16,
2-3-11; No. 17-08, 08-17-17; No. 17-20b, 12-21-17)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 22-3--22-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LICENSES
Sec. 22-26. Complying with rules and regulations, paying fee, obtaining license
prerequisite to doing business.
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall engage in any business or activity, nor
maintain any equipment or device, for which a license or permit is required, without having first
complied with all applicable rules and regulations and having paid the proper fee and obtained a
license therefor.
(Code 1982, § 17-3)
Sec. 22-27. Violations; penalty.
Each day that any person engages in any business or activity after the license fee therefor
becomes due and payable, without paying such fee and securing a license as required in this
chapter, shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that a person continues to operate a
business in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Violators may have their licenses immediately suspended or revoked.
(Code 1982, § 17-25)
Sec. 22-28. License for each location required.
A license is required for each place or premises where a business regulated by this chapter, or
any part thereof, including storage, is conducted. No licensee shall engage in such business in
any manner at any place without first obtaining such license. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the following licenses, except that a separate license shall be required for each cart,
vehicle, conveyance or other carrier employed by such licensees: peddler, solicitor, sound
amplification and taxicab. (Code 1982, § 17-4; Ord. No. 01-22, 1-10-02)
Sec. 22-29. Procedure for application; payment of fees.
Except when otherwise provided by the ordinances of the city, every application for a license
shall be made in writing to the city clerk upon a form to be provided by the clerk. Such
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:12
application shall be signed by the applicant. The proper fee shall be paid to the clerk at the time
of filing the application. (Code 1982, § 17-5)
Sec. 22-30. Business beginning after application date.
The license fee for any business shall be due and payable before such business is begun,
provided, that when the licensee begins such business after the expiration of six months of the
current license year, then such licensee shall be required to pay one-half the applicable yearly
license fee prescribed, except as provisions otherwise require payment of the full license fee.
(Code 1982, § 17-6)
Sec. 22-31. Authority to waive fees.
The city clerk may waive fees which are prescribed by ordinance.
(Code 1982, § 17-7)
Sec. 22-32. Applicants required to furnish information.
Every applicant for a license shall furnish to the city clerk the following information:
(1) Complete and exact name under which the business is proposed to be operated;
(2) If the business is proposed to be operated by an individual under any assumed
name, the name of such individual and his address;
(3) If the business is a partnership, the name and address of each partner;
(4) If the business is a corporation, the name and address of the officers of the
corporation, and the location of the principal office;
(5) Nature of the business for which a license is desired;
(6) Proposed location;
(7) In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk such other
information as may be required by him in order to enable him to determine the
proper classification of the applicant and the appropriate license fee.
(Code 1982, § 17-8)
Sec. 22-33. Investigation of applicants.
Wherever his approval is required or upon the request of the city clerk, the police chief may
cause an investigation of any applicant for a license to be conducted prior to approval of such
application for a license or permit. (Code 1982, § 17-9)
Sec. 22-34. Inspection of applicant's premises, merchandise.
Whenever required by the statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city or the regulations of any
city department, or upon the request of the city clerk, an inspection may be made of the
applicant's premises and/or merchandise by the city assessors, police chief, fire chief, health
officer, building inspector or other duly authorized city official prior to approval of any
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:13
application for a license or permit. In addition, the premises and/or merchandise of every
licensee shall be subject to such inspection at any time during the current license year; and the
results of such inspections may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license issued
by the city. (Code 1982, § 17-10)
Sec. 22-35. Compliance with rules and regulations required; approval, disapproval by city
officials, council.
(a) All licensees and applicants for licenses are required to comply with the state statutes,
city ordinances and rules and regulations of city departments which pertain to the
business or activity for which a license is desired. In any case where the city requires the
approval of the building inspector, health officer, police chief, fire chief or any other city
official prior to issuance of the license, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify in
writing the officials whose approvals are required. The officials so notified, or their duly
delegated representatives, shall approve or disapprove the application without delay and
shall note their approval or disapproval thereon, stating the reasons for any disapproval.
When required by the city council, a hearing will be held at which time the council shall
decide whether to approve or disapprove any application for a license or permit. It shall
be the duty of the city clerk to notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing.
Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his last
known address at least 48 hours prior to the date set for such hearing. The decision and
order of the council on such hearing shall be final and conclusive.
(b) Except as set forth in subsection (c) below, a license under this chapter shall be denied if
the council makes a finding that:
(1) The applicant is a corporation which is not licensed to do business in the state;
(2) The applicant is a corporation, of which, at any time during the previous five
years, a principal officer, or a person having an actual or beneficial ownership
interest or management authority therein has been convicted of (a) any Class A,
Class B, or Class C crime, or (b) a crime committed under the laws of the United
States of America or of any other state or territory thereof, which is punishable
(whether or not such punishment was actually imposed) by a sentence at least as
harsh as that which is authorized for the commission of a Class C crime under
Maine law; provided that such conviction was for an offense which is rationally
related to the regulation of the business sought to be licensed;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of (a) any Class A, Class B or Class C crime, or
(b) a crime committed under the laws of the United States of America or of any
other state or territory thereof, which is punishable (whether or not such
punishment was actually imposed) by a sentence at least as harsh as that which is
authorized for the commission of a Class C crime under Maine law; provided that
such conviction was for an offense which is rationally related to the regulation of
the business sought to be licensed;
(4) The applicant has had his or her business license revoked within the five years
preceding the date of the application;
(5) The applicant is a corporation, person or other business entity which does or will
employ a person (a) who will be substantially in the ownership or management of
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:14
the business and the employee's business license has been revoked within the five
years preceding the application; or (b) who was a principal of any corporation
whose business license has been revoked within the five years preceding the
application;
(6) The applicant is a corporation, person or other business entity of which any
person is a principal who will be substantially involved in the ownership or
management of the business and the principal's business license has been revoked
within the five years preceding the application;
(7) The proposed licensed premises or its use fails to comply with zoning or other
land use ordinances;
(8) The proposed licensed premises or its use fails to comply with any municipal
ordinance or regulation;
(9) There exist on or about the premises proposed to be licensed conditions such as
waste disposal violations, health or safety violations or other such conditions that
unreasonably disturb, interfere with, or affect the ability of persons or businesses
residing or located in the vicinity of the licensed premises to use or enjoy their
property in a reasonable manner;
(10) The applicant has knowingly furnished false or misleading information on his/her
application.
(c) In the event that the council, in an exercise of its sound discretion, determines that (a)
there exist extenuating circumstances with respect to the grounds for denial of a license
under subsection (b) above; or (b) that the circumstances giving rise to the denial under
subsection (b) above can be ameliorated by the imposition of conditions or limitations to
the grant of a license, the council may, notwithstanding the grounds set forth in
subsection (b) above, grant a license to the applicant upon such conditions as the council
in an exercise of its sound discretion deems to be just and appropriate.
(Code 1982, § 17-11; Ord. No. 96-5, 5-16-96)
Sec. 22-36. Licenses denied; appeal.
(a) No license or permit shall be issued by the city clerk following a hearing at which the city
council has disapproved any application for such license. The city clerk shall deny a
license or permit to any person whose application was disapproved by any city official
whose approval was required. No license or permit shall be issued to any person who is
indebted to the city upon any claim, tax or account which is more than 60 days
delinquent. The city treasurer shall be responsible for making available to the city clerk
and any other license-issuing officers such information as is essential for compliance with
this section. In case an application is disapproved, the city clerk shall then notify the
applicant in writing of such denial and shall refund the fee paid in. The city clerk shall
also notify the city council of such action at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
city council.
(b) Except as otherwise provided, appeals shall be made to the council in writing, whereupon
a hearing will be scheduled, at which time the applicant shall have the right to be heard. It
shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify such applicants who have appealed, of the time
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:15
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to
the applicant at the address furnished on the application form at least 48 hours prior to the
date set for hearing. The city council may, at that time, approve any application
previously denied by the affirmative vote of five or more members of the council.
(Code 1982, § 17-12)
Sec. 22-37. Issuance of licenses.
Except where the ordinances of the city require a license to be signed by some other
official or where otherwise provided for by the city council, the city clerk shall issue all licenses
for which an application has been submitted and approved.
(Code 1982, § 17-13)
Sec. 22-38. Display of licenses.
Every license shall be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee
named in the license, or, in the case of equipment licenses, the license shall be affixed to such
machines or equipment as required to allow such license to be inspected at any time by any
proper city official.
(Code 1982, § 17-14)
Sec. 22-39. Change of location of licensed business.
No license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the conduct of any
business at a fixed place designated in the license issued therefor shall be valid for the conduct of
such business at any place other than that designated in such license.
(Code 1982, § 17-15)
Sec. 22-40. Nontransferability.
Every license issued by the city shall be a personal privilege and shall not be assignable
or transferable.
(Code 1982, § 17-16)
Sec. 22-41. Duration of licenses; expiration date.
All licenses, except when otherwise provided, shall be for 12 months' duration and shall
expire according to the following schedule:
Adult amusement device........................................ June
Billiard and pool rooms..................................November
Bowling alley......................................................... April
Class A lounge...............One year from date of issuance
Coin-operated amusement devices.......................... June
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:16
Flammable liquid..................................................... June
Food service establishment.................................... April
Group care facility............................................ February
Junk collectors............................................... November
Lodging place operator.....................................February
Motion picture theater............................................ April
Pawnbroker.................................................... September
Peddler.................................................................... April
Roller skating rink.................................................. April
Roving diner........................................................... April
Secondhand dealer......................................... September
Special food handlers............................................. April
Taxicabs........................................................... February
(Code 1982, § 17-17; Ord. No. 98-11, 11-19-98; Ord. No. 01-21, 1-10-02; Ord. No. 03-13, 9-4-03; Ord.
No. 17-20b, 12-21-17)
Sec. 22-42. Licensees responsible for compliance with rules, regulations; duty to cooperate
with city officials.
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee of establishments regulated by this chapter to
make certain that all rules and regulations prescribed by this chapter and the statutes of the state
are complied with, and each licensee shall cooperate fully with city officials to enforce such
regulations.
(Code 1982, § 17-18)
Sec. 22-43. City officials to notify police of violators; prosecutions.
(a) Any city official having knowledge of any person operating any business or activity
regulated by this chapter without the required license, or violating any state or local
regulations, shall furnish the chief of police the name of such person.
(b) It shall be the duty of the chief of police to commence proceedings against the offenders
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 17-19)
Sec. 22-44. Suspensions and revocations; hearings.
(a) Where provided, duly authorized city officials shall have the power to temporarily
suspend licenses when continued operation of the licensed business or activity presents a
danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. Any license issued by the
city may be suspended or revoked by the city council and any license fees retained by the
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:17
city, upon a finding by the council that the licensee has violated the ordinances of the city
or the laws of the state, or has willfully or persistently failed to comply with any
applicable rules and regulations. Any action to suspend or revoke a license may be
commenced upon the initiative of the council, upon the recommendation of any city
official charged with approving, inspecting or otherwise regulating the licensee's business
or activity, or upon complaint from any resident of the city.
(b) Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the city council shall hold a hearing at the
regular meeting of the council or a special meeting thereof called for that purpose. At
such a meeting, the licensee shall have the right to be heard. Notice of the hearing for
suspension or revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically
the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed by the city clerk, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least
48 hours prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the city council at
such hearings shall be final and conclusive.
(Code 1982, § 17-20)
Sec. 22-45. Exemptions to licensing provisions generally.
(a) Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction and
persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as
sheriffs and marshals, shall not be required to secure a local license.
(b) Orphanages and public and private hospitals, as defined in the ordinances of the city and
the laws of the state, shall not be required to secure a local license to operate a children's
home or day care facility.
(c) Needy and disabled honorably discharged veterans shall be exempt from the payment of
the fee for a peddler's license upon presenting proof of at least 50 percent disability.
(d) Persons selling, exclusively, farm, dairy, orchard or fish products of their own production
shall not be required to obtain a local license.
(e) No charge shall be made for the issuance of a solicitor's license, blasting permit or
chimney cleaner permit.
(f) Persons licensed in accordance with state statutes to maintain an automobile graveyard or
junkyard shall not be required to obtain a local license to also operate as a junk collector.
(g) Food service establishments and special food handlers operating more than one such
business under the same roof and under the same management need obtain only one
license, provided that where such person is engaged as both a food service establishment
and a special food handler, a special food handler's license shall be insufficient to include
the food service establishment's operation and the license required shall be that required
for a food service establishment.
(h) Persons traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street selling magazines or
other merchandise by sample, list or catalogue for future delivery shall not be required to
obtain a local peddler's license, but such persons shall be required to register with the
police department.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:18
(i) Persons who use their own homes to provide foster care to children shall not be required
to obtain a local license.
(j) Public or private school cafeterias and nursing homes shall not be required to obtain a
local food service establishment license.
(Code 1982, § 17-21; Ord. No. 98-11, 11-19-98)
Sec. 22-46. Schedule of fees.
The fees for business licenses shall be paid by the owner or his agent in accordance with
the business fee schedule established by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 17-22; Ord. No. 98-11, 11-19-98; Ord. No. 01-4, 4-7-01; Ord. No. 01-21, 1-10-02; Ord.
No. 01-22, 1-10-02; Ord. No. 02-14, 8-29-02)
Sec. 22-47. Regulation of business days and hours of class E food service establishments.
(a) No liquor shall be consumed in a class E food service establishment except as provided in
this section.
(1) Liquor may be consumed in any class E food service establishment between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:15 a.m. except as provided in this section.
(2) No liquor shall be consumed in any class E food service establishment between
the hours of 1:15 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. and between 1:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon on
Sundays.
(3) Licensees of class E food service establishments may permit the consumption of
liquor on their premises on January 1 of any year until 2:15 a.m.
(4) Liquor may be consumed in class E food service establishments on the day of
holding a general election or statewide primary after the city polls have closed.
(5) No liquor shall be consumed in a class E food service establishment on Memorial
Day prior to 12:00 noon.
(b) As used in this section, the word "liquor" means and includes any alcoholic, spirituous,
vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed
liquors, intended for human consumption, which contains more than one-half of one
percent alcohol by volume.
(c) Any licensee of a class E food service establishment, by himself, clerk, servant or agent,
who permits the consumption of liquor on his premises in violation of this section shall
be guilty of an offense.
(Code 1982, § 17-23)
Sec. 22-48. Group care facilities.
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee of a group care facility to ensure that such
facility is in compliance with the following regulations:
(1) The building must be kept in good repair and free of safety hazards.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:19
(2) The grounds and accessory building or structure must be kept in a safe, sanitary
and presentable condition. Grounds shall be kept free from refuse and litter, as
well as insect and rodent breeding areas.
(3) Each licensed group care facility shall maintain staff sufficient to keep the
building, accessory buildings or structures and grounds in compliance with this
section.
(4) Each facility shall have sufficient trained staff present at all times to properly
supervise its operation.
(5) The licensee is responsible for the prevention of activities constituting a nuisance
or annoyance injurious to the health, safety or comfort of the citizens of the city.
(Code 1982, § 17-24)
Sec. 22-49. Adoption of State of Maine Rules.
For the purpose of protecting the public health the City hereby adopts and enacts the following
State of Maine Rules:
(1) State of Maine Food Code 2001 as adopted by the Maine Department of Human
Services 10-144 CMR 200 and the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Resources 01-001 CMR 331 May 1, 2001.
(2) Rules Relating to Lodging Establishments, Department of Health and Human
Services, Maine Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of
Environmental Health 10-144 CMR 206 January 1, 2003.
(3) Rules Relating to the Administration and Enforcement of Establishments
Licensed by the Health Inspection Program, Department of Health and Human
Services, Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of
Environmental Health Inspection Program 10-144 CMR Chapter 201 October 7,
2012.
(Ord. No. 12-12, 11-16-12; Ord. No. 13-1, 2-21-13)
Secs. 22-50--22-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS
Sec. 22-71. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide adequate controls to ensure that the
establishment, operation and maintenance of automobile graveyards and junkyards do not have a
deleterious impact on the natural environment or the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Code 1982, § 17-160)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:20
Sec. 22-72. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any automobile graveyard or junkyard all or part of which is
within the city, except those owned or operated by the city.
(Code 1982, § 17-161)
Sec. 22-73. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Aquifer means a geological formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that stores
and transmits significant quantities of recoverable water, as mapped by the state geological
survey.
Automobile graveyard means a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage, other
than temporary storage, by an establishment or place of business which is engaged primarily in
doing auto body repair work for the purpose of making repairs to render a motor vehicle
serviceable, for three or more unserviceable, unregistered and/or uninspected, discarded, wornout
or junked motor vehicles as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. section 101, subsection 42, or parts
thereof, referred to in this article as "vehicle" and includes an area used for automobile
dismantling, salvage and recycling operations.
Classified waterway means surface water, inland or tidal, and direct or indirect tributaries
thereof, which is described and designated by distinct category by the state department of
environmental protection pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 363-A or 38 M.R.S.A. § 364.
Floodplain means the low land and relatively flat areas adjoining inland and coastal
waters, including floodprone areas of offshore islands, which are inundated by a flood that has a
one percent or greater chance of recurring in any year or a flood of magnitude equaled or
exceeded once in 100 years on the average as identified by the Federal Insurance Administration.
Junkyard means a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for:
(1) Discarded, wornout or junked plumbing, heating supplies, household, appliances
and furniture;
(2) Discarded, scrapped and junked lumber;
(3) Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste
and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material; and
(4) Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills;
all of which are referred to in this article as "junk."
(Code 1982, § 17-162; Ord. No. 04-24, 2-3-05) Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-74. Permit required.
(a) No person shall establish, operate or maintain, and the owner of property shall not permit
the establishment, operation or maintenance of, any junkyard or automobile graveyard all
or any part of which is within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:21
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3752 et seq.
(b) All permits issued under this article shall be approved by the city council and issued by
the city clerk.
(c) All permits issued under this article shall be for a term not to exceed one calendar year,
which expires on the first day of the year next following unless earlier suspended or
revoked.
(d) In addition to the application fee provided for in this article, the fee required for the
issuance of any permit under this article shall be paid in advance in the amount provided
for in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3756.
(Code 1982, § 17-163)
Sec. 22-75. Administration.
(a) Conditions of approval. The city council may impose conditions on the approval of any
permit application under this article to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the receipt of any
approvals required by any federal or state agency or department pursuant to
federal or state law prior to the issuance of any permit under this article.
(2) The applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the receipt of any
approvals required by any city board pursuant to this Code prior to the issuance of
any permit under this article.
(3) Any screening requirements imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter be
installed and completed prior to the issuance of any permit under this article.
(b) Contents of application. All applications for permits under this article shall be filed with,
and in a form satisfactory to, the city clerk. Such application shall include, but is not
limited to, the following:
(1) Name, address and contact information including a phone number of the applicant
and all other persons having a legal interest in the property.
(2) The location of the premises for which a permit is sought by identification of city
tax map number and street address.
(3) The dimensions and acreage of the property.
(4) An original and three copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of 100 feet or less to
the inch, which contains the following information:
a. The boundary lines of the property for which a permit is sought.
b. The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures.
c. The location of all existing and proposed areas within which all vehicles
and junk will be located.
d. The location of any aquifer or classified waterway on the property or
within 300 feet thereof.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:22
e. The location of any water bodies on the property or within 300 feet
thereof.
f. The location of any floodplain areas located on the property.
g. The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed vegetation
which is proposed to be maintained for required screening.
h. The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed fencing
proposed to be maintained for required screening.
i. The location of any residences, private wells or schools within 300 feet of
the property.
j. The characteristics of the soils existing on the property as determined by
the soil conservation service soils survey map.
k. The contours of the property as determined by the U.S. Geological Survey
Contour Map.
l. The location and characteristics of all vehicular entrances and exits
serving the property.
(5) A statement as to whether approval by any state agency or department is required
pursuant to state law and, if so, a copy of the required license and/or approval.
(6) A nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's policy manual as
approved by the city council.
(c) Compliance standards. The following standards shall govern the issuance of permits
under this article and the operation and maintenance of all permitted premises:
(1) An effective visual screen at least six feet in height shall be located and
maintained around all sides of the area where vehicles or junk are to be located
such that these areas are entirely screened from ordinary view from all directly
abutting properties and public ways at all times.
(2) All screening and location requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3754-A and § 3755-
A shall be satisfied. There shall be no vehicles or junk stored outside the screened
area.
(3) No vehicle or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any water body, aquifer or
classified waterway.
(4) No vehicles or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any residence, private well
or school.
(5) No vehicles or junk shall be stored within a floodplain.
(6) Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the fuel tank and battery shall be removed and
the fuel, engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant shall
be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be recycled or disposed of
according to all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations regarding
disposal of waste oil and hazardous materials. No discharge of any fluids from
any motor vehicle or junk shall be permitted into or onto the ground.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:23
(7) No vehicles or junk shall be located closer than 100 feet from all lot lines of the
property.
(8) All dismantling of motor vehicles with power tools shall take place within a
building.
(9) All federal and state hazardous waste laws and regulations shall be satisfied.
(10) All vehicular entrances and exits shall be located and constructed in a manner
which does not create or aggravate a traffic safety hazard.
(11) No noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor shall be emitted which is detectable to
the normal senses from any abutting property.
Upon recommendation of the director of planning and code enforcement, the city
council may waive compliance with any of the above standards when both the
director of planning and code enforcement and the city council determine that
strict compliance therewith is not necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
article.
(d) Nonconforming uses. Any automobile graveyard or junkyard in existence and for which a
valid permit was in effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article
derives may remain in operation in its present location, pending the expiration of such
permit, so long as such use complies with the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 3751 et seq.
Thereafter, such automobile graveyard or junkyard shall be required to comply with all
the provisions of this article except those compliance standards contained in subsections
(c)(3), (4), (5), (7), (8) and (10) of this section. Any expansion of such junkyard or
automobile graveyard beyond the size which existed and for which a valid permit was in
effect on the effective date of this article shall comply with all provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 17-164; Ord. No. 04-24, 2-3-05; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
Sec. 22-76. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms of any permit issued
under this article may be penalized in the following manner:
(1) Temporary suspension. The city clerk is authorized, pursuant to section 22-44, to
immediately and temporarily suspend any permit when continued operation of the
permitted premises or activity presents a danger to the health, safety or the general
welfare of the public.
(2) Suspension or revocation. The city council may suspend or revoke a permit in
accordance with the provisions of section 22-44 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3758-A
and/or 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(3) Civil penalties. The violator may be required to pay the penalties imposed by
section 1-8 or 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3758 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4506, whichever are
greater, as well as reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs pursuant
to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4506 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(Code 1982, § 17-165; Ord. No. 04-24, 2-3-05)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:24
Secs. 22-77--22-95. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RESERVED*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 03-13, effective Sept. 4, 2003, repealed art. IV, § 22-96, in its entirety. Formerly, said
article pertained to children's homes and child care facilities record book as enacted by Code 1982, § 17-6.
Secs. 22-96--22-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. FLEA MARKETS
Sec. 22-121. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the issuance of permits for conducting so-called
flea markets.
(Code 1982, § 17-41)
Sec. 22-122. Defined.
The term "flea market" means the selling or offering for sale, to the public, of any
services, goods, wares and merchandise or personal property by three or more individuals,
groups or organizations from or at one location.
(Code 1982, § 17-42)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-123. Permit required; application.
No flea market shall be conducted without a permit, which shall be obtained as follows:
(1) A permit shall be obtained by the owner or duly authorized agent of the premises
where the flea market is to be located by submitting a completed application to
the city clerk's office upon forms provided for such purpose.
(2) The fee for a flea market permit shall be paid in accordance with the business fee
schedule as established by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 17-43; Ord. No. 92-7, 3-19-92; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
Sec. 22-124. Provisions of section 22-2 not applicable.
Notwithstanding the provisions relating to peddlers under section 22-2, individual
participants in a flea market need not secure a peddler's license.
(Code 1982, § 17-44)
Secs. 22-125--22-145. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS*
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:25
*State law references: Food and food handlers generally, 7 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq., 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2491--2501,
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3931, 32 M.R.S.A. §§ 1751--1854.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 22-146. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Food means and includes all liquid or solid substances intended for human consumption.
(Code 1982, § 12-1)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-147. License required.
No person shall engage in, operate or conduct the business of the manufacture,
preparation, sale or service of food in the city unless such person has first acquired a license in
accordance with articles I and II of this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 12-2)
Sec. 22-148. Suspension of license; appeal.
(a) A license granted pursuant to this article may be temporarily suspended at any time by
the health officer of the city upon satisfactory evidence that food is being manufactured,
prepared, sold or served in an unsanitary manner or in a manner not conducive to public
health. The licensee shall have the right to appeal such suspension to the council, such
appeal to be heard at the next regular meeting of the council.
(b) The health officer shall have discretion to remove the suspension and reinstate the license
under this article prior to the hearing of the appeal upon finding that the unsanitary
conditions have been remedied.
(Code 1982, § 12-3)
Sec. 22-149. Sanitary conditions required.
Every person owning, managing or operating an establishment or business where food is
manufactured, prepared, sold or served to the public in the city shall at all times keep the
premises and all fixtures, appliances and utensils in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Code 1982, § 12-4)
Sec. 22-150. Running water, toilet facilities required.
Every establishment or business where food is manufactured, prepared, sold or served to
the public in the city shall be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold running water
under pressure from the public mains where such is available, and shall be equipped with proper
lavatory and toilet facilities convenient, accessible and sufficient to ensure the comfort and
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:26
cleanliness of its employees; and where both male and female help are employed, the health
officer may require separate toilets, lavatories and dressing rooms to be installed for the use of
either sex.
(Code 1982, § 12-5)
Sec. 22-151. Diseased and unhealthy employees.
No person afflicted with any eruptions, ulcerations or running sores, and no person
afflicted with any communicable disease, shall be employed in any establishment where food is
manufactured, prepared, sold or served to the public.
(Code 1982, § 12-6)
Sec. 22-152. Certificate of health required.
Every person employed in any establishment where food is manufactured, prepared, sold
and served to the public shall, when required by the health officer, file with such health officer,
as evidence of good health, a certificate of examination by a reputable and competent physician,
attesting to the fact that such person is not afflicted with active tuberculosis, any venereal disease
or other communicable disease.
(Code 1982, § 12-7)
Sec. 22-153. Physician's duty.
It shall be the duty of every physician attending a case of venereal disease, tuberculosis or
any other communicable disease, in any person employed in or about any establishment where
food is manufactured, prepared, sold or served to the public, to notify at once, in writing and
over his signature, the health officer. Such notification in the case of a venereal disease shall not
be made part of any record accessible to the general public, but may be used as evidence in any
prosecutions initiated by the health officer for failure to comply with the provisions of this
article.
(Code 1982, § 12-8)
Sec. 22-154. Exceptions to article.
(a) The requirements of section 22-150 may be waived if the health officer determines that
such a waiver will not create a hazard to public health.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person who makes delivery of
foodstuffs to customers on order from an established and regular place of business
located in the city or to route salesmen while making deliveries of foodstuffs to their
regular customers.
(Code 1982, § 12-23)
Secs. 22-155--22-165. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SPECIAL FOOD HANDLERS AND ROVING DINERS
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:27
Sec. 22-166. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this division to establish minimum regulations for special
food handlers and roving diners, where food is sold within the corporate limits of the city.
(Code 1982, § 12-19)
Sec. 22-167. Approval of health inspector, license required.
No person shall operate a roving diner nor maintain, or otherwise engage in, any business
as a special food handler or food service establishment without having first secured the approval
of the health inspector and obtained a license in accordance with the provisions of this article and
those of articles I and II of this chapter.
(Code 1982, § 12-20; No. 17-08, 08-17-17)
Sec. 22-168. Display of license or permit.
Any person authorized to do business in accordance with this division as a roving diner
shall have displayed in a conspicuous place on the right-hand side of each vehicle, cart,
conveyance or carrier used in such business a plate showing that a license or permit has been
obtained. Food trucks and trailers shall submit an application on a form provided by the City
Clerk’s Office with colored pictures of at least two different angles of the unit and a description
that includes the length and width, when in its widest configuration.
(Code 1982, § 12-21; No. 17-08, 08-17-17)
Sec. 22-169. Roving diners in streets and public places.
(a) Pushcarts licensed as roving diners may be operated in the streets, ways and public places
in accordance with the provisions of this section. For the purpose of this section, the term
"public places" shall include public parks and grounds.
(b) No pushcart shall be operated or stationed:
(1) In the roadway as defined in chapter 66 of this Code, except when specifically
authorized to do so by the chief of police on a street which has been blocked to
vehicular traffic for purposes of a public event.
(2) Within 100 feet, measured by the most direct line, of occupied space of a food
service establishment having a fixed location.
(3) On the premises of a public school.
(4) In any City park unless part of a permitted event.
(5) In such a manner as to unreasonably obstruct the normal flow of pedestrian traffic
or to expose any pedestrian to a risk of injury.
(6) On any city sidewalk where the remaining pedestrian travel path is less than six
feet.
(7) In such a way that any part of the equipment overhangs over private property,
unless the owner of the pushcart has authorization from the property owner in
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:28
writing.
(c) No pushcart shall be operated or stationed in, on or within 100 feet of any area subject to
an exclusive franchise granted by the city. The city clerk shall maintain a list of such
areas and shall advise operators of pushcarts of the location thereof.
(d) Operators of pushcarts shall provide waste paper receptacles for use by their customers
and shall maintain the areas in which they operate free of litter generated by their
business.
(e) A license to operate a pushcart in the streets, ways and public places pursuant to this
division may be suspended by the city clerk upon three days' written notice and hearing,
for a period of five days, for a violation of any provision of this section and may be
revoked by the municipal officers upon five days' written notice and hearing, for repeated
violations of the provisions of this section.
(f) Food trucks and trailers
(1) Food trucks and trailers may operate on City owned property from 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. on private property in zoning districts
where restaurants are a permitted use as per Appendix A Article XI, Section
22(c) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston with the permission of
the property owner.
(2) Police Department has the right to close down or request a food truck or trailer to
relocate, where in the opinion of the Department, the food truck or trailer is
causing or contributing to an imminent public safety hazard.
(3) Food trucks and trailers shall not be permitted on the grounds of any school unless
as part of a school authorized function.
(4) Food trucks and trailers shall not be permitted in cemeteries, parking garages, city
owned parking lots, on Lisbon Street, and within the boundaries of a City park
unless part of a permitted event.
(5) In locations on public property where food trucks and trailers are permitted to
operate, food trucks and trailers shall comply with all parking rules outlined in
Chapter 70, Article IV of the City Code of Ordinances, except that food trucks
otherwise operating lawfully and actively offering food for sale on public
property may, in any twenty-four (24) hour period, “feed” any parking meter once
in order to extend the maximum parking time to 4 hours. Hourly parking food
trucks or trailers may have a maximum of 4 hours at any timed spot.
(6) Separation Requirement:
a. Except when operating in connection with a festival or special event, food
trucks and trailers shall not locate within 100 feet, measured by the most
direct line, of occupied space of a food service establishment having a fixed
location.
b. No minimum measured space is required between food trucks and trailers.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:29
(7) In addition to complying with the City’s ordinances related to roving diners and
these regulations, the owner and operator of a food truck or trailer is responsible
for applying for and obtaining all other necessary city licenses required for the
service of food and beverages. The food truck or trailer itself shall be in
compliance with the motor vehicle laws of the State of Maine, securing State of
Maine Mobile Vendor license, and the food truck or trailer owner is responsible
for verifying that a specific location does not violate an ordinance of the City.
(8) Food trucks and trailers may not be parked overnight on city streets or in city
parking lots.
(9) Size limitations: Food trucks and trailers shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width,
including any side extensions or awnings. Food trucks and trailers parking in
metered parking spaces on city-owned property shall not exceed twenty (22) feet
in length including the length of any trailer hitch, trailer, or other extension. Food
trucks and trailers parking in non-metered parking spaces on city-owned property
shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet in length, including the length of any trailer
hitch, trailer, or other extension.
(10) Food trucks and trailers shall be self-contained when operating, except for the
required trash and/or recycling receptacles, which shall be in contact with the
food truck, in a safe location and in no event shall impede the free movement of
automobiles or pedestrians. Owner is responsible for all clean up and waste.
(11) Food trucks and trailers shall serve to the sidewalk or esplanade next to a
sidewalk when parked in spaces parallel to City sidewalks.
(12) Food trucks and trailers shall park parallel to sidewalk or esplanade.
(13) Food trucks and trailers shall be in a timed, metered or legal parking spot.
(14) Only food and/or non-alcoholic beverages are allowed to be sold on City
property.
(15) Each food truck or trailer vendor shall provide the City of Lewiston with a
certificate of insurance to cover public liability in the amount of at least
$400,000.00.
(16) The food truck or trailer shall be inspected and properly licensed. If food is
prepared outside of the truck or trailer base station it shall be prepared in a State
of Maine licensed food service establishment.
(17) Food trucks and trailers shall comply with the City’s noise requirements.
(18) A license to operate a food truck or trailer in the streets, ways and public places
pursuant to this division may be suspended by the city clerk upon three days'
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:30
written notice and hearing, for a period of five days, for a violation of any
provision of this section and may be revoked by the municipal officers upon five
days' written notice and hearing, for repeated violations of the provisions of this
section.
(Code 1982, § 12-22; Ord. No. 91-3, § 1, 4-5-91; Ord. No. 04-12, 6-3-04; No. 17-08, 08-17-17)
Secs. 22-170--22-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. JUNK COLLECTORS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND
DEALERS
Sec. 22-191. License.
(a) No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, junk collector or secondhand dealer
without first obtaining a license pursuant to the following provisions:
(1) The city clerk shall issue a license to conduct business as a pawnbroker, junk
collector or secondhand dealer to any person over the age of 21 who demonstrates
that he:
a. Has no record of criminal convictions for crimes of moral turpitude,
dishonesty or fraud; and
b. Possesses adequate financial resources.
(2) A license shall be obtained by the owner or duly authorized agent of the premises
where the business is to be located (“licensed business location”) by submitting a
completed application to the city clerk's office upon forms provided for such
purposes.
(b) The fee for such licenses shall be set from time to time and a schedule of such fees shall
be on file and available in the city clerk's office.
(c) Before any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk collector license shall be issued to
any person that does not maintain a permanent business location in the City of Lewiston,
the person shall file with the city clerk a surety company performance bond in the sum of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the form of which bond shall be approved by the city
clerk. It shall be a condition of such bond that the principal named therein shall observe
and abide by all laws, regulations and City ordinances regulating pawnbrokers,
secondhand dealers and junk collectors, and shall account for and retain any merchandise,
article or property which comes into their possession through their business as such
pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk collector in accordance with the requirements of
this Article.
(d) Any license issued pursuant to this provision shall be valid for one year only.
(e) Any person denied a license to conduct a pawnbroking, junk collector or secondhand
dealer business may appeal the denial to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with
the office of the city clerk within 30 days of the date of any such denial.
(Code 1982, § 17-70; Ord. No. 11-06, 8-18-11)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:31
Sec. 22-192. Account of business done and disclosure to consumer.
(a) Account kept. Every pawnbroker shall maintain records in which the pawnbroker shall
enter:
(1) The date, duration, amount, periodic rate of interest and annual percentage rate of
every loan that is made;
(2) The finance charge, due dates for payment and the total payment needed to
redeem or repurchase the pawned property;
(3) An accurate account and description of the property pawned;
(4) The terms of redemption or repurchase, including any reduction in the finance
charge for early redemption or repurchase and the right of the consumer to at least
one extension of 31 days at the same rate of interest upon request in writing or in
person; and
(5) The name and address of the consumer.
(b) Inspection. The pawnbroker shall allow the municipal officers to inspect these records at
all reasonable times.
(c) Delivery to consumer. At the time of the pawn transaction, the pawnbroker shall deliver
to the consumer a signed, written disclosure complying with the truth-in-lending
provisions of the Maine Consumer Credit Code, 9-A M.R.S.A. § 8-101 et seq. containing
the items required by subsection 1 and the name and address of the pawnbroker.
(Code 1982, § 17-71)
Sec. 22-193. List of transactions; seller to furnish proof of identification.
(a) Every person licensed as a junk collector or secondhand dealer shall make out, and have
available for periodic collection, a legible and correct list, upon a format furnished by the
police chief, containing an accurate description of all articles taken in pawn, purchased,
or taken in exchange, the name, residence and date of birth of the buyer or seller other
than the licensee, together with the correct and exact time when such articles were
pawned or purchased, and the amount the item was sold for. Before recording the
information required by this section, a dealer shall require reasonable written proof of the
seller's identification in the form of a motor vehicle operator's license, military
identification card, adult liquor identification card or similar item which confirms the
person's identification by date of birth and by physical description.
(b) Alternative compliance mechanism for secondhand dealers. In lieu of the requirements
set forth in subsection (a), a secondhand dealer is in compliance with this section with
respect to certain secondhand goods if it establishes and maintains the following system
for identifying and reporting the purchase of such goods:
(i) Application to low value goods. This section shall apply only with respect
to individual secondhand goods of a mass manufacture process with no
specific individual identifying feature, valued at or below $20, provided
the total value of secondhand goods sold by a person to the dealer within a
30 day period does not exceed $100. Any sale of a secondhand good in
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:32
excess of the limits established in this paragraph must comply with the
requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section.
(ii) Goods with serial number. This section shall not apply to a second hand
good displaying a readily identifiable serial number or similar registration
number, or any other personalized identifying characteristic marking
having been uniquely applied. Any sale of a secondhand good with an
identifiable number, along with all other secondhand goods sold at such
time by the same individual, must comply with the requirements set forth
in subsection (a).
(iii) Record retention. With respect to any sale of secondhand goods under
this subsection, the dealer shall maintain records of each secondhand good
purchased by the dealer, the date of the purchase, and the name and
address of the person selling the good to the dealer. Records may be
retained in electronic form.
(iv) Transmittal to police department. No later than the 15th day of each
calendar month, the dealer shall transmit to the chief of police, or the
chief’s designee, the purchase records collected by the dealer under
subparagraph (iii) during the prior calendar month. Transmittal may be
provided in electronic form.
(v) Identification of seller. At the time of purchase of a secondhand good by a
dealer, the dealer shall verify the name, address, and date of birth of the
person making the return using reasonable means of identification as
described in subsection (a).
(vi) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “purchase” includes the
provision by the secondhand dealer of any item or thing of value in
exchange for the acquisition of a secondhand good.
(Code 1982, § 17-72; Ord. No. 10-01, 3-4-10; Ord. No. 12-08, 7-19-12)
Sec. 22-194. Receiving articles from minors, thieves.
No one licensed pursuant to this article shall purchase or receive any article from any
person under the age of 18 years without the written consent of such person's parent or guardian,
from any person known by the licensee to be a thief or a receiver of stolen property, or from any
person whom the licensee has reason to believe to be a thief or receiver of stolen property.
(Code 1982, § 17-73; Ord. No. 12-08, 7-19-12)
Sec. 22-195. Retention of articles purchased.
(a) Articles purchased by anyone licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article,
excepting pawnbrokers, shall be retained by such licensee in the same condition in which
they were obtained and in an accessible place at the licensed business location where
such articles can be examined and inspected for at least 15 days before they are disposed
of. This paragraph does not apply with respect to the sale of any secondhand good or
goods which conforms to the requirements of section 22-193(b).
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:33
(b) No pawnbroker shall sell, destroy or alter any property pawned until it has remained in
his possession for the duration of time as required by this article, unless forfeited in
writing by the customer.
(Code 1982, § 17-74; Ord. No. 10-01, 3-4-10; Ord. No. 11-06, 8-18-11; Ord. No. 12-08, 7-19-12)
Sec. 22-196. Periodic inspections of junkyards.
The police chief shall be responsible for inspection of all junkyards periodically and shall
report immediately to the council any violation of the license conditions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 17-75)
Secs. 22-197--22-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 22-221. License required to operate.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain any mobile home park within
the city unless such person holds a valid license issued annually by the city council in the
name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All applications for licenses shall
be made at the city clerk's office, where the city clerk shall issue a license upon
compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this section and regulations issued
under this section and of the applicable legal requirements.
(b) Every person holding a license to operate a mobile home park shall give notice in writing
to the city council within 72 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise
disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park. Such notice shall include the
name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile
home park. A license is a personal privilege and is not assignable or transferable.
(c) Application requirements:
(1) Application for original licenses shall be made only after the proposed mobile
home park has been approved by the planning board and shall be in writing,
signed by the applicant as to the truth of the application, and accompanied by the
deposit of a fee according to the business fee schedule as established by the city
council; and such application shall contain:
a. The name and address of the applicant;
b. The location and legal description of the mobile home park;
c. A site plan of the mobile home park showing all mobile home lots,
structures, roads, walkways and other facilities.
And in addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall furnish to the city clerk such
other information as may be required by this article.
(2) Applications for renewals of licenses shall be made in writing by holders of the
licenses, shall be accompanied by the deposit of a fee according to the business
fee schedule as established by the city council; and shall contain any change in the
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:34
information submitted since the original license was issued or the latest renewal
granted.
(d) Any person whose application for a license to operate and maintain a mobile home park
has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the city
council under the procedure provided by section 22-223 and from the city council to the
superior court.
(e) Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the director of code enforcement or
his designee finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this article or regulations issued under this article or appendix A of this
Code, he shall report such to the city council, which shall direct the director of code
enforcement to communicate in writing in accordance with section 22-223 to the person
to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice by the city council, the license
shall be suspended. At the end of such period, the director of code enforcement or his
designee shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if such conditions or practices have
not been corrected, he shall report such to the city council, which will suspend the license
and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license is issued.
Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, such person shall cease operation of such
mobile home park except as provided in section 22-223.
(Code 1982, § 17-167; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
Sec. 22-222. Inspections; access.
(a) It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks and mobile homes
contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the director of code
enforcement or his designee free access to such premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection.
(b) It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof or
his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with this article and regulations issued under this article and appendix
A of this Code, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 17-168)
Sec. 22-223. Notices, hearings and orders.
(a) Whenever the city council determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this article, or regulations issued under this
article, the city council shall direct the director of code enforcement to give notice of such
alleged violation to the person to whom the license was issued as provided in this section.
Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:35
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, as the case may require, provided, that
such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by registered mail to his last
known address, or where he has been served with such notice by any method
authorized or required by the laws of the state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this article.
(b) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this article, or regulations issued under this article, may
request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the city council; provided,
that such person shall file in the office of the city clerk a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after
the day the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a
stay of the notice and of the suspension except in the case of an order issued under
subsection (e) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the city council shall set a
time and a place for such hearing and shall give petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that, upon application of
the petitioner, the city council may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time
beyond the ten-day period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and
sufficient reasons for such postponement.
(c) After the hearing under this section, the city council shall make findings as to compliance
with the provisions of this article and regulations issued under this article and appendix A
of this Code and shall issue an order in writing, sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the
notice which shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(4) of this section. Upon failure
to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the licensee shall be in
violation of this section and the license of the mobile home park affected by the order
shall be suspended.
(d) The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decisions of the city
council, and together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the city clerk, but the record of the
proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought to the
superior court.
(e) Whenever the city council shall find that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as the
council may deem necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the
permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the city council, shall be afforded a hearing
as soon as possible. The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be
applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
(Code 1982, § 17-169)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:36
Secs. 22-224--22-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. PEDDLERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 22-246. Use of streets.
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall
any peddler be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any
congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose
of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
(Code 1982, § 17-89)
Secs. 22-247--22-255. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 22-256. Application.
(a) An applicant for a license under this article shall file with the city a sworn application in
writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following
information:
(1) Name of the applicant;
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials
establishing the exact relationship;
(5) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, together with a license
number or other means of identification;
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor, felony or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(b) The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a photograph, in
duplicate, of the applicant, at least two inches square, taken within 30 days immediately
prior to the date of the filing of the application.
(Code 1982, § 17-86)
Sec. 22-257. Contents.
A license issued pursuant to this article shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing
officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the date of issuance and
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:37
the length of time such license shall be operative, as well as the license number and other
identifying description of any vehicle used.
(Code 1982, § 17-87)
Sec. 22-258. Exhibition of license.
Every licensee at all times while engaged in peddling shall have in his immediate
possession the license issued to him and when so peddling shall display such license upon
demand of any police officer of the city and upon demand of any person to whom he is peddling.
(Code 1982, § 17-88)
Sec. 22-259. Suspension and revocation.
Upon complaint being filed with the police department that any person to whom a local
peddler's license has been issued has violated any law or ordinance which has a reasonable
relationship to the conduct of the licensed business, and, if upon investigation, it is found that
such complaint is valid, the police official charged with the duty of investigating such complaint
may suspend such license for no more than three days. It shall be the duty of the police official
who effects such a suspension to notify the city clerk and the city council on the next regular
working day following such suspension. The grounds of such suspension shall also be sufficient
basis for revocation of that same license.
(Code 1982, § 17-90)
Sec. 22-260. Special event license.
A special event peddlers license can be issued to eligible applicants for a maximum of
seven consecutive days, and will limit their sale area to be inside the designated festival zone
area, as per requirements of the festival event organizers. Only one special event peddlers license
shall be needed for booths or sales tables operated by the same vendor, and individuals working
for the primary vendor at the booth shall not require a separate license. The primary vendor shall
be subject to a criminal background investigation regarding their peddler application for this
section.
The license shall be displayed the entire time the vendor is operating the booths or sales
tables.
(Ord. No. 04-11, 5-20-04)
Secs. 22-261--22-280. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES
Sec. 22-281. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:38
Donated personal property means the personal property of persons other than those
residing on the residential premises where such sale is to take place, such personal property
being donated to, or the sale being conducted by, a tax-exempt religious or charitable
organization, and the entire proceeds from such sale being donated to, or retained by, the
sponsoring tax-exempt religious or charitable organization.
Residential premises means a building or structure having at least one dwelling unit,
boarding or lodging room, and the lot of land associated therewith, and any accessory structures;
and any lot of land within a residential zone.
(Code 1982, § 17-116)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-282. Permit required; conditions.
No person shall sell or offer for sale personal property from any residential premises
except as permitted by this article. Only the sale of donated personal property and the sale of
personal property owned, used and maintained for personal use only by the seller, and not for
resale to the public, shall be permitted to be sold from residential premises, and only after
issuance to the seller of a permit for such purposes, as follows:
(1) A permit may be obtained from the city clerk's office. The fee for a permit shall
be paid in accordance with the business fee schedule as established by the city
council.
(2) No permit shall be issued for sales of personal property upon residential premises
for a period of more than three consecutive days, and no more than three permits
shall be issued for such sales upon a residential premises in any one calendar year.
Permits required under this article shall be on forms furnished by the city clerk.
(Code 1982, § 17-117; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 14-4, 4-3-14)
Sec. 22-283. Signs.
Notwithstanding the provisions relating to signs under appendix A of this Code, one
single-faced sign, containing not more than four square feet in total area, may be placed upon
residential premises where the sale of personal property has been permitted for the duration of
the sale only.
(Code 1982, § 17-118)
Sec. 22-284. Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales of personal property made under
court order or process.
(Code 1982, § 17-119)
Secs. 22-285--22-305. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. SOLICITATIONS
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:39
Secs. 22-306--22-315. Reserved.
Sec. 22-316. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any public street or sidewalk, park or
other public place or at any doorway or entranceway immediately abutting thereon, within the
corporate limits of the city, the sale of any subscription of any magazine, periodical or other
publication, newspapers excepted, or the sale of any tangible personal property, for delivery at a
subsequent time without a license.
(Code 1982, § 17-101)
Sec. 22-317. Application.
Applicants for licenses under this article shall file with the city clerk a sworn application
in writing on a form to be furnished by the clerk, which shall give the following information:
(1) Name of the applicant and name of the agent making the application and
remuneration to be received by the agent for services rendered;
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant and of the agent
making application;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the applicant's activities;
(4) A brief description of the intended disposition of the funds to be solicited by the
applicant;
(5) If the application is for a so-called "tag day" or "poppy day," then it shall indicate
the exact date the solicitation is to be made on.
(Code 1982, § 17-102)
Sec. 22-318. Issuance and duration.
After an investigation of the representations made in an application required by this
article, the city clerk shall issue the license. If the application is for a "tag day" or "poppy day,"
then the license shall be issued for a date certain on a first come, first served basis only, and no
more than one such license shall be made available to any person and used by him in any one
calendar year. If the application is for other than a "tag day" or "poppy day," then the license
may be issued for any period of time not in excess of one year.
(Code 1982, § 17-103)
Secs. 22-319--22-340. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. TATTOOING
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 22-341. Definitions.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:40
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Operator means the individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the
person of another.
Tattoo means to insert pigment under the skin of a human being by pricking with a needle
or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin.
(Code 1982, § 17-153)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 22-342. Prerequisites to tattooing.
No tattoo shall be administered except by conforming to all of the following:
(1) Age. No tattoo shall be administered to any person less than 18 years old, as
verified by a driver's license, liquor identification card, military identification card
or other adequate record.
(2) Notice of permanency. Before administering a tattoo, the patron shall be advised
that the tattoo should be considered permanent; that it can be removed only with a
surgical procedure; and that any effective removal will leave permanent scarring
and disfigurement. The written cautionary notice contained in subsection (7) shall
be furnished to and signed by the patron.
(3) Skin condition. The skin to be tattooed shall be free from rash, pimples, infection
or recent (less than two years) scar tissue. The patron must be in apparent good
health, and the skin to be tattooed generally in a healthy condition to all
appearances.
(4) Sobriety of patron. Tattoos shall not be administered to any person under the
influence of drugs or alcohol, and the operator is charged with the responsibility
of making reasonable observation and inquiry to assure himself that the patron is
not under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
(5) Food, drink, smoking, and alcoholic beverages prohibited. The consumption of
food or drink and smoking is prohibited in the tattooing area. The consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the tattooing premises is prohibited.
(6) Prior jaundice or hepatitis. The patron shall be asked, before the operation,
whether he has had jaundice or hepatitis. If the answer is in the affirmative, the
tattoo operation shall not be performed.
(7) Record; form. The tattoo establishment shall keep a permanent record of all
patrons tattooed, stating name, age, address, date of tattoo, operator's name, place
where tattooed, and a description of the design of the tattoo. Such records shall be
made available to any city official upon request, and shall be in the following
form, which shall be signed by the patron and the tattoo operator:
Date ______________________________________
I, the undersigned, realize that a tattoo is permanent; that it can be removed only
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:41
with a surgical procedure; and that any effective removal will leave permanent
scarring and disfigurement.
Name ______________________________________
Address ____________________________________
Date of birth _________________________________
Social security no. ____________________________
Serial number if a member of armed forces
____________________________________________
Have you had jaundice or hepatitis within the last two
years?
Yes ________ No ________
________________________
Patron
Description of tattoo ___________________________
Area of body _________________________________
________________________
Tattoo operator
(Code 1982, § 17-154)
Sec. 22-343. Tattooing procedure.
The minimum required procedure for administering a tattoo shall be as follows:
(1) No tattooing shall be done on the head, neck, hands, feet or the genitalia of any
person.
(2) The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with soap and water before starting
to tattoo; the hands shall be dried with individual single-use towels.
(3) No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for the
purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish, birthmark or scar.
(4) Safety razor with a new single-service blade for each patron or a straight-edge
razor may be used and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized as required by
the state before use on each patron.
(5) The area to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed, i.e., for a period of two
minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic soap. A sterile
single-use sponge shall be used to wash the area. After shaving and before
tattooing is begun, a solution of 70 percent alcohol shall be applied to the area
with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument.
(6) Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent as
approved by the state, shall be used on the area to be tattooed and it shall be
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:42
applied with a sterile gauze.
(7) The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks, or other solid or liquid styptics to check
the flow of blood is prohibited.
(8) A patch test for sensitivity for each of the dyes used shall be made on the patron
before any tattooing design is applied.
(9) Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron
and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work
on a patron and any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on
any person.
(10) Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile
sponge which shall be used only on one person and then immediately discarded.
(11) After completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed with
sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by the state, or a
70 percent alcohol solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry and
petroleum jelly from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied, using sterile
gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area with
adhesive.
(Code 1982, § 17-155)
Sec. 22-344. Care of instruments.
(a) Storing of instruments. All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept
in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
(b) Sterilizing of instruments. A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing
all needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron.
Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approved by the
authorized city inspector. Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to
live steam for at least 30 minutes at a minimum pressure 15 pounds per square inch,
temperature of 240 degrees Fahrenheit or 116 degrees Celsius.
(c) Use of instruments. The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used,
handled and temporarily placed during tattooing so that they will not be contaminated.
(Code 1982, § 17-156)
Sec. 22-345. Inspection of tattooing establishment.
City inspectors may conduct periodic inspections of any tattooing establishment for the
purpose of determining whether or not such establishment and the persons performing the art of
tattooing therein are in compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this
article and other pertinent ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person or operator of a
tattooing establishment willfully to prevent or restrain the inspection officer from entering any
licensed establishment where tattooing is being performed for the purpose of inspecting such
premises, after proper identification is presented to the operator.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:43
(Code 1982, § 17-157)
Sec. 22-346. Licensed practitioners.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any establishment under the control or
direction of a duly licensed practitioner of the healing arts, nor do they apply to licensed medical
hospitals, and similarly licensed medical institutions.
(Code 1982, § 17-158)
Sec. 22-347. Penalty for violation of article.
In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, any person violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of this Code.
(Code 1982, § 17-159)
Secs. 22-348--22-360. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 22-361. Required.
No individual shall tattoo another, or operate or conduct a tattooing establishment of any
kind within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
(Code 1982, § 17-150)
Sec. 22-362. Application fee.
An application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a fee in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council. No application fee shall
be required for the renewal of an existing license.
(Code 1982, § 17-151; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
Sec. 22-363. License fee; expiration.
Each applicant, before being granted a license under this article, shall pay an annual fee
according to the business fee schedule as established by the city council. Each license shall
expire one year from date of issuance.
(Code 1982, § 17-152; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
Sec. 22-364. Right to appeal from suspension or denial; procedure.
Any applicant or licensee under this article aggrieved by an order of suspension or denial
shall have the right to appeal, provided such applicant or licensee submits an application to the
board of appeals for a hearing. The board of appeals shall have the power to temporarily
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:44
suspend, revoke or deny a tattooing license when operation by the applicant or license holder
presents a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. After such hearing, the
board of appeals may affirm, modify or vacate the order of suspension or denial appealed from.
(Ord. No. 13-14, 2-6-14; Ord. No. 18-01, 3-8-18)
Secs. 22-365--22-380. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 22-381. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Lewiston Massage Establishment and Massage
Therapist Regulatory Ordinance" and may be referred to by short title as the "massage
ordinance". (Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-382. Purpose.
The city recognizes that the practice of legitimate massage therapy by trained and
experienced therapists is a valuable component of our health care system. The city also
recognizes that persons without legitimate massage training or experience may masquerade as
massage therapists as a facade for unlawful purposes such as prostitution. It is the purpose of this
article to clearly distinguish between these persons and to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by simultaneously acknowledging and permitting legitimate massage therapy
and prohibiting the commission of sexual intercourse, sexual contacts or sexual acts for money.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-383. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly implies otherwise:
Client means any person who receives a therapeutic massage.
Massage or therapeutic massage are used interchangeably to mean any method of
rubbing, kneading, tapping, vibration, compression, percussion, application of friction or
manipulation of the external parts of the human body other than parts of the body above the
neck, with the hands or other parts of the body or with the aid of any instrument or device.
Massage establishment or therapeutic massage establishment are used interchangeably to
mean any business including, but not limited to, a sole proprietorship in which the business
operations consist of providing or making available massage in the city for consideration or with
the expectation of receiving consideration or any gratuity, whether or not the business has a fixed
place of business within the city limits.
Massage therapist means any person who performs therapeutic massage for consideration
or gratuity or with the expectation of receiving consideration or any gratuity.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:45
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity.
Recognized school means any post secondary, academic institution for massage,
bodywork, and/or somatic therapy which offers a course of training in the theory, method,
profession and work of massage therapy consisting of 500 hours or more, such institution being
approved by the Maine Higher Education Department or an equivalent agency in another state.
The 500 hours shall include at least 100 hours of anatomy/physiology; at least 100 hours devoted
to professional aspects of the practice of massage including but not limited to ethics, draping,
contraindications, first aid, CPR, and business management; and at least 200 hours of theory,
practice and techniques of massage therapy.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 96-14, 11-14-96; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-18-99)
Sec. 22-384. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from this article while licensed and practicing in
accordance with the laws of this state: physicians, physician's assistants, surgeons, osteopaths,
nurses, chiropractors, physical therapists, and persons holding a license issued by the State of
Maine Department of Professional and Financial Regulations, Division of Licensing and
Enforcement. Students enrolled in a recognized school who are required to give massages as part
of their training shall be exempt from this article.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 96-14, 11-14-96; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-18-99)
Sec. 22-385. General provisions to apply.
Except to the extent that this article contains a contrary provision, all provisions of
chapter 22 shall apply to this article.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
DIVISION 2. LICENSES
Sec. 22-386. Required.
(a) Therapeutic massage establishment license. No person shall operate a therapeutic
massage establishment without a valid therapeutic massage establishment license issued
by the city. A separate license shall be required for each such establishment.
(b) Massage therapist license. No person shall work as a massage therapist without a valid
massage therapist license or a combined massage establishment/therapist license issued
by the city.
(c) Combined massage establishment/massage therapist license. A sole practitioner who
employs no massage therapist other than himself may apply for a combined massage
establishment/massage therapist license in lieu of both a therapeutic massage
establishment license and a massage therapist license.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-387. Compliance of existing therapists and massage establishments.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:46
Any person presently operating as a massage therapist and/or operating a massage
establishment in the city as defined herein on the effective date of this article shall comply with
the terms of this article by obtaining a license hereunder within three months of the effective date
of this article.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-388. License fee; expiration.
Each applicant, within 30 days of approval of the application and before issuance of the
license, shall pay an annual fee according to the business fee schedule as established by the city
council. If the fee is not paid within said 30 days, the approval of the application shall expire.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from date of issuance, unless
otherwise suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 04-15, 7-15-04)
Sec. 22-389. Application and information.
Each applicant for a license shall:
(1) Complete all information upon and file an application on a form prescribed by the
city clerk;
(2) Pay a nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's policy manual
as approved by the city council in advance to the city clerk;
(3) Submit the completed application to the city clerk, together with attested copies of
the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the applicant is a corporation, evidence
of partnership, if a partnership, or articles of association and bylaws, if the
applicant is an association, as well as a list of all officers and directors;
(4) File an affidavit which will identify all owners, officers, managers or partners of
the applicant and their places of residence at the time of the application and for
the immediately preceding five years;
(5) For a combined massage establishment/massage therapist license or a massage
therapist license, submit two front face photographs of the applicant taken within
30 days of application, of such size as the clerk may specify;
(6) File the release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A. § 620(6), Criminal History Record
Information Act, with the application for each applicant and for each officer,
owner, manager or partner of an applicant seeking a therapeutic massage
establishment or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license; and
(7) File any information not set forth above which is required by section 22-32.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
Sec. 22-390. Qualifications of applicant, officers.
Within the five years immediately preceding the date of application, no applicant for a
massage establishment or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license, nor any
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:47
owner, officer, manager or partner of an applicant, shall have been convicted of a crime now
classified under Maine Statute as a Class A, B, or C crime, a crime involving moral turpitude, the
crimes of engaging in prostitution or promotion of prostitution, nor of violating any of the
gambling, drug or prohibitive liquor laws under the laws of the United States or the State of
Maine or any other state. Hereinafter any one of the foregoing convictions or violations may be
referred to as a "disqualifying criminal conviction".
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-391. Investigation of applicant, officers.
Upon receipt of an application or notice of a change of the owners, officers, managers or
partners of the applicant:
(1) The building inspector shall verify that the premises at which the establishment
will be located complies with all applicable ordinances of the city including, but
not limited to, the building code, electrical code, plumbing code and zoning
ordinance and shall report his findings in writing to the city clerk;
(2) The city clerk shall review the application and other documents and determine
whether such documents comply with all of the requirements of this article;
(3) The health officer shall inspect the location or proposed location to determine
whether the applicable ordinances relating to health and safety have been satisfied
and shall report his findings in writing to the city clerk;
(4) The fire chief or his agent shall inspect the location or proposed location to
determine if all city ordinances concerning fire and safety have been satisfied and
shall submit his report in writing to the city clerk; and
(5) The police chief or his agent shall investigate the application, including the
criminal history record information authorized under subsection 22-389(6) and
required under section 22-390 and shall report his findings in writing to the city
clerk.
All reports under this section shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-392. Basic proficiency.
Each applicant for a massage therapist license or combined massage
establishment/therapist license shall show proof of basic proficiency in the field of massage
therapy which may be satisfied by:
(1) Evidence of the satisfactory completion of all formal course work and training in
massage therapy required for graduation from a recognized school, which shall be
in the form of a diploma or certificate of graduation or equivalent documentation;
or
(2) A written statement from a physician, nurse, osteopath, chiropractor, physical
therapist, or member of the AMTA stating that that person refers clients to the
applicant for therapeutic massage.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:48
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-393. Obtaining license by fraud.
No person shall make any false, untruthful or fraudulent statement, either written or oral,
or in any way conceal any material fact, or give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or
aid in securing a license required by this chapter. All names, including, but not limited to maiden
name, ever used by the applicant must be noted on the application.
Any license so secured shall be void.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-394. Use of license.
No person shall make use of, in any manner, to his own or another's benefit, any license
which has not been duly issued to him in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-395. Standards for denial.
A license under this division shall be denied to the following persons:
(1) Therapeutic massage establishment license:
a. To a corporation not registered to do business in this state; or
b. To a corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person having an
actual ownership interest or management authority therein has a
disqualifying criminal conviction (as defined in section 22-390) within the
immediately preceding five years; or
c. To an applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has a
disqualifying criminal conviction within the immediately preceding five
years.
(2) Massage therapist license, or combined massage establishment/massage therapist
license:
a. To an applicant who has a disqualifying criminal conviction at any time
during the five years immediately preceding application; or
b. To an applicant who is not at least 18 years of age.
(3) All licenses:
a. To an applicant who has submitted an incomplete application, knowingly
made an incorrect statement of a material nature, or failed to supply
additional information required by the city clerk or reasonably necessary
to determine whether the license is issuable; or
b. To an applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual
ownership interest or management authority therein has been denied a
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:49
license for knowingly making an incorrect statement of a material nature
within the immediately preceding five years; or
c. To an applicant, if such applicant or any person having an actual
ownership interest or management authority therein has had a license
granted pursuant to this article revoked for any reason within the
immediately preceding five years.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-396. Grounds for suspension or revocation.
(a) All licenses. In addition to the grounds of denial set forth in section 22-395, any license
may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee:
(1) Failed to notify the clerk of any change in material fact set forth in the application
for such license; or
(2) Violated any provision of this article.
(b) Therapeutic massage establishment or combined establishment/therapist license. In
addition to the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, either a massage establishment license
or combined establishment/therapist license may be suspended or revoked upon a
determination that the licensee:
(1) Permitted any person to perform therapeutic massage without a valid license to do
so;
(2) Permitted or allowed an employee, massage therapist or conditional massage
therapist, to violate any provision of this chapter on the premises of the
establishment or in the course of conduct of the business of the establishment; or
(3) Knowingly permitted any violation of 17-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851 through 855. Such
knowledge shall be presumed if there has been a conviction of any such offense
within the immediately preceding five years. The applicant or licensee may rebut
said presumption by showing that: (i) due diligence was exercised to prevent the
recurrence of any such offense; and (ii) despite such diligence, he or she did not
know and could not reasonably have known of any subsequent offense.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
DIVISION 3. OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 22-397. Licenses displayed.
A valid therapeutic massage establishment license shall be displayed at all times in an
open and conspicuous place in the massage establishment for which it was issued. A valid
massage therapist license or combined massage establishment/massage therapist license must be
readily available to be produced immediately if demanded of the licensee.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-398. Age restrictions.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:50
No massage or therapeutic massage shall be practiced on a minor without the written
consent of a parent or guardian.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-399. Massage tables.
All therapeutic massage shall be administered on a massage table, treatment table,
treatment mat, or treatment chair.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-400. Maintenance and cleaning.
Every person who conducts or operates a therapeutic massage establishment shall keep
the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments, supplies and devices of
any kind, or parts thereof, that come into contact with the human body shall be kept clean by a
modern and approved method of cleaning.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-401. Prohibited activities.
(a) No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a client whose genitals are exposed.
(b) No massage therapist shall administer or agree to administer a massage to the genitals or
anus of a client.
(c) No massage therapist shall administer a massage unless he or she is fully clothed with
nontransparent clothing of the type customarily worn by massage therapists while
administering a massage.
(d) No massage therapist shall perform sexual intercourse, commit a sexual act or make
sexual contact as defined in 17-A M.R.S.A. § 251, for pecuniary benefit to himself or a
third party.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-402. Closing hours.
At all times when open for business, a therapeutic massage establishment shall have upon
the premises a licensed massage therapist or person who possesses a combination massage
establishment/massage therapist license who shall be available to supervise the operation of the
establishment and assure that no violations of this article occur. (Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
Sec. 22-403. List of employees.
The therapeutic massage establishment shall keep a written list of the names and current
addresses of all employees, both on duty and off duty. Such list shall be shown to the chief of
police, his authorized deputy, the city clerk or his representative, upon request.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:51
DIVISION 4. PENALTIES
Sec. 22-404. Penalties.
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance
with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council. Each act of violation and every day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such
penalty, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of this article by appropriate action, including,
but not limited to revocation of the license.
(Ord. No. 96-10, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
Secs. 22-405--22-409. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. OUTPATIENT ADDICTION TREATMENT CLINICS
Sec. 22-410. Purpose.
The city council recognizes that an outpatient addiction treatment clinic can be a valuable
component of our health care system. The city council also recognizes that the appropriate siting
of such clinics, including restricting their proximity to schools, churches, family day care homes,
small day care facilities, day care centers, and public parks and play grounds as well as other
locations where children and other young adults may frequent is important in order to protect the
public. In addition, the city has devoted substantial resources and made significant efforts to
attract retail and commercial development in the Southern Gateway Development District, South
Lewiston Retail Growth District, and Western Gateway Development District. The city council
finds that it is in the best interests of the city to protect areas where efforts are currently being
made to stimulate new business investment, and encourage focused and planned economic
growth, which includes the districts identified above. Siting of outpatient addiction treatment
clinics in these areas could detract from these efforts. Proper siting will also work to minimize
potential adverse law enforcement impacts and overburdening of police and rescue resources.
The city council finds that with the reasonable and necessary siting restrictions listed herein,
there remain sufficient suitable areas within the city to site outpatient addiction treatment clinics.
Licensing of these facilities will enhance community relations with the providers of such clinics
and will establish lines of communications with the clinics. Licensing of these facilities is
appropriate and consistent with the city's policies and practices to review and license business
activities that impact its citizens. The licensing is not meant to duplicate the licensing done at the
state level pursuant to 14-118 CMR Ch. 4 Regulations for Licensing/Certifying Substance Abuse
Treatment Programs in the State of Maine, but to provide separate and additional requirements
as necessitated by the above findings.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
Sec. 22-411. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any outpatient addiction treatment clinic which is located
within the city.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:52
Sec. 22-412. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the content
clearly implies otherwise:
Church means a building, together with its contiguous accessory buildings and
uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious
body organized to sustain public worship.
Day care center means a building, structure or other place in which a person, or
combination of persons, maintains or otherwise carries out a regular program, for
consideration, for any part of the day providing protection and child care for more than
12 children under 13 years of age, who are unattended by parents or guardians for any
part of the day, and which holds all necessary licenses and permits from the State of
Maine and/or the City of Lewiston.
Family day care home means child care for three to 12 children under 13 years of
age (not related by blood or marriage to, or legal wards of the operator, or foster children
living in the private family residence (i.e. dwelling unit) serving as the day care home)
who are unattended by parents or guardians for any part of the day. A family day care
home shall be operated by a person who is domiciled and a resident within the private
family residence, and who is the holder of all necessary licenses and permits from the
State of Maine and/or the City of Lewiston.
Outpatient addiction treatment clinic means a program or facility operated for the
purpose of and specializing in the care, treatment and/or rehabilitation of persons
suffering with addictions, that is certified to dispense medication to clients under 42 Code
of Federal Regulations, Part 8.
School means a building together with its contiguous accessory buildings and uses
for the education and learning of children. Uses within the meaning of this definition
shall include private and public preschool, elementary, middle and high school.
South Lewiston Retail Growth District. The area identified as a special retail
growth area by the Lewiston City Council, which includes the contiguous land area
defined in a map entitled (South Lewiston Retail Growth District), dated February, 2006
and kept on file with the Lewiston City Clerk.
Southern Gateway Development District. The land area identified as per appendix
A, article XVI, section 2 of this Code.
Small day care facility means child care for three to 12 children under 13 years of
age who, are unattended by parents or guardians for any part of the day, in a nonhome
setting. Small day care facilities shall not be operated within a private family residence (i.
e. dwelling unit).
Western Gateway Development District. The land area identified as per appendix
A, article XVI, section 3 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06; Ord. No. 17-07, 7-20-17)
Sec. 22-413. Application requirements.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:53
All applications for licenses under this article shall be filed with, and in a form
satisfactory to, the city clerk. Such application shall include, but is not limited to the following:
(1) Name, address and contact information including a phone number of the applicant
and all other persons having a legal interest in the clinic and property and the
individual(s) hired by the applicant to manage operation of the facility, if any.
(2) The location of the premises for which a license is sought by identification of city
tax map number and street address.
(3) The dimensions and acreage of the property.
(4) A copy of a site plan, drawn to a scale of 50 feet or less to the inch, which
contains the following information:
(5) The boundary lines of the property for which a license is sought.
(6) The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(7) The location of all existing and proposed parking areas and walkways and any
other site improvements.
(8) The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed vegetation which is
proposed to be maintained for required screening.
(9) The location and characteristics of all existing and proposed fencing proposed to
be maintained for required screening.
(10) A site location map at a scale of not greater on 1" to 100' showing all adjoining
residential uses and any schools, churches, family day care homes, small day care
facilities, day care centers and public parks and play grounds.
(11) The location and characteristics of all vehicular entrances and exits serving the
property.
(12) A detailed description of the proposed outpatient addiction treatment clinic to
include the following: population to be served, client services, methods of
treatment, identification of controlled substances to be kept on site, staffing
requirements, security provisions, hours of operation, anticipated parking demand,
peak hour traffic, identification of other required licenses, etc.
(13) Identification of any other approvals required the City of Lewiston, by any state
agency or department or of any federal agencies.
(14) A nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's policy manual as
approved by the city council and an original and 15 copies of the license
application and all supporting documentation.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
Sec. 22-414. Administration.
(a) City council review. License applications for outpatient addiction treatment clinics shall
be filed with the city clerk and the clerk will order a background check from the police
department for the applicant, individuals with a legal interest in the facility and any
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:54
individual(s) hired to manage operation of the facility. The license application with the
background check will then be reviewed by the city clerk to determine if the application
is complete. If the application is not deemed complete, the license shall be denied. If the
application is deemed to be complete, the application will be forwarded to the planning
board for a recommendation regarding the location requirements contained in this article.
In the event that development review approval is required pursuant to appendix A, article
XIII of this Code, the planning board shall not provide a recommendation to the city
council until it conducts a site plan review hearing on the proposed clinic.
(b) Planning board recommendation. Once the city clerk receives the recommendation from
the planning board, the clerk shall schedule public hearings for the city council to
consider the request to establish the proposed outpatient addiction treatment clinic. The
city council shall conduct two public hearings on the application for a license to allow
adequate time for public comment and review.
(c) Conditions of license approval. The city council may impose conditions on the approval
of any license application under this article to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this article or any other provision of law. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the receipt of all
approvals required by any federal or state agency or department pursuant to
federal or state law prior to clinic operations.
(2) That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the receipt of any
approvals required by any city board pursuant to this Code prior to the issuance of
any license under this article.
(3) That any screening and or other requirements imposed by the city council
pursuant to the provisions of this article or by the planning board upon
development review, shall be installed, completed and approved by staff prior to
the issuance of any license under this article.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
Sec. 22-415. Location criteria.
Applicants for licenses must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council that all of
the standards contained in this section are met in order to approve a license to operate an
outpatient addiction treatment clinic.
(1) Location criteria.
a. No clinic may be located within 1,000 feet of any church, school, family
day care home, small day care facility, day care center, or public park or
playground.
b. No clinic may be located within the bounds of the following revitalization
and/or growth areas: South Lewiston Retail Growth Area, Southern
Gateway, and the Western Gateway.
(2) Neighborhood compatibility standards. No license shall be approved if the city
council finds that the granting of the license would violate one or more of the
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:55
following neighborhood compatibility standards:
a. Neither the proposed use nor the proposed site upon which the use will be
located is of such a character that the use will have significant adverse
impact upon the value or quiet possession of surrounding properties. The
city council may not find that this standard is satisfied unless it finds that:
1. The size of the proposed use is comparable to the size of
surrounding uses;
2. The amount and type of traffic to be generated, hours of operation,
expanse of pavement, and the number of parking spaces are
comparable to surrounding uses;
3. The generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, litter
and other nuisances is comparable to that generated surrounding
uses;
4. The impact of the use on the quality and quantity of groundwater
available to abutting properties is comparable to that for
surrounding uses;
5. Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size of the
lot, shape of the lot, topography, and soils, do not aggravate
adverse impacts upon surrounding properties.
(3) Vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation to, from, into and within the site
will be safe and no public way will be overburdened or made hazardous as a
result of the new use of and/or development of the property. The city council may
not find that this standard has been satisfied unless it first finds that:
a. Vehicular access to the site will be on roads which have adequate capacity
to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
Adequate capacity means that: Intersections on major access routes to the
site within a one-half mile radius of any entrance road will function after
development at a minimum at Level of Service C, as defined in Maine
Department of Transportation regulations, 17-229 C.M.R. Ch. 305, Rules
and Regulations Pertaining to Traffic Movement Permits (2000); or
b. If any such intersection is functioning at a Level of Service D (as defined
in MDOT regulations Chapter 305, cited above) or lower prior to the
development, the project will not reduce the current level of service. The
city council may approve a license for an application not meeting this
requirement if the applicant demonstrates that: A public agency has
committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring the
level of access to said standard, or the applicant will assume financial
responsibility for the improvements necessary to bring the level of service
to said standard and will guarantee the completion of the improvements
within one year of approval of the license.
(4) The topography of the site shall permit the construction of all driveways,
entrances or proposed streets to meet the standards set forth in appendix A, article
XIII, subsection 4(c) of this Code.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:56
(5) Adequate facilities are present to assure the safety of pedestrians passing by or
through the site.
(6) Municipal or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be overburdened or
made hazardous. The city council may not find that this standard is satisfied
unless it finds that: The capacity of sewerage and water supply systems is
adequate to accommodate the proposed use; the capacity of the storm drainage
system is adequate to accommodate the proposed use; and the ability of the fire
department to provide necessary protection services to the site and development is
adequate.
(7) The soils on the proposed site shall have adequate capacity and stability to
support all loadings, including fill, developed by the proposed use and the use will
not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold
water to the extent that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result on the site
or upon the land of abutters. In considering whether this standard is satisfied, the
city council shall take into account the elevation above sea level of the site and
surrounding properties, its relation to floodplains, the slope and vegetation of the
land and their effects on drainage.
(8) The scale and design of the proposed structures with respect to materials, scale
and massing shall be compatible with existing structures within 500 feet of the
site in areas where the existing structures are of a similar scale and architectural
treatment.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
Sec. 22-416. Screening requirements.
All clinics shall be required to erect and maintain opaque fencing to provide an effective
visual screen at least six feet in height to be located along side and rear property lines that abut
properties in residential use. Said fencing is to screen the clinic entrance and parking lot from
ordinary view from all directly adjoining properties.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
Sec. 22-417. Meetings with the chief of police.
Meetings will be conducted at the clinic, held at the discretion of the chief of police, to
allow the applicant and city staff the opportunity to discuss issues with the chief of police and or
his designee. The purpose of said meetings is to establish a good working relationship between
the police department and the owner and operators of clinics.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06; Ord. No. 15-12, 11-19-15)
Sec. 22-418. Nonconforming uses.
Any outpatient addiction treatment clinic in lawful existence on the effective date of this
article may remain in operation in its present location for 12 months following the effective date
of this article. Thereafter, such clinics shall be required to comply with all the provisions of this
article except the location and screening requirements set forth in sections 22-415 and 22-416
supra.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:57
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06)
Sec. 22-419. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms of any license issued
under this article may be penalized in the following manner:
(1) Temporary suspension. The city clerk is authorized, pursuant to section 22-44, to
immediately and temporarily suspend any license when continued operation of the
licensed premises or activity presents a danger to the health, safety or the general
welfare of the public.
(2) Suspension or revocation. The city council may suspend or revoke a license in
accordance with the provisions of section 22-44 of this chapter.
(3) Civil penalties. A violator may be required to pay the penalties imposed by
section 1-8 of this Code or 30-A M.R.S.A. (4452 et seq. as amended). A judgment
from such a lawsuit in the city's favor can result in a court order that the owner
and/or operator of said clinic abate any violations, pay a penalty in accordance
with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council, and pay the court
costs and legal and expert witness fees incurred by the city.
(Ord. No. 06-06, 5-4-06; Ord. No. 08-06d, 8-14-08)
ARTICLE XV. ADULT USE AND MEDICIAL MARIJUANA
Sec. 22-420. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Marijuana Legalization Act, 28-B M.R.S.§101
et seq. and the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S. §2421 et seq., and to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of and visitors to the City of Lewiston by
prescribing the manner in which the cultivation and distribution of marijuana can be
conducted in the City. This Article XV is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by 28-B
M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq., as may be amended, and 22 M.R.S.A. §2429-D et seq., as may be
amended. In addition, this chapter:
Provides for the safe sale and distribution of marijuana to those who qualify to obtain, possess,
and use marijuana under the Marijuana Legalization Act and Maine Medical Marijuana Act.
Protects public health and safety through reasonable controls on marijuana cultivation,
manufacturing, testing, and distribution operations as they relate to noise, air and
water quality, food safety, neighborhood and customer safety, security for these operations
and their personnel, and other health and safety concerns.
To impose fees to cover the City’s costs of licensing the cultivation, manufacturing,
distribution and sale of marijuana and enforcing the regulations outlined in this Article.
Adopts a mechanism for the monitoring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:58
Sec. 22-421. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any persons or entities operating or interested in operating a
Marijuana Businesses within city. (Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-422. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the content clearly
implies otherwise:
Adult use marijuana: marijuana cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold by a marijuana
establishment.
Adult use marijuana product: a marijuana product that is manufactured, distributed or sold by a
marijuana establishment.
City Department means any or all of the chief of police, the fire chief, the director of planning
and code enforcement and their designees who administer the provisions of this chapter.
Cultivation or Cultivate: the planting, propagation, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading,
trimming or other processing of marijuana for use or sale. "Cultivation" or "cultivate" does not
include manufacturing, testing or marijuana extraction.
Disqualifying offense means a conviction for a violation of a state or federal law that is (i) a
crime punishable by imprisonment for one year or more or (ii) a crime punishable by
imprisonment for less than one year if it is violation of the Marijuana Legalization Act, 28-B
M.R.S.§101 et seq. or the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act It does not include an offense
that consisted of conduct that would have been permitted under this chapter.
Enclosed, locked facility means a closet, room, or other enclosed area within a building, or an
enclosed locked facility within a greenhouse, that is equipped with locks or other security
devices that permit access only by a licensee.
Food Establishment means a factory, plant, warehouse, or store in which food and food products
are manufactured, processed, packed, held for introduction into commerce, or sold and includes a
caregiver or a registered dispensary that prepares food containing marijuana for medical use by a
qualifying patient. It does not include a caregiver conducting an activity for a qualifying patient
who is a member of the caregiver’s family as defined in MRS Title 22 Section 2422 5-A.
Harvested Marijuana: the plant material harvested from a mature marijuana plant, except the
stalks, leaves and roots. "Harvested marijuana" includes marijuana concentrate and marijuana
products.
Immature marijuana plant: a marijuana plant that is not a mature marijuana plant or a seedling.
Manufacture or Manufacturing: the production, blending, infusing, compounding or other
preparation of marijuana concentrate and marijuana products, including, but not limited to,
marijuana extraction or preparation by means of chemical synthesis.
"Marijuana" means the leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant, whether growing
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:59
or not. Marijuana" includes marijuana concentrate but does not include industrial hemp as defined in
Title 7, section 2231, subsection 1 or a marijuana product.
Marijuana Business: any business involved in the cultivation, processing, testing, sale, or
manufacturing of marijuana products for adult or medical use to include: Facilities for Marijuana
Cultivation, Marijuana Manufacturing, Marijuana Testing as well as Registered Dispensaries and
Marijuana Stores, or Registered Caregivers licensed under this Ordinance.
Marijuana Cultivation facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to purchase marijuana
plants and seeds from other cultivation facilities; to cultivate, prepare and package adult use
marijuana; to sell adult use marijuana to Manufacturing Facilities, to Adult Use Marijuana Stores
and to other cultivation facilities; and to sell marijuana plants and seeds to other cultivation
facilities and immature marijuana plants and seedlings to Marijuana Stores; cultivate, prepare
and package medical marijuana at a location that is not the residence of the Registered Caregiver
or Qualifying Patient
Marijuana extraction: the process of extracting marijuana concentrate from marijuana using water, lipids,
gases, solvents or other chemicals or chemical processes.
Marijuana flower: is the pistillate reproductive organs of a mature marijuana plant, whether processed or
unprocessed, including the flowers and buds of the plant. "Marijuana flower" does not include marijuana
trim or whole mature marijuana plants.
Marijuana Nursery Cultivation Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to cultivate adult
marijuana with not more than 1,000 SF of plant canopy pursuant to MRS 28-B Section501.
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to purchase marijuana
from a cultivation facility or another products manufacturing facility; to manufacture, label and
package adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products; and to sell adult use marijuana
and adult use marijuana products to marijuana stores and to other products manufacturing
facilities; or, a registered tier 1 or tier 2 manufacturing facility or a person authorized to engage
in marijuana extraction under section MRS 22 Section 2423-F.
Marijuana plant: all species of the plant genus cannabis, including, but not limited to, a mother
plant, a mature marijuana plant, an immature marijuana plant or a seedling.
Marijuana Store: a facility licensed under this ordinance where qualified individuals may
purchase marijuana, immature marijuana plants and seedlings from a Cultivation Facility,
purchase marijuana and marijuana products from a Manufacturing Facility and sell marijuana,
marijuana products, immature marijuana plants and seedlings to consumers for their own use and
not for resale or distribution.
Marijuana Testing Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to: develop, research and test
adult use marijuana, adult use marijuana products and other substances; or authorized in
accordance with MRS 22 Section 2423-A, subsection 10, to analyze contaminants in and the
potency and cannabinoid profile of medical marijuana samples and is accredited pursuant to
standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an organization approved by the State
of Maine.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:60
Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery, transfer
or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat
or alleviate a registered patient’s medical diagnosis or symptoms for which a medical provider
has provided the qualifying patient a written certification.
Multifamily dwelling means a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, such
buildings being designed for residential use and occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of one another, with the number of families not exceeding the number of dwelling
units, and which is not a single-family attached dwelling.
Person: an individual or other entity, including a partnership, Limited Liability Company,
corporation or other form of business.
Plant Canopy: the total surface area within the licensed premises of an Adult Use Marijuana
Cultivation Facility that is authorized for use at any time by the cultivation facility licensee to
cultivate mature marijuana plants. The surface area of the plant canopy must be calculated in
square feet and measured using the outside boundaries of the area and must include all of the
area within the boundaries. If the surface area of the plant canopy consists of non-contiguous
areas, each component area must be separated by identifiable boundaries. If a tiered or shelving
system is used by the cultivation facility licensee, the surface area of each tier or shelf must be
included in calculating the area of the plant canopy. Calculation of the area of the plant canopy
may not include the areas within the licensed premises of a cultivation facility that are used by
the licensee to cultivate immature marijuana plants and seedlings and that are not used by the
licensee at any time to cultivate mature marijuana plants.
Qualifying patient: a person who has been a resident of the State for at least 30 days and who
possesses a valid written certification regarding medical use of marijuana in accordance with
MRS 22 Section 2423-B.
Registered caregiver: a person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a qualifying
patient and who is registered by the State of Maine pursuant to MRS 22 Section 24 -A.
Registered Dispensary: a person that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers,
transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and educational
materials to qualifying patients and the caregivers of those patients as that term is defined in
MRS22 Section 2422(6), as may be amended.
Testing or test: the research and analysis of marijuana, marijuana products or other substances
for contaminants, safety or potency.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-423. License required.
No person shall engage, operate or maintain a Marijuana Business in the city unless such
person has first acquired a license in accordance with this Article. A separate license is
required for each type of Marijuana Business, whether located on the same premise, building, or
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:61
property. The following do not require a license:
Each person 21 years of age or older who is growing as a primary caregiver for personal
medical use and/or for personal adult use as allowed per state law and is doing so on the
premises at which that person is domiciled is not subject to the licensing provisions of
this ordinance as long as all cultivation is located within fully enclosed structures and any
odor from marijuana plants or other marijuana products remains confined within the
premises and is not detectable off-site of the premises that are under the custody or
control of the individual or which create a public nuisance at common law. Outdoor
cultivation of marijuana for personal recreational or medical use is prohibited.
Registered Caregivers who manufacture or cultivate medical marijuana only for
themselves and/or members of their household are exempt from the requirement to obtain
a permit or license as it applies to this section of ordinance. Adult use manufacturing in
any structure or property with a residence is prohibited.
Unless otherwise allowed, the cultivation, manufacturing, testing or sale of marijuana
from a residence is prohibited, unless it is for personal use.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-424. Food establishment license.
A food establishment license must be obtained prior to preparing goods containing marijuana
that are intended for consumption.
Registered caregivers who manufacture prepared goods containing medical use marijuana
intended for ingestion, including tinctures, at their residences must apply for and obtain a permit
for a home occupation in accordance with Appendix A, Articles II and V of the Code of
Ordinances, Zoning and Land Use Code, and must obtain a food establishment license from the
City and the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF), and shall comply
with all applicable standards set forth in this ordinance.
Adult use manufacturing out of a residence is prohibited, unless it is for personal use in
accordance with MRS 28-B, Section 1503.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-425. Reserved.
Sec. 22-426. Background checks.
The city clerk shall order background checks on all applicants for a Marijuana Businesses
license. Updated background checks shall be conducted annually at the time of license renewal.
Background checks shall be conducted in each state where such individuals have resided since
the age of 18. (Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-427. Reserved.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:62
Sec. 22-428. Reserved.
Sec. 22-429. Application requirements.
All applications for Marijuana Business licenses under this article shall be filed with, and in a
form satisfactory to, the city clerk. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions
of this Article and shall provide sufficient information to demonstrate that they meet all
qualifications and standards established in this Ordinance.
If the applicant who wishes to operate a Marijuana Business is a single individual, that person
must sign the license application. If the applicant who wishes to operate a Marijuana Business is
more than one individual, each person who has an interest in the business must sign the
application.
Each applicant must meet all qualifications set forth in this Article. Each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
The completed application for a Marijuana Business license shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information and shall be accompanied by the specified documentation:
a. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant’s legal name and any aliases and proof
that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
b. If the applicant is a partnership, the complete name of the partnership and the names of
all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, along with a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any, and proof that all partners are at least twenty-one (21)
years of age. Each general partner must sign the application. Each general partner as
well as the partnership must meet all qualifications set forth in this Article. Each general
partner as well as the partnership shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
c. If the applicant is a corporation, its complete name, the date of its incorporation,
evidence that the corporation is in good standing with the State of Maine, the names and
capacities of all officers, directors, and principal (owning 10% or more of the shares of
the corporation) stockholders, the name of the registered corporate agent, the address of
the registered office for service of process, and proof that all officers, directors, and
principal stockholders are at least twenty-one (21) years of age. A corporate officer must
sign the application. Each of the corporation and corporate officer must meet all
qualifications set forth in this Article. Each of the corporation and corporate officer shall
be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
d. If the applicant is a limited liability company (LLC), its complete name, the date of its
establishment, evidence that the LLC is in good standing with the State of Maine, the
names and capacities of all managers and members, a copy of its operating agreement, if
any, the address of its registered office for service of process, and proof that all members
and managers are at least twenty-one (21) years of age. A duly authorized manager must
sign the application. Each of the limited liability company and manager must meet all
qualifications set forth in this Article. Each of the limited liability company and manager
shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:63
e. If the applicant intends to operate the Marijuana Business under a name other than that
of the applicant, the Marijuana Business’ name must be stated and the required
registration documents must be submitted.
f. If the applicant, an officer, principal shareholder, member, manager or employee has
been convicted of criminal activity under State and/or federal law, the specified criminal
offense involved must be listed including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each
conviction.
g. If the applicant, as an individual, partner, or officer, director, or principal stockholder
of a corporation engaged in a Marijuana Business, or the partner of a partnership, or the
members or managers of a limited liability company has had a previous license
application denied or had such a license suspended or revoked under this ordinance or in
any other governmental jurisdiction, the applicant must list the name and location of the
Marijuana Business, the reason for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked,
the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation, and the position held in the Marijuana
Business.
h. If the applicant holds any other permits/licenses under this ordinance or other similar
Marijuana Business license from another governmental jurisdiction, the applicant shall
provide the names and locations of such other permitted/licensed businesses.
i. The type of Marijuana Business for which the applicant is seeking a license.
j. The location of the proposed Marijuana Business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, and telephone number.
k. Sufficient documentation demonstrating possession or entitlement to possession of the
proposed licensed premises of the Marijuana Business pursuant to a lease, rental
agreement, purchase and sale agreement, ownership, or other arrangement for possession
of the premises.
l. The applicant's telephone number, email address, mailing address and residential
address.
m. The applicant's driver's license or State of Maine Identification Card and, if
applicable, a copy of a valid registered primary caregiver identification card issued by the
State of Maine
n. A sketch showing the configuration of the subject premises, including building
footprint, interior layout identifying floor space to be occupied by the business, and
parking plan. The sketch must be drawn to scale with marked dimensions.
o. A copy of a City Tax Map depicting the property lines of the premises and the property
lines of other properties containing any existing Marijuana Businesses within five
hundred (500) feet of the subject property and the property lines of any pre-existing
schools or child care facilities and public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities
owned by the city within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the subject property,
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:64
measured in accordance with Section 22-430 (3) and (4).
p. A nonrefundable application fee in accordance with the city's policy manual as
established by the city council.
q. Proof that, pursuant to 28-B M.R.S. § 402, the applicant has been issued a conditional
license by the State of Maine to operate the Adult Use Marijuana Business.
Three (3) copies of the license application and all supporting documentation must be provided at
time of application.
All applications for a Marijuana Business license shall be kept confidential by the City.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-430. Performance standards for Marijuana Business.
All marijuana businesses shall conform to the following provisions:
1. No cultivation or storage outside of a structure of marijuana, marijuana products, or
related supplies is permitted.
2. Marijuana businesses operating with City approval prior to December 13, 2018, shall be
entitled to continue operation whether such use does or does not conform to the locational
requirements of Section 22-430 (3) and (4) of this Article of this Code or applicable
zoning ordinances and shall be treated as a nonconforming use pursuant to Article VI,
Section 4 of the Zoning and Land Use Code. A nonconforming business may convert to
another nonconforming business pursuant to Article VI, Section 4(e) of the Zoning and
Land Use Code.
3. No marijuana business shall be sited within seven hundred and fifty (750) feet of the lot
lines of pre-existing schools or child care facilities and public parks, playgrounds or
recreational facilities owned by the city. For the purposes of this paragraph, "school"
includes a public school, as defined in Title 20-A, section 1, subsection 24, a private
school, as defined in Title 20-A, section 1, subsection 22, a public preschool program, as
defined in Title 20-A, section 1, subsection 23-A or any other educational facility that
serves children from prekindergarten to grade 12. “Public parks, playgrounds or
recreational facilities” includes those areas as defined in Section 54-8 of the Lewiston’s
Code of Ordinances. For purposes of this section, the term “child care facility” means a
“child care facility” as that term is defined in 22 M.R.S. § 8301-A (1-A)(B), as may be
amended. Setbacks shall be measured along the ordinary course of travel between the
main entrance of the business and the closest lot line of pre-existing schools or child care
facilities and public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities owned by the city. If the
marijuana business is located within a commercial subdivision or multi-tenant structure
(i.e. business park, shopping plaza, etc.), the required setback shall be measured in the
same manner. Notwithstanding the foregoing, more than one marijuana businesses may
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:65
be located on the same parcel, provided all state and local requirements are met.
Cultivation, manufacturing, testing, nurseries, and dispensaries operating within the
industrial zoning district are exempt from this setback requirement.
4. Separation of marijuana stores and registered dispensaries. The minimum distance
between a marijuana store or dispensary and any two other marijuana stores and/or
dispensaries shall be 500 feet as measured along the ordinary course of travel between the
main entrance of each premises.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, more than one marijuana businesses may be
located on the same parcel, provided all state and local requirements are met.
(b) A parcel with a marijuana store operating with City approval prior to December
13, 2018 is allowed to have one additional store located on the same parcel not
subject to the above referenced separation requirements, provided all state and
local requirements are met and if applicable, shall be treated as a nonconforming
use pursuant to Article VI, Section 4 of the Zoning and Land Use Code.
5. All activities of marijuana businesses, including, without limitation, cultivating, growing,
manufacturing, processing, displaying, selling and storage, shall be conducted indoors.
Marijuana businesses are not permitted to conduct outdoor sales or services of any kind.
Any common areas, including, but not limited to storage areas and building facilities,
shared with another marijuana business must be clearly identified as such in the license
application.
6. Odor management. For all marijuana businesses, the odor of marijuana must not be
detectable offsite, i.e., must not be detected at premises that are not under the custody or
control of the establishment. To prevent and control marijuana odors, an odor control
plan describing the odor(s) originating or anticipated to originate at the premises and the
control technologies to be used to prevent such odor(s) from leaving the premises shall be
submitted as part of the license application.
7. Marijuana businesses shall include appropriate ventilation systems to mitigate noxious
gases or other fumes used or created as part of the operation.
8. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke, debris, dust, fluids and other
substances from exiting a marijuana business must be provided and operating at all times.
9. Sufficient and appropriate security measures to deter the theft of marijuana and prevent
unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana must be provided at all times.
Security measures shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) security surveillance cameras installed and operating 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week to monitor all entrances, along with interior and exterior of the premises to
discourage and facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities
occurring at the premises;
(b) door and window intrusion alarm systems with audible and Police Department
notification components that are professionally monitored and maintained in good
working order;
(c) a locking safe or its functional equivalent permanently affixed to the premises that
is suitable for storage of all adult use marijuana products, medical marijuana
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:66
products and cash stored overnight on the premises;
(d) exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior walls of the premises and complies
with applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances; and
(e) deadbolt locks on all exterior doors and locks or bars on any other access points
(e.g., windows).
10. Sale of edible products. No food products shall be sold, prepared, produced or assembled
by a marijuana business except in compliance with all operating and other requirements
of state and local law and regulations including, without limitation, food establishment
licensing requirements. Any goods containing marijuana for human consumption shall
be stored in a secure area.
11. Drive-through and home delivery. Marijuana businesses are prohibited from having
drive-through pick-up facilities. Marijuana businesses are prohibited from providing
home delivery services; provided, however, that registered caregivers and medical
marijuana assistants may provide home delivery services. Adult use marijuana customers
may only purchase and obtain adult use marijuana products from within a marijuana
store.
12. Manufacture of marijuana. The extraction of marijuana using inherently dangerous
substances is prohibited unless (a) the person has sought and obtained authorization to do
so with the State of Maine, and (b) such activity is located in a zoning district where a
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility is an allowed use.
13. Signs: Notwithstanding the requirements of the Article XII, Section 16 of the Zoning and
Land Use Code, all signs used by and all marketing and advertising conducted by or on
behalf of a marijuana business may not involve advertising or marketing that has a high
likelihood of reaching persons under 21 years of age or that is specifically designed to
appeal to persons under 21 years of age. The signs, marketing, or advertising are
prohibited from making any health or physical benefit claims. All signage shall meet the
City’s sign ordinance requirements and may use an image or images of the marijuana
plant or plants, or parts thereof, as long such image or images do not exceed 20% of the
sign face. Pictorial representations of other marijuana products, by-products, or
paraphernalia associated with the use or distribution of retail marijuana is prohibited.
14. Other laws remain applicable. A marijuana establishment shall meet all operating and
other requirements of State and local law and regulation. To the extent the State of Maine
has adopted or adopts in the future any stricter law or regulation governing adult use
marijuana and/or marijuana establishments, the stricter law or regulation shall control.
15. Businesses must satisfy all applicable State of Maine and city code requirements such as,
but not limited to, electrical, plumbing, building, ventilation, energy conservation, life
safety, and mechanical in addition to the environmental performance standards with
respect to odors and other environmental considerations as per Appendix A, Article XII,
Section 19.
16. The cultivation of marijuana within or on the property of a multifamily dwelling is
prohibited;
17. Businesses may not be located within 300 feet as measured along the ordinary course of
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:67
travel between the main entrance of the business and main entrance of a legally
established dwelling in a residential zoning district, in existence prior to the
establishment of the business.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-431. Reserved
Sec. 22-432. Reserved.
Sec. 22-433. Inspection of marijuana businesses
A marijuana business is subject to inspection as follows:
1. Submission of a license application for a marijuana business shall constitute permission
for entry and inspection.
2. A marijuana business shall allow the City Department to carry out an inspection in
accordance with this chapter at any reasonable time.
3. During an inspection, the City Department may identify violations of this chapter
or other provisions of the Code or State Law. The marijuana business may receive
written notice by certified mail of the nature of the violations. If so, the marijuana
business must notify, in writing, the representative of the City Department identified in
such notice within ten (10) business days of the date of the notice of violations
identifying the corrective actions taken and the date of the correction.
4. Failure to cooperate with required inspections and to respond to notices of violations as
specified shall be grounds for the city clerk or the City Department to temporarily
suspend the license of the marijuana business, subject to potential license revocation by
the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-434. Denial of application.
The city clerk may deny an application for a license based on the applicant’s failure to comply
with the application requirements set out in these rules, including the applicant’s failure to
provide the required information; and/or a determination that the information provided was
materially inaccurate or incomplete. (Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-435. Disqualifying conviction.
The City shall not approve a license for a marijuana business if (i) the applicant or applicants in
the case of individual applicants; (ii) the applicant or any general partner in the case of an
application by a partnership; (iii) the applicant or any officer or principal shareholder in the case
of an application by a corporation; and (iv) the applicant or any manager in the case of an
application by a limited liability company, has been convicted of a disqualifying offense in
Maine or another jurisdiction, specifically a conviction, within the past 10 years, for a violation
of a state or federal law that is a crime punishable by imprisonment for one year or more;
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:68
misdemeanor convictions (or local ordinance violations) involving a controlled substance,
dishonesty, theft, or fraud within the past 5 years; submitting an application that contains false
information; failure to demonstrate the ability to maintain adequate premises liability and
casualty insurance; failure to meet other criteria established by the State; and tax delinquency
issues at the local, state, or federal level.
The city clerk or the City Department shall temporarily suspend the license for a marijuana
business for any violations of the provisions contained within this chapter.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-436. Revocation of license.
Grounds for revocation of a license of a marijuana business by the city administrator include the
following actions of a licensee:
1. Conviction of the licensee of selling, furnishing, or giving marijuana to a person who is
not allowed to possess marijuana in accordance with these rules and the applicable state
statutes.
2. Conviction of a disqualifying drug offense by the licensee.
3. Conviction of dispensing, delivering, or otherwise transferring marijuana to a person
other than a registered patient who has designated the registered primary caregiver to
cultivate marijuana.
4. Failure to cooperate with required inspections.
5. Failure to timely rectify any Notice of Violations.
6. Violations of any laws, rules, or ordinances that govern the operation of a
marijuana business.
7. Committing, permitting, aiding or abetting any illegal practices in the operation of a
marijuana business;
8. Conduct or practices that are detrimental to the safety and welfare of patient
or/customers;
9. Providing information that is materially inaccurate or incomplete; and
10. Revocation or suspension of any state license or permit related to the Marijuana Business
with which the licensee is associated
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-437. Reserved.
Sec. 22-438. License administration for a marijuana business.
The city clerk and the City Department may impose conditions on the approval of any
license application under this article to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article or any other provision of law. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:69
(a) That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the
receipt of all approvals required from any federal or state agency or
department pursuant to federal or state law prior to operations.
(b) That the applicant provide documentation to the city clerk of the receipt
of any approvals required by any city board pursuant to this Code prior to the
issuance of any license under this article.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-439. Reserved.
Sec. 22-440. Reserved.
Sec. 22-441. Reserved.
Sec. 22-442. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or the terms of any license issued under
this article may be penalized in the following manner:
(1) Temporary suspension. The city clerk and the City Department are authorized, pursuant
to section 22-44, to immediately and temporarily suspend any license when continued operation
of the licensed premises or activity presents a danger to the health, safety or the general welfare
of the public.
(2) The city administrator may suspend or revoke a license for a marijuana business in
accordance with the provisions of section 22-436 of this article.
(3) Civil penalties. A violator may be required to pay the penalties imposed by section 1-8 of
this Code or 30-A M.R.S.A. (4452 et seq. as amended). A court judgment in the city's favor
may result in a court order that the owner and/or operator of said Marijuana Business abate any
violations, pay a penalty in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city
council, and pay the court costs and legal and expert witness fees incurred by the city.
Notwithstanding the above, the chief of police may initiate criminal proceedings relative to
individuals engaged in the unlawful distribution, use and cultivation of marijuana.
(Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Sec. 22-443. Confidentiality.
All applications and supporting information submitted by primary caregivers under this
ordinance, and the identity of registered primary caregivers and registered patients, shall be
confidential pursuant to the Act, 22 M.R.S.A. §2425(8), and the Maine Freedom of Access law,
1 M.R.S.A. §402(3)(F). (Ord. No. 19-13, 12-19-19)
Secs. 22-444 – 22-449. Reserved
BUSINESSES
Lewiston Code Chapter 22
CH 22:70
ARTICLE XVI. RESERVED*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 18-07, effective Sept. 13, 2018, repealed Art. XVI, § 22-450, in its entirety. Formerly,
said article pertained to Recreational Marijuana.
Secs. 22-450 –22-459. Reserved.
Chapter 23
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:1
Chapter 24
CABLE TELEVISION*
Article I. In General
Sec. 24-1. Establishment and purpose.
Sec. 24-2. Definitions.
Sec. 24-3. Franchise required.
Sec. 24-4. Franchise contract.
Sec. 24-5. Public hearing.
Sec. 24-6. Performance bond and insurance coverage.
Secs. 24-7--24-19. Reserved.
Article II. Board Created
Sec. 24-20. Cable television advisory board.
Secs. 24-21--24-29. Reserved.
Article III. Operations
Sec. 24-30. Franchise contract contents.
Sec. 24-31. Rules, regulations and procedures.
Sec. 24-32. Compliance with all laws.
Sec. 24-33. Severability.
*Cross references: Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; streets
and sidewalks, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning and land use code, app. A.
CABLE TELEVISION
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 24-1. Establishment and purpose.
This chapter is an ordinance providing for city regulation and use of the cable television
system including its construction, operation and maintenance in, along, upon, across, over and
under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all
extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city, including poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes, conductors and fixtures necessary for a cable television system and to
provide conditions accompanying the grant of a franchise and providing for the city's regulating
of cable television system operation.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly implies otherwise:
Cable television company or company means any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling, operating, managing or leasing a cable television system within the city.
Cable television system means any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or
indirectly over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals transmitting programs
broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or originates its own signal or signals
produced through any of its community access channels, and distributes such signals by wire or
cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services. The term does not include
any such facility that serves fewer than 50 subscribers or that serves only the residents of one or
more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and commercial
establishments located on the premises of the apartment dwellings.
City shall mean the City of Lewiston organized and existing under the laws of the State of
Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Cross references: Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 24-3. Franchise required.
No person, firm or corporation shall install, maintain or operate within the city or any of
its public streets or other public areas any equipment or facilities for the operation of a cable
television system unless a franchise agreement authorizing the use of said public streets or areas
has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless said franchise
agreement is in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-4. Franchise contract.
The municipal officers of the city may contract on such terms, conditions and fees as are
in the best interest of the municipality and its residents with one or more cable television
companies for the operation of a cable television system within the city, including the granting of
CABLE TELEVISION
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:3
nonexclusive franchise agreements for the operation thereof for a period not to exceed 15 years.
Applicants for a franchise agreement, including applicants for renewal of a franchise
agreement, shall pay a reasonable fee to the city to defray the cost of public notices, advertising
and other expenses relating to, or incurred by the city in acting upon, such applications. The
amount of said fee is to be determined by the municipal officers.
The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain such information as the
city may require, including but not limited to a general description of the applicant's proposed
operation, a schedule of proposed changes, a statement detailing its previous two fiscal years, an
estimated ten-year financial projection of its proposed system and its proposed annual city
franchise fee or the basis for same, and a statement detailing the prior operational experience of
the applicant in both cable television and microwave service including that of its officers,
management and staff to be associated with the proposed operation.
Prior to issuing a request for proposals to any cable television company or companies for
franchise agreements or renewals, the city shall hold a public hearing or conduct some other
process to determine any special local needs or interests with respect to cable television service
and shall allow for a period of public comment on the request for proposals.
Franchise agreement applications, including renewal applications, and any submittals in
response to a request for proposals or solicitation of bids and related documents, are public
records. Upon the filing of such documents, the city shall provide reasonable notice to the public
that such documents are open to public inspection during reasonable hours.
A franchise agreement may be revoked by the municipal officers for good and sufficient
cause after due notice to the company and a public hearing thereon; with the sole right to appeal
to the Androscoggin County Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-5. Public hearing.
Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise agreement, including renewals, and
approvals of any transfers of ownership, property or rights under franchise agreements, the
municipal officers shall review the applicant's character, financial and technical qualifications
and the adequacy and feasibility of its qualifications to operate a cable television system within
the city, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon with at least seven days advertised notice
prior to said public hearing. Such public hearing shall provide a reasonable opportunity for
public input on the proposed franchise agreement, renewal or transfer.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-6. Performance bond and insurance coverage.
Upon the execution of any such franchise agreement, the cable television company shall
file a surety company performance bond in the amount and in such form as is acceptable to the
city.
The city, in making this determination, may rely upon the advice of the municipal
officers, city administrator, city attorney and/or other appropriate city officials. The amount of
CABLE TELEVISION
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:4
said bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of performing any work specified in the
franchise agreement and shall include the cost of dismantling the cable television system. Said
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of said contract and full compliance
with any laws, ordinances or regulations governing said franchise agreements.
When the cable television company has completed construction of the system as set forth
in the franchise agreement and provided that the cable television company is otherwise in
compliance with the terms of the franchise agreement, the municipal officers shall permit the
company to reduce said bond to an amount sufficient to cover the cost of dismantling the system.
The cable television company shall also, upon execution of any such franchise contract,
provide evidence of such public liability, copyright infringement and other insurance coverage as
the municipal officers may require.
The municipal officers may opt to provide for a cash security fund in lieu of a
performance bond and appropriately condition the security fund.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Secs. 24-7--24-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BOARD CREATED
Sec. 24-20. Cable television advisory board.
(a) Establishment. The municipal officers are hereby authorized to establish a cable
television advisory board and to enter into an interlocal agreement with the City of
Auburn and other municipalities served by the cable system(s) serving Lewiston for the
purpose of establishing a cable television advisory board.
(b) Membership. The municipal officers are hereby authorized to appoint up to ten volunteer
members to the cable television advisory board for the city. In addition, the city
administrator, or his/her designee, shall be an advisory member to the board.
(c) Duties of the board. The cable television advisory board shall have the following duties:
(1) To propose such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for monitoring
the operation of the cable television system, said rules and regulations being
subject to the approval of the municipal officers. All such rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with those that have been or may be adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission for the operation of such systems, but may, unless
expressly preempted, be more detailed, more restrictive, or more strict than
applicable FCC regulations.
(2) To make recommendations to the city and the cable television company
concerning educational and local interest programming.
(3) To resolve complaints, disputes, or disagreements between subscribers and the
company.
(4) To prepare specifications for bids or requests for proposals for cable television
franchises and invite bids or issue requests for proposals for said franchises.
Before issuing a request for proposals or soliciting bids, the cable television
CABLE TELEVISION
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:5
advisory board shall determine any special local needs or interests, whether by
actively seeking to determine those needs or interests or by allowing a period for
public comment on a proposed request for proposals. Upon receipt of bids or
proposals, it shall study same and make recommendations on the awarding of a
franchise, said recommendations being subject to the approval of the municipal
officers.
(5) To oversee and administer the use and operation of local public, educational and
governmental access facilities.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Secs. 24-21--24-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OPERATIONS
Sec. 24-30. Franchise contract contents.
Each franchise agreement between the city and any cable television company shall
contain, but is not limited to, the following provisions:
(1) A statement of the area or areas to be served by the cable television company;
(2) A line extension policy;
(3) A provision for renewal, the term of which may not exceed 15 years;
(4) Procedures for the investigation and resolution of subscriber complaints by the
cable television company;
(5) An agreement to comply with the requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3010
regarding consumer rights and protection and any amendments thereto;
(6) Any other terms and conditions that are in the best interest of the city; and
(7) A provision for access to, and facilities to make use of, one or more local public,
educational and governmental access channels.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-31. Rules, regulations and procedures.
The municipal officers of the city shall, either directly or through their designees:
(1) Adopt such ordinance rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for
regulating the operation of a cable television system;
(2) Make recommendations to the cable television company concerning educational
and local interest programming;
(3) Resolve complaints, disputes, or disagreements between subscribers and the
company;
(4) Conduct public hearings and issue such appropriate orders as it may deem
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulations, rules and
CABLE TELEVISION
Lewiston Code Chapter 24
CH 24:6
orders and franchise agreements, including the revocation of franchise agreements
and the assessment of penalties for violations, as well as to correct any
deficiencies in the operation of the system. The municipal officers' decisions and
findings shall be final and binding upon all parties including the company, except
such decision or finding may be appealed to the Androscoggin County Superior
Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure;
(5) All such ordinances, regulations, rules and orders of the municipal officers shall
not be in conflict with those that have been or may be adopted by the Federal
Communications Commission for the operation of such systems, except that
unless expressly preempted, such ordinances, regulations, rules and orders may be
more detailed, more strict or more restrictive than applicable FCC regulations;
and
(6) As part of its enforcement authority, the municipal officers have the authority to
bring legal action for damages, penalties and for injunctive relief. The city shall
be entitled to recover its costs, including reasonable attorneys fees, incurred in the
enforcement of this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement, or any
local rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-32. Compliance with all laws.
Cable television companies shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state and
local laws, statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes and orders.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Sec. 24-33. Severability.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-17, 12-17-96)
Chapter 25
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 26
CH 26:1
Chapter 26
CEMETERIES
Sec. 26-1. Control, care and maintenance.
Sec. 26-2. Accounting; disbursements.
CEMETERIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 26
CH 26:2
Sec. 26-1. Control, care and maintenance.
The department of public works shall be charged with the control, care and maintenance
of all cemeteries under the jurisdiction of the city.
(Code 1982, § 8-1)
Sec. 26-2. Accounting; disbursements.
All trust funds and accounts established for the purpose of maintaining the Grand Army
of the Republic and all other public cemeteries shall be administered by the city treasurer. The
treasurer shall annually reimburse the city for expenses incurred in the maintenance of
cemeteries up to an amount not to exceed the accumulated interest in such trust accounts.
(Code 1982, § 8-2)
Chapters 27-29
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 30
CH 30:1
Chapter 30
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*
Article I. In General
Secs. 30-1--30-25. Reserved.
Article II. Emergency Management
Sec. 30-26. Organization.
Sec. 30-27. Appointment of emergency management director, duties and responsibilities.
Sec. 30-28. Rules and regulations.
Sec. 30-29. Emergency proclamation; mayor's or city administrator's powers.
Sec. 30-30. Mayor's or city administrator's duties and emergency powers.
Sec. 30-31. Emergency operational plan.
Sec. 30-32. Civil emergency preparedness forces.
Sec. 30-33. Immunity from liability.
Sec. 30-34. Compensation for injuries.
Sec. 30-35. Right-of-way; penalty.
Sec. 30-36. Violation of article.
*Cross references: Administration, ch. 2.
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 30
CH 30:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1--30-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 30-26. Organization.
(a) There is created an emergency management agency in compliance and conformity with
the provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A. §§ 703 and 781, referred to in this article as the
emergency management agency.
(b) The city administrator shall be responsible for the agency's organization, administration
and operation. The city administrator may employ such permanent and temporary
employees as he deems necessary and prescribe their duties.
(c) The city council shall advise the city administrator and the emergency management
director on all matters of civil emergency preparedness, review the existing operational
organization to ascertain the agency's ability to cope with its responsibilities, and accept
or reject, after public hearing, such rules and regulations submitted to it under section 30-
28.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-531, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-27. Appointment of emergency management director, duties and responsibilities.
The city administrator shall appoint a director who shall coordinate the activities of all
city departments, organizations and agencies for civil emergency preparedness within the city
and maintain liaison with other emergency management agencies and public safety agencies, and
have such additional duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the city administrator.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-532, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-28. Rules and regulations.
The director shall prepare under the direction and control of the city administrator such policies
as may be deemed necessary for the administration and operational requirements of the
emergency management agency, which policies must be approved by the city council prior to
becoming effective. The city council, after public hearing, shall accept, amend or reject such
policies.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-533, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-29. Emergency proclamation; mayor's or city administrator's powers.
(a) The mayor or the city administrator shall have with the power and authority, after
consultation with the city council, to issue a proclamation that an emergency exists under
conditions specified in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 742. The proclamation may declare the fact that
an emergency exists in any or all sections of the city. If the city administrator is
temporarily absent from the city or is otherwise unavailable, the next person in the city
who would serve as acting city administrator shall have the authority to issue an
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 30
CH 30:3
emergency proclamation. A copy of such proclamation shall be filed within 24 hours with
the city clerk.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, when consultation with
the city council would result in a substantial delay in an effective response in alleviating
or preventing an emergency or disaster, the mayor or the city administrator is authorized
to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss of life and property in the city.
(c) The mayor or the city administrator and/or the emergency management director shall be
responsible to submit a full report to the city council of actions taken under this section as
soon as the city council can convene.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-534, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-30. Mayor's or city administrator's duties and emergency powers.
(a) During any period when an emergency or disaster exists or appears imminent, the mayor
or the city administrator may promulgate such regulations deemed necessary to protect
life, property and to preserve critical resources within the purpose of this section. Such
regulations may include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles from areas within
or without the city.
(2) Regulations pertaining to the evacuation of persons from any hazard-stricken or
threatened areas of the city.
(3) Regulations necessary to abate, clean up or mitigate whatever hazards exist.
(4) Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety.
(b) The mayor or the city administrator or the emergency management director shall be
authorized to request aid and/or assistance from the state or any political subdivisions of
the state and shall render assistance through reciprocal mutual aid agreements to other
entities or political subdivisions under the provisions of 37-B M.R.S.A. §§ 701 and 784.
(c) The mayor or the city administrator or purchasing agent may obtain vital supplies,
equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life
and property.
(d) The provisions of subsections (a) through (c) of this section will terminate at the ending
of the declared emergency.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-535, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-31. Emergency operational plan.
(a) The city administrator will cause to be prepared an emergency operational plan for the
city, which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Amendments to the
emergency operational plan shall be submitted to the city council for approval.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the
functions and/or responsibilities assigned and to maintain their portion of the emergency
plan in a current state of readiness. The city's emergency operational plan shall be
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 30
CH 30:4
reviewed periodically by the mayor or the city administrator in conjunction with all city
department heads and the emergency management director.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-536, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-32. Civil emergency preparedness forces.
The civil emergency preparedness forces of the city shall be the employees, equipment
and facilities of all city departments, agencies, boards, and commissions suitable for, or
adaptable to, the activities of emergency management and, in addition, shall include all private
volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from private volunteer
persons and organizations.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-537, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-33. Immunity from liability.
Immunity from liability shall be as set forth in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 822.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-538, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-34. Compensation for injuries.
All members of the civil emergency preparedness forces shall be deemed to be
employees of the state when engaged in training for, or on, duty and shall have all the rights of
state employees under the workmen's compensation act as specified in 37-B M.R.S.A. § 823.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-539, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-35. Right-of-way; penalty.
Personnel and equipment required to respond to an emergency or disaster shall have the
right-of-way over all public ways and roads, and anyone failing to grant such right-of-way shall
suffer penalties as specified under 37-B M.R.S.A. § 828.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-540, 5-21-92)
Sec. 30-36. Violation of article.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or the
regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article, or to willfully
obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization as described in
this article in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulation or plan issued
thereunder.
(Ord. No. 92-10, § 2-541, 5-21-92)
Chapter 31
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:1
Chapter 32
ELECTIONS*
Article I. In General
Sec. 32-1. Wards described.
Sec. 32-2. Write-in vote.
Sec. 32-3. Validity of vote.
Sec. 32-4. Voter approval required.
Secs. 32-5--32-25. Reserved.
Article II. Initiative and Referendum
Sec. 32-26. Established.
Sec. 32-27. How to invoke.
Sec. 32-28. Form of petition.
Sec. 32-29. Ordinances subject to initiative or referendum.
Sec. 32-30. Number of votes required.
Sec. 32-31. Submission to voters; municipal action eliminating an election.
Sec. 32-32. Effective date after election.
Sec. 32-33. Conflicting ordinances.
Sec. 32-34. Order upon the ballot.
Sec. 32-35. Amending and repealing matters enacted by the people.
Sec. 32-36. Authority to submit question to a popular vote.
Sec. 32-37. Publication required.
Sec. 32-38. Form of ballot.
Sec. 32-39. Ordinances not retroactive.
Sec. 32-40. Additional ordinances authorized.
Sec. 32-41. Authority of council to submit question for nonbinding vote.
*Cross references: Administration, ch. 2.
State law references: Municipal elections generally, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2501 et seq.
ELECTIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. Wards described.
Official Ward Map. The wards of the city for all elections of the city shall be as shown on the
map dated June 13, 2014 and maintained on file in the office of the city clerk.
The map shall depict the boundaries of each of the seven city electoral wards.
All amendments to the map shall be approved by the city council, and all amendments so
approved shall be recorded in the office of the city clerk.
(Code 1982, § 9-1; Ord. No. 93-10, § 9-1, 7-1-93; Ord. No. 93-14, § 9-1, 8-19-93; Ord. No. 4-22, 9-9-04;
Ord. No. 14-08, 6-13-14)
Sec. 32-2. Write-in vote.
If a voter wishes to vote for a person whose name is not on the ballot, he shall write the full name
in the blank space provided at the end of the list of nominees for the office in question, with the
surname first or last. The voter shall then complete the voting indicator next to the name.
(Code 1982, § 9-3, Ord. No. 14-01, 3-6-14)
Sec. 32-3. Validity of vote.
If a voter marks his ballot or casts a write-in vote in a manner which differs from the
instructions at the top of the ballot, but in such a manner that it is possible to determine the
voter's choice, then the vote for the office or question concerned shall be counted.
(Code 1982, § 9-4)
Sec. 32-4. Voter approval required.
No local tax monies shall be spent to build a convention center or civic center in the City
of Lewiston. The construction of a convention center or civic center shall not be funded through
the city's general budget, general obligation bonds, and/or community development block grants
unless approved by the voters at a regular or special municipal election.
(Ord. No. 98-10, 11-5-98)
Secs. 32-5--32-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Sec. 32-26. Established.
Initiative and referendum for the electors of the city in regard to its municipal affairs are
hereby established in accordance with article 4, part 3, section 21, of the state constitution.
(Code 1982, § 9-18)
ELECTIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:3
Sec. 32-27. How to invoke.
The submission to the vote of the people of any proposed or enacted ordinance, order or
resolve, or question, may be accomplished by the presentation of a petition therefor to the
council in the manner provided in this article. Any ten qualified voters of the city may originate a
petition putting in operation the initiative or the referendum by signing a petition application at
the office of the city clerk. The petition application shall be available to accept signatures for 10
working days. Whenever requested by ten such voters, the clerk shall prepare the proper petition
with a copy of the ordinance, order or resolve to be submitted attached thereto, and upon its
being signed by the ten voters, the clerk shall issue the petition forms to the ten voters and upon
the request of any registered voter within the city, who shall for 60 days thereafter collect
signatures of qualified voters of the city. Any signatures collected outside of the 60-day period
shall be deemed invalid. Prior to the close of business on the 60th day, or in the event said day is
a nonbusiness day, the immediate next business day, the petition forms shall be submitted to the
city clerk, the city clerk shall declare the petition closed, shall verify the signatures on the
petition within ten business days, and shall at the first regular meeting of the council thereafter
present the petition with verification of the number of valid signatures thereto attached to the
council. If the number of valid signatures to such petition shall amount to seven percent of the
number of votes cast in the City of Lewiston at the last gubernatorial election or greater, the
council shall order that the question proposed in the petition be submitted to the voters of the city
at the next available, scheduled election following.
Provided, that in the case of the referendum, the entire repeal of the ordinance, order or resolve
sought to be referred, and in the case of the initiative, the passage by the council of the desired
ordinance, order or resolve, shall put an end to all proceedings under the petition.
(Code 1982, § 9-19; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08; Ord. No. 14-09, 01-01-2015)
Sec. 32-28. Form of petition.
The petition used to originate the initiative or the referendum shall be substantially in the
following terms:
PETITION TO THE CITY COUNCIL
FOR THE SUBMISSION TO THE PEOPLE OF THE QUESTION
Shall the ordinance, order, resolve or question, a copy of which is hereunto
attached, be adopted?
We, the undersigned, are duly qualified voters of the City of Lewiston, residing
respectively at the addresses placed opposite our names, and we hereby petition the city
council to submit the foregoing question to the voters of the City of Lewiston at the next
regular municipal election.
Names Residence Date
_________________ ________________________ ________________________
_________________ ________________________ ________________________
(Code 1982, § 9-20; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
ELECTIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:4
Sec. 32-29. Ordinances subject to initiative or referendum.
Initiatives and referendums are permitted on all ordinances, orders and resolves
pertaining to the policing power authority of the council to regulate, govern and enforce all
legislative matters on the municipal level regarding the health, safety and welfare of the general
public, such as, but not limited to zoning, licensing, noise, traffic, solid waste, animals and other
related issues. Any resolve dealing with appropriations or orders or resolves dealing with tax
levy or budgetary matters shall be subject to the ordinance from which this section derives for
the next fiscal year following the successful passage by the voters. No ordinance, order or
resolve dealing with terms and conditions of employment for city employees shall be subject to
the initiative and referendum provisions contained in this article.
(Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-30. Number of votes required.
Whenever a petition has been originated in accordance with the provisions of this article
for the reference to the people of any ordinance, order, resolve or question passed by the council,
and the required number of valid signatures has been obtained thereon for its presentation to the
council, the same shall be suspended from going into operation until it has been submitted to a
vote of the people and has received the affirmative vote of a majority of the voters on such
question, unless otherwise restricted in section 32-29.
(Code 1982, § 9-21; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-31. Submission to voters; municipal action eliminating an election.
When an initiative or referendum petition meeting the requirements of this article is
presented by the city clerk, the city council shall order that the proposed or referred ordinance,
order, resolve or question be submitted to the voters of the city at the next available, scheduled
election following if not otherwise earlier authorized by a special election, unless the city council
proceeds to repeal the ordinance, order, resolve or question in the case of a referendum, or to
pass the desired ordinance, order, resolve or question in the case of the initiative.
(Code 1982, § 9-22; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-32. Effective date after election.
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance, order,
resolve or question or a referred ordinance, order, resolve or question shall vote in favor thereof,
such ordinance, order, resolve or question shall take effect upon the declaration of the official
canvass of the return of such election and the mayor shall forthwith make proclamation thereof.
(Code 1982, § 9-23; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-33. Conflicting ordinances.
Any number of proposed or referred ordinances, orders, resolves or questions may be
voted upon at the same election. If two or more ordinances, orders, resolves or questions adopted
at the same election shall contain conflicting provisions, the ordinance, order, resolve or question
receiving the highest number of votes at such election shall be paramount and all questions of
ELECTIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:5
construction shall be determined accordingly.
(Code 1982, § 9-24; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-34. Order upon the ballot.
If two or more ordinances, orders, resolves or questions are submitted at the same
election, they shall be placed upon the ballot in the order of the priority of the filing of the
respective petitions and shall be given precedence upon the ballot over any and all questions
submitted by the council on its own initiative.
(Code 1982, § 9-25; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-35. Amending and repealing matters enacted by the people.
An ordinance, order, resolve or question proposed by petition or adopted by vote of the
people shall not be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people, unless such ordinance,
order, resolve or question shall otherwise expressly provide.
(Code 1982, § 9-26; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-36. Authority to submit question to a popular vote.
The council may submit on its own initiative a proposition for the enactment, repeal or
amendment of any ordinance, order, resolve or question except as otherwise provided in this
article, to be voted upon at a regular or special city election, and should such proposition receive
a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, such ordinance, order, resolve or question
shall be enacted, repealed or amended accordingly.
(Code 1982, § 9-27; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Editor's note: Lewiston voters accepted this ordinance, that was passed by the council, at an election held on Feb.
17, 1947.
State law references: City council's authority to establish the initiative and referendum, the Maine Constitution,
art. IV, § 21.
Sec. 32-37. Publication required.
Whenever any ordinance, order, resolve or question is required by the provisions of this
article to be submitted to the voters of the city, the city council shall order one publication of the
complete text thereof to be made in the daily newspapers published in the city, such publication
to be made not less than seven days, nor more than 15 days prior to the election.
(Code 1982, § 9-30; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-38. Form of ballot.
The ballots used when voting upon proposed ordinances, orders, resolves or questions
shall set forth the title in full and state its general nature and shall contain the words: "For the
ordinance, order, resolve or question" and "Against the ordinance, order, resolve or question".
(Code 1982, § 9-31; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
ELECTIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 32
CH 32:6
Sec. 32-39. Ordinances not retroactive.
All ordinances, orders, resolves or questions and parts thereof which are hereafter
repealed through the initiative and referendum provided for in this article shall remain in force
for the trial and punishment of all past violations of them and for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures already incurred and for the preservation of all rights and remedies existing by them
and, so far as they apply, to any office, trust, proceeding, right, contract or event already affected
by them. (Code 1982, § 9-29; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-40. Additional ordinances authorized.
The council shall, by ordinance, make such further regulations as may be necessary to carry out
the provisions of this article. (Code 1982, § 9-28; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Sec. 32-41. Authority of council to submit question for nonbinding vote.
The council may submit to the electorate on its own initiative a nonbinding question, to
determine the collective views of the voters, to be voted upon at a regular or special city election.
Such question shall be entitled on the Ballot "Nonbinding Question To Voters" and the vote
thereon shall not be binding upon the council. The city clerk shall report to the council the results
of such vote at the next council meeting occurring at least ten days after the date of such election.
Such question shall not be subject to sections 32-26 through 32-36 or 32-38.
(Ord. No. 01-15, 10-4-01; Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-08)
Chapter 33
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 34
CH 34:1
Chapter 34
ENVIRONMENT*
Article I. In General
Secs. 34-1--34-25. Reserved.
Article II. Nuisances
Sec. 34-26. Forbidden.
Sec. 34-27. Nuisance defined.
Sec. 34-28. Inspections of tenements; vacating occupants.
Sec. 34-29. Offensive conditions declared nuisances.
Sec. 34-30. Abatement generally.
Sec. 34-31. Abatement orders and appeals.
Sec. 34-32. Abatement by city.
Sec. 34-33. Penalty and abatement.
Sec. 34-34. Obnoxious use of buildings.
Sec. 34-35. Dense smoke.
Sec. 34-36. Abandoning an airtight container.
Sec. 34-37. Disposal of dead animals restricted.
Sec. 34-38. Action for damages.
*Cross references: Vegetation, ch. 78.
ENVIRONMENT
Lewiston Code Chapter 34
CH 34:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1--34-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. NUISANCES*
*Cross references: Depositing offensive substances, § 54-5.
Sec. 34-26. Forbidden.
No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance.
(Code 1982, § 18-1)
Sec. 34-27. Nuisance defined.
Whatever is dangerous to human health, whatever renders the grounds, the water, the air, or
food, hazardous or injurious to health, is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
(Code 1982, § 14-2)
Sec. 34-28. Inspections of tenements; vacating occupants.
Whenever the health officer shall find that the number of persons occupying any tenement is so
great as to be the cause of nuisance or sickness, or a source of filth; and whenever any tenement
is not furnished with suitable sewage disposal facilities, according to the rules and regulations of
the state department of human services, division of health and engineering, such health officer
may cause all or any persons occupying such tenement to be removed therefrom, first giving
them notice in writing to remove, and allowing them at least 48 hours in which to comply with
the notice.
(Code 1982, § 14-1)
Sec. 34-29. Offensive conditions declared nuisances.
Any accumulation of refuse matter such as swill, waste of meat, fish, shells, bones, decayed
vegetables, dead carcasses, excrement or any kind of offal which may decompose and generate
diseases, germs or unhealthy gases, and affect the purity of the air in the immediate vicinity of
any dwelling house or place of business, shall be considered a nuisance.
(Code 1982, § 14-3)
Sec. 34-30. Abatement generally.
The process for abatement of a nuisance is as provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2702.
(Code 1982, § 18-7)
ENVIRONMENT
Lewiston Code Chapter 34
CH 34:3
Sec. 34-31. Abatement orders and appeals.
(a) Whenever the health officer determines that a condition is or is likely to become injurious
to the health of the public, an order to correct such condition shall be issued to the responsible
party. The order shall be in writing and include a statement of the reasons for issuance of the
order and may contain an outline of remedial action which will effect compliance with this
chapter. A copy of the order shall be kept as part of the public record.
(b) The order shall be served upon the owner or his agent or upon the occupant as the case
may require. The order shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, agent or
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by registered
mail or certified mail to his last known address or the address as shown on the records in the
department of assessment. A statement signed by the person so serving, stating the date of
service, shall be filed in the office of the director of code enforcement.
(c) Any person served with an order pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the
board of appeals by filing a written petition for the hearing at the office of the director of code
enforcement within ten days of the date of service of order. The appeal shall be heard at the next
scheduled meeting of the board of appeals occurring at least 48 hours after the date of filing. The
board of appeals may sustain, modify or withdraw such order. The decision of the board of
appeals may be further appealed pursuant to the provisions of rule 80B of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure. To take advantage of this right, a petition for review must be filed with the
superior court within 30 days of receipt of the decision of the board of appeals.
(d) The health officer may, upon evidence of disregard of the order or noncompliance with
the decision of the board of appeals, request that appropriate legal action be instituted by the city
attorney.
(Code 1982, § 14-4)
Sec. 34-32. Abatement by city.
Upon failure to correct any nuisance described in section 34-28, after due notice given by the
health officer, the same shall be corrected at the expense of the owner or agent, or occupant of
the premises where such nuisance exists. (Code 1982, § 14-5)
State law references: Health officer's authority to remove private nuisance, 22 M.R.S.A. § 1561.
Sec. 34-33. Penalty and abatement.
As provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2706, whoever erects, causes or continues a public or common
nuisance, as described in state law or at common law, where no other punishment is specially
provided, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, and the court with or without
such fine may order such nuisance to be discontinued or abated and issue a warrant therefor as
provided in state law.
(Code 1982, § 18-6)
ENVIRONMENT
Lewiston Code Chapter 34
CH 34:4
Sec. 34-34. Obnoxious use of buildings.
The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the exercise of a trade, employment
or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations, offensive smells or other annoyances becomes
injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals, or of the public, is
declared to be a public nuisance as provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2802.
(Code 1982, § 18-3)
Sec. 34-35. Dense smoke.
(a) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
section:
Chart shall be considered as referring to the Ringelmann smoke chart as published and used by
the Bureau of Mines.
Stack means and includes chimneys, smokestacks, structures and openings of any kind
whatsoever, capable of emitting smoke. This shall include locomotives.
(b) Any stack emitting smoke of greater density than no. 2 on the chart except for a period of
six minutes in any one hour and not exceeding 12 minutes daily while engaged in cleaning or
building a new fire, and except for locomotives which shall be allowed one minute in 30 minutes
for smoke denser than no. 2 but not denser than no. 3 by the chart, shall be termed a nuisance and
annoyance. Any person causing, or responsible for, a stack emitting smoke in excess of limits set
forth in this section shall be guilty of an offense. Every 24 hours the offense continues shall be a
separate offense. The health department shall be the agent for the enforcement of this section.
(Code 1982, § 18-4)
Sec. 34-36. Abandoning an airtight container.
(a) A person is guilty of abandoning an airtight container if:
(1) He abandons or discards in any public place, or in a private place that is accessible to
minors, any chest, closet, piece of furniture, refrigerator, icebox or other article having a
compartment capacity of 1 1/2 cubic feet or more and having a door or lid which when closed
cannot be opened easily from the inside; or
(2) Being the owner, lessee, manager or other person in control of a public place or of a place
that is accessible to minors on which there has been abandoned or discarded a container
described in subsection (1), above, he knowingly or recklessly fails to remove such container
from that place, or to remove the door, lid or other cover of the container.
(b) Abandoning an airtight container is an offense. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be fined in an amount not exceeding
$50.00. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such under this section.
(Code 1982, § 19-5)
ENVIRONMENT
Lewiston Code Chapter 34
CH 34:5
Sec. 34-37. Disposal of dead animals restricted.
No person shall cast any dead animal substance into any street, nor into any of the canals or
waters within or adjoining the city, nor cause any animal to be drowned in such canals or waters.
(Code 1982, § 14-6)
Cross references: Animals, ch. 14.
State law references: Depositing of dead animals a nuisance, 22 M.R.S.A. § 1562.
Sec. 34-38. Action for damages.
As provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2701, any person injured in his comfort or enjoyment of his estate
by a common and public or a private nuisance may maintain against the offender an action of the
case for his damages, unless otherwise specially provided.
(Code 1982, § 18-5)
Chapters 35-37
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:1
Chapter 38
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
*Cross references: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; weapons and explosives, § 50-106 et seq.; hazardous
materials, § 62-56 et seq.; fire zones, § 70-137.
State law references: Municipal fire protection, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3151.
Article I. In General
Sec. 38-1. Interfering with fire alarm.
Sec. 38-2. Unauthorized use of hydrants prohibited.
Sec. 38-3. Regulation of false fire alarms.
Secs. 38-4--38-25. Reserved.
Article II. Fire Prevention Code
Sec. 38-26. Codes adopted.
Sec. 38-27. Application of fire codes on new or existing conditions; fire chief to set limit
on corrections.
Sec. 38-28. Violations, enforcement orders and appeals.
Article III. Permits
Sec. 38-29. Aggrieved person may seek revocation of permit, approval or license.
Sec. 38-30. Limitations on permits; applications generally to be made to bureau; fees.
Sec. 38-31. Authority to suspend, revoke permits, licenses; reports required; appeal.
Sec. 38-32. City council to prescribe areas, locations, boundaries for storage of
materials.
Sec. 38-33. Public meeting to be held prior to establishing restricted areas.
Sec. 38-34. Open-air burning.
Sec. 38-35. Outdoor incinerators, defined; fire chief to prescribe regulations; permit
required, revocation.
Sec. 38-36. Grade 1 gas leaks.
Sec. 38-37. Fire chief's statutory duties.
Sec. 38-38. Right of entry to inspect for hazards.
Sec. 38-39. Appeal to the fire chief and board of appeals.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1. Interfering with fire alarm.
No person shall interfere in any way with any of the signal boxes of the fire alarm system by
breaking, cutting, defacing or injuring such boxes, nor tamper or meddle with such boxes or any
part thereof.
(Code 1982, § 11-1)
Sec. 38-2. Unauthorized use of hydrants prohibited.
No person except one duly authorized shall remove the cap from any water hydrant in the city.
No person shall interfere with or meddle with, obstruct the approach to, partially or wholly cover
with snow or any other substance, or in any manner damage or deface such hydrant or decrease
its immediate availability in the event of an emergency.
(Code 1982, § 11-2)
Sec. 38-3. Regulation of false fire alarms.
(a) Installation of alarm systems. No person shall, without first obtaining a permit
from the fire chief, install an alarm system that includes any mechanism, equipment or device,
designed to automatically transmit a signal, message or warning from private or public premises,
including, but not limited to, telephonic alarm systems designed to operate automatically through
the use of public telephone facilities to the city fire department, or monitored by a private or
public entity, which in turn calls the city fire department.
(b) Existing alarm systems. No person shall, without first obtaining a permit from the
fire chief, continue to operate an alarm system that includes any mechanism, equipment or
device, designed to automatically transmit a signal, message or warning from private or public
premises, including, but not limited to, telephonic alarm systems designed to operate
automatically through the use of public telephone facilities to the city fire department, or
monitored by a private or public entity, which in turn calls the city fire department.
(c) Issuance of permits. Permits shall be issued to applicants upon the following
conditions:
(1) The applicant shall execute and submit to the fire chief a written agreement, upon
a form furnished by the fire chief, that includes, inter alia, an acknowledgment
that the applicant has read and agrees to abide by the terms of the false fire alarm
policy adopted by and amended from time to time by the city council.
(2) With respect to applicants under subsection (b) above, the applicant shall provide
evidence that the applicant has, prior to the time of the application, fully complied
with the false fire alarm policy adopted by and amended from time to time by the
city council.
(3) With respect to applicants under subsection (b) above, in the event that they are
unable to make such certification due to their prior failure to pay charges under
such policy, they shall submit with their application full payment of such charges.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:3
(d) Disconnection from noncompliance; appeal. In the event a permittee under this
section fails to comply with the terms of the permit or with the terms of the false fire alarm
policy adopted by and amended from time to time by the city council, the fire chief shall give to
the permittee 60 days written notice of the city's intention to disconnect the permittee's system
from the connection with the city fire department, which notice shall be deemed to be a notice of
violation and an order to comply. In the event that the permittee, having received such notice,
fails to place itself in compliance within such 60-day period, the fire chief shall proceed to
disconnect the permittee from the system. A permittee may appeal to the board of appeals as
detailed in 38-28(d) from the fire chief’s notice of intention to disconnect.
(Ord. No. 95-15, 11-2-95; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Secs. 38-4--38-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION CODE*
*Charter references: Board of appeals, § 4.06.
Sec. 38-26. Codes adopted.
(a) For the purpose of protecting life and property against the hazards of fire and explosion,
the city hereby adopts and enacts as codes of the city the Maine Fuel Board Rules, 02-658 Code
of Maine Rules ch.1, et. seq., as amended and the following National Fire Codes as promulgated
by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA):
• NFPA 1: Fire Prevention Code, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 10: Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 11: Standard for Low, Medium, and High Expansion Foam Systems, 2005 Edition
• NFPA 12: Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, 2008 Edition
• NFPA 13: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2016 Edition
• NFPA 13D: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family
Dwellings and Manufactured Homes, 2016 Edition
• NFPA 13R: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies
up to and Including Four Stories in Height, 2016 Edition
• NFPA 14: Standard for the Installation of Standpipe, Private Hydrants and Hose Systems,
2013 Edition
• NFPA 15: Standard for Water Spray Fixed Systems for Fire Protection, 2012 Edition
• NFPA 16: Standard for the Installation of Foam-Water Sprinkler and Foam-Water Spray
Systems, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 17: Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 2009 Edition
• NFPA 17A: Standard for Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 2009 Edition
• NFPA 18: Standard on Wetting Agents, 2006 Edition
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:4
• NFPA 20: Standard for the Installation of Stationary Fire Pumps for Fire Protection, 2013
Edition
• NFPA 22: Standard for Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection, 2013 Edition
• NFPA 24: Standards for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their
Appurtenances, 2013 Edition
• NFPA 25: Standards for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire
Protection Systems, 2014 Edition
• NFPA 30: Standards for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, 2008 Edition
• NFPA 30A: Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages, 2012 Edition
• NFPA 30B: Code for the Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 31: Standard for the Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 32: Standard for Dry Cleaning Plants, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 33: Standard for Spray Application Using Flammable or Combustible Materials,
2007 Edition
• NFPA 34: Standard for Dipping and Coating Processes Using Flammable or Combustible
Liquids, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 37: Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and
Gas Turbines, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 51: Standard for the Design and Installation of Oxygen-Fuel Gas Systems for
Welding, Cutting and Allied Processes, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 51A: Standard for Acetylene Cylinder Charging Plants, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 51B: Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding, Cutting and Other Hotwork,
2009 Edition
• NFPA 52: Vehicular Natural Gas Fuel and Systems Code, 2010 Edition
• NFPA 54: National Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition
• NFPA 55: Standard for the Storage, Use, and Handling of Compressed Gasses and
Cryogenic Fluids in Portable and Stationary Containers, Cylinders, and Tanks, 2010
Edition
• NFPA 58: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 59: Utility LP-Gas Plant Code, 2012 Edition
• NFPA 59A: Standard for the Production, Storage, and Handling of Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG), 2009 Edition
• NFPA 70: National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 72: National Fire Alarm Code, 2007 Edition
• NFPA 80: Standard for Fire Doors and Windows, 2010 Edition
• NFPA 88A: Standard for Parking Structures, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 90A: Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems,
2012 Edition
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:5
• NFPA 90B: Standard for the Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air-Conditioning
Systems, 2012 Edition
• NFPA 96: Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking
Operations, 2008 Edition
• NFPA 99: Standard for Health Care Facilities, 2005 Edition
• NFPA 99B: Standard for Hypobaric Facilities, 2005 Edition
• NFPA 101: Life Safety Code, 2009 Edition, pursuant to 38-26(b)
• NFPA 102: Standard for Grandstands, Folding and Telescopic Seating, Tents, and
Membrane Structures, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 110: Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems, 2005 Edition
• NFPA 160: Standard for the Flame Effects Before an Audience, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 211: Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel-Burning
Appliances, 2013 Edition
• NFPA 214: Standard on Water-Cooling Towers, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 220: Standard on Types of Building Construction, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 318: Standard for the Protection of Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities, 2015
Edition
• NFPA 385: Standard for Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, 2007
Edition
• NFPA 409: Standard on Aircraft Hangers, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 418: Standard for Heliports, 2011 Edition
• NFPA 495: Explosive Materials Code, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 496: Standard for Purged and Pressurized Enclosures for Electrical Equipment,
2008 Edition
• NFPA 750: Standard on Water Mist Fire Protection Systems, 2015 Edition
• NFPA 1122: Code for Model Rocketry, 2008 Edition
• NFPA 1123: Code for Fireworks Display, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 1124: Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition
• NFPA 1126: Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate Audience, 2006
Edition
• NFPA 2001: Standard on Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems, 2008 Edition
(b) Specific Provisions: Specific provisions of the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2009 edition
have been excluded to avoid conflict with Title 25 M.R.S.A., Chapter 1103, the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code, and several provisions have been modified to make the provisions
specific to Maine. This subsection also includes rules governing portable classrooms and indoor
and special pyrotechnic events.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:6
1. Specific provisions of the NFPA #31, Standard for the Installation of Oil Burning
Equipment (2011 edition) have not been adopted as follows:
A. The City does not adopt the exception to Chapter 7, Section 7.12, Abandonment
and Removal from Service of Tanks and Related Equipment. (See instead Chapter
8, Section 8.9.4 of the Maine Fuel Board’s rules.)
B. The City does not adopt Chapter 7, Section 7.3.1, Tanks and their Supports shall
Rest on Foundations made of Solid Concrete. (See instead Chapter 8, Sections
8.10 and 8.11 of the Maine Fuel Board’s rules.)
2. Specific provisions of the NFPA #52, Vehicular Gaseous Fuel Systems Code (2010
edition) have not been adopted:
A. Chapter 5, General GH2 Requirements and Equipment Qualifications;
B. Chapter 7, Service and Maintenance of GH2 Engine Fuel Systems;
C. Chapter 9, GH2 Compression, Gas Processing, Storage and Dispensing Systems;
D. Chapter 11, LNG Engine Fuel Systems; and
E. Chapter 14, LH2 Fueling Facilities.
3. Specific provisions of the NFPA #54, National Fuel Gas code (2012 edition) have not
been adopted as follows:
A. Installations of propane and natural gas must also comply with all other applicable
statutes or rules of the State and all applicable City ordinances, orders, rules, and
regulations.
B. The use of unvented heaters in HUD-Code homes, as defined in 10 MRSA
§9002(7)(A), is prohibited.
C. The City does not adopt the exception to Chapter 10, Section 10.23.1, Prohibited
Installations.
D. The use of unvented heaters in bedrooms and bathrooms is prohibited.
E. The City does not adopt the exception to Chapter 12, Section 6.4.2.
4. Specific provisions of the NFPA #55, Compressed Gases and Cryogenic Fluids (2010
edition) have not been adopted as follows:
A. Chapter 8, Cryogenic Fluids;
B. Chapter 9, Bulk Oxygen Systems;
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:7
C. Chapter 10, Gaseous Hydrogen Systems;
D. Chapter 11, Liquefied Hydrogen Systems;
E. Chapter 13, Insulated Liquid Carbon Dioxide Systems; and
F. Chapter 14, Storage, Handling and Use of Ethylene Dioxide for Sterilization and
Fumigation.
5. Specific provisions of the NFPA #58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code (2011 edition) have
not been adopted as follows:
A. Department of Transportation cylinders and ASME containers must rest on
noncombustible materials unless listed for such purpose.
B. Bulk plant or dispensing station remotely controlled actuators on internal valves
and emergency shut-off valves must not be operated with a flammable gas.
C. Any cylinder that does not have a legible manufacture date or retest date will be
considered to be out of compliance and shall not be filled.
D. The City does not adopt Chapter 6, Section 6.3.7 and adopts the following in its
place:
1. Cylinders and ASME containers of 125 gallons water capacity or less may be
located and installed underneath a deck provided the following conditions are met:
a. The space is completely open to the atmosphere for 50 percent of its
perimeter or more;
b. There is a minimum of 2’ vertical clearance between the top of the tank and
any part of the structure; and
c. The maximum aggregate water capacity of such tanks is no more than 250
gallons.
E. Portable motor fuel containers which are equipped for volumetric filling and meet
the requirements of construction and inspection set forth in NFPA #58 may be
filled by volume or weight.
F. Chapter 6, Section 6.4.5.5 does not apply to a single tank containing methanol,
connected to and as part of a propane bulk plant, for the specific purpose of
adding said methanol to the propane gas stored in the bulk plant.
6. Specific provisions of the NFPA #101, Life Safety Code, 2009 edition have been
excluded as follows:
A. Unvented fuel-fired heaters. Unvented fuel-fired heaters shall not be used in a
bedroom or bathroom or in a manufactured home.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:8
B. Extinguishment Requirements. The following provisions of NFPA # 101, the Life
Safety Code, 2009 edition, are not incorporated by reference:
1. Chapter 12, section 12.3.5.3, subsections 3 & 4; and,
2. Chapter 13, section 13.3.5.3, subsections 1 & 2.
C. Extinguishment Requirements in One- and Two- Family Dwellings. Section
24.3.5.1 of NFPA #101, the Life Safety Code, 2009 edition, is not incorporated by
reference.
D. Stair risers, guards, treads, and tread nosing. The following provisions of NFPA #
101, Life Safety Code, 2009 edition, are modified as indicated: The maximum
height of risers as prescribed in Chapter 24, Section 24.2.5 is modified to permit a
maximum 7 ¾” riser for newly constructed stairs in one- and two family
dwellings only. The minimum height of guards as prescribed in Chapter 24,
Section 24.2.5 is modified to permit a minimum guard height of 36” for newly
constructed stairs in one- and two family dwellings only. The minimum tread
depth as prescribed in Chapter 24, Section 24.2.5 shall be amended to permit a
10” tread depth for newly constructed stairs in one-and two family dwellings
only. Tread nosing as prescribed in Chapter 7, Section 7.2.2.3.5 is modified to
permit a nosing at least ¾” but not more than 1 ¼” in depth for newly constructed
one-and two family dwellings.
E. Separated Occupancies. Tables 6.1.14.4.1 a & b, “Required Separation of
Occupancies (hours.)” shall be crossed referenced with Table 508.4 Required
Separation of Occupancies of the 2009 International Building Code(IBC). Where
separation requirements in the two tables conflict, separation requirements set
forth in the IBC table control.
F. Accessory Occupancies. Chapter 6, Section 6.1.14.1.3 of NFPA # 101, Life Safety
Code, 2009 edition, is not incorporated. Section 508.2 Accessory Occupancies, of
the 2009 International Building Code governs.
G. Dead End Corridors. The following provisions of NFPA # 101, Life Safety Code,
2009 edition, are modified as indicated: Chapter 18, Section 18.2.5.2 is modified
to require dead end corridors not to exceed 20 feet. Chapter 32, Section 32.3.2.5.4
is modified to require dead end corridors not to exceed 50 feet. Chapter 42, Table
42.2.5 is modified to require that a dead end corridor in an ordinary hazard
storage occupancy protected by a sprinkler system not exceed 50 feet. A dead end
corridor in an ordinary hazard storage occupancy not protected by a sprinkler
shall not exceed 20 ft.
7. NFPA #211, Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel Appliances (2013 edition)
A. The City does not adopt Chapter 9, Section 9.8.2 for interconnection. (See 32 MRSA
§18107(1)(A))
B. The City does not adopt Chapter 11, Fireplaces or Chapter 12, Masonry Heaters.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:9
C. In Chapter 13, Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, the City does not adopt Section
13.5.2, Room Heaters, Fireplace Stoves, Room Heater/Fireplace Stove Combinations,
and Ranges.
D. The City does not adopt the following Sections of Chapter 13:
1. Section 13.2, Annual Inspection, the reference to the requirements of Section
14.3;
2. Section 13.4.1 of Section 13.4, Appliance or Connector Replacement, the
reference to Chapter 14; and
3. Section 13.7.2 of Section 13.7, Evidence of Damage.
E. The City does not adopt Chapter 14, Inspection of Existing Chimneys.
8. The City incorporates the following appendices from Maine Fuel Board Rules, 02-658
Code of Maine Rules ch. 1:.
A. Appendix A – Department of Environmental Protection Oil Regulations;
B. Appendix B – Department of Environmental Protection Asbestos Regulations;
C. Appendix C – Memorandum of Understanding between the Maine Fuel Board and the
Plumbers’ Examining Board for the Installation of Hot Water or Steam & Warm Air
Heating Systems, Radiation Supply and Return Connections;
D. Appendix D – Memorandum of Understanding between the Maine Fuel Board and the
Electricians’ Examining Board for the Installation, Service and Repair of Hot Water,
Steam, Warm Air Heating Systems and Water Heaters;
E. Appendix E – State of Maine Emergency Chimney Update Waiver Form;
F. Appendix F – Chimney or Fireplace Construction/Installation Disclosure; and
G. Appendix G – Vehicle Protection
9. Portable Classrooms
Portable Classrooms shall mean buildings manufactured and moved to a site to provide
educational space for educational facilities. Similar portable classrooms may be site built
if the installation follows these requirements and a construction permit is obtained in
accordance with Title 25 M.R.S.A. §2448.
A. All portable classrooms shall be placed in such a manner that no part of the
portable classroom is within 20 feet horizontally to any other building.
B. Groups of portable classrooms shall maintain 20 feet of clearance between
individual buildings.
C. All groups of buildings under this construction shall have a construction permit
issued by the Office of State Fire Marshal as required by Title 25 M.R.S.A.
§2448.
D. Buildings and groups of buildings on the same property shall have fire alarm
systems as required (NFPA 101, 20069 edition, Sections 14.3.4 and 15.3.4) and
all systems shall be interconnected.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:10
E. Fire Drills shall be conducted in conjunction with drills in main educational
buildings.
F. Portable classrooms shall meet all egress requirements of the adopted National
Fire Protection Association Standard #101, Life Safety Code, 2009 edition.
G. No installation shall be completed unless a letter from the municipal fire authority
has been received by the Office of State Fire Marshal. This letter must indicate
that the fire authority's ability to respond to fire emergencies will not be hindered
by the placement of the portable classrooms and that the installations of the
portable classrooms do not violate local ordinances.
10. Indoor Pyrotechnic Events
Indoor events using special effect display features, as defined in Title 8 M.R.S.A.
§221-A, shall be held only:
A. In buildings fully protected by automatic fire sprinkler systems meeting all
requirements of National Fire Protection Association #13, Installation of
Sprinkler Systems, 2006 edition.
B. With the prior approval of the Office of State Fire Marshal in accordance with the
requirements of Title 8 M.R.S.A., Chapter 9-A; Rules Chapters 20 and 26; and the
following:
1. The announcement required by Chapter 20, Section 9 shall be made
regardless of capacity.
2. The special effect display shall be conducted by a licensed Fireworks
Technician with appropriate Indoor and/or Flame Effect endorsement.
3. The event shall be monitored by the Office of State Fire Marshal.
4. An inspection by the Office of State Fire Marshal shall be completed prior
to the commencement of the event with all scenery, effects, and equipment
in place.
11. Special Pyrotechnic Amusement Events
A. A special pyrotechnic amusement event is an event, including but not limited to
such events as a magic show or theatrical performance, which uses no more than
1 ounce of flash paper, or small open flame devices such as candles, matches or
lighters, or similar devices approved for use at special pyrotechnic amusement
events by the Office of State Fire Marshal.
B. An operator of a special pyrotechnic amusement event shall register with the
Office of State Fire Marshal and provide a list of scheduled events and their
locations. Such registration shall be valid for a period of 1 year. Location and
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:11
event schedules shall be updated with the Office of State Fire Marshal no less
than 10 days prior to any newly scheduled event or location.
C. An operator or manager of a special pyrotechnic amusement event shall obtain
licensure as a Fireworks Technician with indoor pyrotechnic endorsement
pursuant to Title 8 M.R.S.A. Chapter 9-A or conduct the event under the direct
supervision of one holding this license.
12. Announcement required
At every event with a defined start time, where an assembly occupancy can accommodate
300 occupants or more, the event manager, operator, sponsor, or a designee shall make an
audio announcement to all occupants, prior to the commencement of the event, regarding
the following:
A. Location of exits;
B. Smoking rules and regulations;
C. Use of open flame devices;
D. What to do in case of emergency evacuation; and
E. Location of any first aid stations.
Such events include but are not limited to those held at armories, assembly halls,
auditoriums, dance halls, exhibition halls, gymnasiums, special amusement buildings
regardless of occupant load, and theaters.
13. For this section and the codes adopted herein, the “family” has the same meaning as the
term is defined in the Code of Ordinances, Appendix A-Zoning and Land Use Code,
Article II.
(c) All NFPA codes and portions therefore adopted by this section may be viewed by
contacting the Lewiston Fire Prevention Bureau.
(d) Chapter 66, Section 66-03 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston, regarding
the procedure for numbering houses, is incorporated by reference. The fire chief, or fire chief’s
designee, shall have the authority to issue and enforce notices requiring display of assigned
numbers.
(Code 1982, § 11-19; Ord. No. 92-26, § 1, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 94-7, 7-21-94; Ord. No. 99-14, 7-15-99;
Ord. No. 01-3, 3-8-01; Ord. No. 02-03, 4-18-02; Ord. No. 05-04, 3-10-05; Ord. No. 10-07, 09-16-10; Ord.
No. 11-10, 10-20-11; No. 17-20c, 12-21-17; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-27. Application of fire codes on new or existing conditions; fire chief to set limit on
corrections.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:12
The provisions of the codes adopted by section 38-26 shall apply equally to new and existing
conditions, except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of the codes
hereby adopted may be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct
hazard to life or property, in the opinion of the fire chief. The fire chief may prescribe a time
limitation on corrections required to be made to existing conditions or to bring conditions or
corrections up to code requirements.
(Code 1982, § 11-20)
Sec. 38-28. Violations, enforcement orders and appeals.
(a) Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use, or occupy any building or structure or
equipment in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or state law.
Each day a violation is permitted to exist after due notice shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Notice of Violation. The fire chief, or fire chief’s designee, is authorized to serve
a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for a condition that is or is likely to
become a fire hazard; on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure in
violation of any of the provisions of this Code or state law; on the person responsible for a
violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder; or, on the person responsible for a
violation of a permit or license issued under the provisions of this Code. Such order shall direct
the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
(c) Service of notice of violation or order. A notice of violation or order may be
served in hand to the violator or left with a person of suitable age and discretion at the residence
or place of business of the violator or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address. If the return receipt is not returned, the notice shall be conclusively
presumed to have been served if it is also sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and not returned
as undeliverable by the postal service.
(d) Request for appeal. Any person served with an order pursuant to this section,
may request a hearing before the board of appeals by filing a written petition for said hearing at
the planning and code enforcement department within ten (10) days of the date of service of the
order. Such appeal shall be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the board of appeals occurring
at least 48 hours after the date of filing. The board of appeals may sustain, modify or withdraw
such order. The decision of the board of appeals may be further appealed pursuant to the
provisions of rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(e) Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail
to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who has caused a condition that
is or is likely to become a fire hazard or has allowed such condition to remain, shall be liable for
one or more citations as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-8 and Chapter 50, Section 50-36 of the
Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston. In lieu of or in addition to the issuance of citations,
the fire chief may initiate a land use complaint pursuant to Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of civil
Procedure and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 et seq. as amended.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:13
(f) Restrictions on transfer. Any person who, after receipt of a notice of violation
under this chapter, sells, transfers or leases the property, must notify the grantee, mortgagee,
transferee, or lessee of any outstanding code violations, and must also furnish the City fire
prevention bureau with a signed, notarized statement from the grantee, mortgagee, transferee, or
lessee acknowledging receipt of any orders or notices and fully accepting responsibility for the
abatement of said violations.
(Code 1982, § 11-21; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
ARTICLE III. PERMITS
Sec. 38-29. Aggrieved person may seek revocation of permit, approval or license.
Any person aggrieved by the granting of a permit or approval under this article, or the granting
of a license by the fire department on the grounds that the exercise thereof would constitute a fire
nuisance, health or explosion hazard may appeal for revocation of such permit, approval or
license to the fire chief, as detailed in section 38-39.
(Code 1982, § 11-22; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-30. Limitations on permits; applications generally to be made to bureau; fees.
(a) A permit required by this article or the codes adopted hereby shall not take the
place of any license required by law. It shall not be transferable, and any change in use or
occupancy or change in location shall require a new permit. Applications for permits required by
this article or by the codes adopted hereby shall be made to the fire prevention bureau, except as
specified in this article.
(b) Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by the
Lewiston City Council have been paid, nor shall an amendment to the permit be released until
the additional fee, if any, has been paid.
(c) Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, or alterations requiring a
permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule as
established by the Lewiston City Council.
(Code 1982, § 11-23; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-31. Authority to suspend, revoke permits, licenses; reports required; appeal.
All fire department officers and fire inspectors shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any
and all permits or licenses which may be issued by the fire department. Permits and licenses shall
be suspended or revoked only if, in the opinion of an officer or inspector having jurisdiction,
such action is immediately necessary to safeguard life or property and failure to take such action
would be a distinct hazard to life or property. Appeals for restoration of such permit or license
shall be made to the fire chief. Suspension or revocation of a permit or license shall be reported
to the fire chief with a written report setting forth all facts concerning such action.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:14
(Code 1982, § 11-24; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-32. City council to prescribe areas, locations, boundaries for storage of materials.
The city council shall prescribe areas, locations or boundaries as required by the codes adopted
in this article for the enforcement of restrictions on use, storage, consumption, loading,
unloading, processing or other matters pertaining to any or all products or materials requiring
such defined areas.
(Code 1982, § 11-25)
Sec. 38-33. Public meeting to be held prior to establishing restricted areas.
The city council shall hold a public meeting prior to the establishment of any restricted area,
location or boundary, and such public meeting shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city.
(Code 1982, § 11-26)
Sec. 38-34. Open-air burning.
(a) As used in this section, the term "fire" means and shall include, but is not limited
to, bonfires, burning of grass, leaves, weeds, brush, wood, paper boxes, trash, waste, automobiles
and trucks, junk, fires on public or private dumps, and any burning of combustible or flammable
materials, including petroleum products.
(b) No person shall kindle or maintain any fire in the open air, or authorize any such
fire to be kindled or maintained, in any street, alley, roadway, lane, public grounds or private lot,
without first having obtained a written permit to do so from the fire department.
(c) The fire chief or his designee shall prescribe and issue policies and procedures for
the issuance of burning permits and shall have full control of such permits. Dispatchers, fire
department officers and fire inspectors have authority to issue burning permits. The assistant fire
chief or captain on duty shall have the authority to suspend or stop all burning in the city
whenever, in their opinion, safety requires such action.
(d) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, no person shall kindle or
cause to be kindled such fires as are enumerated in this section, without calling by telephone the
city fire department for clearance to kindle the fire just prior to lighting it. Failure to obtain such
clearance shall cause the permit issued therefor to be automatically null and void.
(Code 1982, § 11-27; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-35. Outdoor incinerators, defined; fire chief to prescribe regulations; permit
required, revocation.
(a) "Outdoor incinerators" are defined as "any container used to burn waste or
discarded materials."
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:15
(b) The city fire chief is authorized to prescribe and issue policies and procedures for
the safe use of outdoor incinerators, including, without limitations, the types of containers
authorized to be used.
(c) It shall be unlawful to use any outdoor incinerator without having first obtained a
permit for such incinerator from the city fire department. Such permits may be refused by the
inspector if the incinerator or its location is not in compliance with all laws and ordinances.
(d) The permit for any outdoor incinerator may be revoked by a fire inspector in the
event of violation of any policies or procedures of the city fire chief.
(e) Any permit for an outdoor incinerator may be revoked if the incinerator causes
smoke or odor or is a source of discomfort or a nuisance to adjoining property owners or tenants.
(Code 1982, § 11-28; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-36. Grade 1 gas leaks.
(a) When a Grade 1 gas leak, as defined by the Maine Public Utilities Commission in
65-407 C.M.R. § 420, as revised, pertaining to Safety Standards for Natural Gas and Liquefied
Natural Gas Facility Operators, is discovered anywhere in the city, the fire chief, or his deputy
acting in his absence, may order the supplier of the gas service to the section of the city in which
the leak is located to immediately shut off the distribution, transmission or supply of gas to the
area in the vicinity of the leak where it reasonably appears that such action is necessary to
prevent imminent danger to lives or property. Any such order shall be revoked upon the
presentation of satisfactory evidence that the dangerous situation which prompted it no longer
exists. Such evidence may consist of instrument readings and other scientific data relative to the
presence of natural gas in the area where the leak is located.
(b) Any person who refuses to comply with any lawful order issued under the
provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the city's policy manual
as approved by the city council, which such fine shall not be suspended. Each 24-hour period
during which a refusal continues from the issuance of the original order shall constitute a
separate offense.
(c) In addition to enforcement under the preceding subsection, the city may initiate
civil proceedings to temporarily or permanently enjoin the continuation of the dangerous
condition.
(d) The city shall not be liable for damages incurred as a result of shutting down the
system. If areas are shut off, the gas company shall notify users of natural gas.
(e) Outside shutoffs shall be installed at every building where natural gas is used.
(Code 1982, § 11-29; Ord. No. 08-06e, 8-14-08; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Sec. 38-37. Fire chief's statutory duties.
The city council hereby assumes the power conferred and the responsibility for performance of
duties prescribed by 25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2394, 2395, 2397, and hereby delegates the exercise of such
powers and the responsibility for performance of such duties to the fire chief as authorized by 25
M.R.S.A. § 2391, except in such specific cases as the city council may notify the fire chief of its
intention to take jurisdiction. (Code 1982, § 11-31)
Sec. 38-38. Right of entry to inspect for hazards.
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Lewiston Code Chapter 38
CH 38:16
The fire chief or fire chief’s designee may enter any building, premises or structure within the
limits of the city with the permission of any person having control of such building, premises or
structure, or may apply to a court for process to do so, for the purpose of examining and
inspecting the same to ascertain the condition thereof with regard to the presence, arrangement or
deposit of any articles, materials, substances, goods, wares or merchandise which may have a
tendency to create danger from fire on or in the building, premises or structure, or personal injury
or loss of life of the occupants thereof or persons in or about such premises, building or structure;
also with regard to the condition of the chimneys, stoves, stovepipes, boilers and places of
deposit of ashes. The inspector shall wear the regulation uniform of the fire department or
produce proper credentials. (Code 1982, § 11-32; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
State law references: Municipal inspection of buildings, 25 M.R.S.A. §§ 2351--2360; inspection by the state
insurance commissioner, removal of dangerous matter, appeal, exits, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2392.
Sec. 38-39. Appeal to the fire chief and board of appeals.
Appeals to the fire chief, as authorized under this article, shall be made by filing a written
petition for appeal at the office of the fire chief within ten (10) days of the decision being
appealed. The fire chief shall issue an order on the appeal within fourteen (14) days of the filing
of such petition for appeal.
Should any owner, lessee or occupant of any premises, building or structure or the owner or
person in control of any materials, goods, wares or merchandise, chimneys, stove, stovepipe,
boiler or place of deposit of ashes, consider himself aggrieved by an order of the chief of the fire
department, he may appeal to the board of appeals as detailed in 38-28(d).
(Code 1982, § 11-33; Ord. No. 18-04, 6-14-18)
Chapters 39-45
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:1
Chapter 46
GENERAL ASSISTANCE*
Article I. In General
Sec. 46-1. Introductory provisions.
Sec. 46-2. Definitions.
Sec. 46-3. Confidentiality of information.
Sec. 46-4. Maintenance of records.
Secs. 46-5--46-30. Reserved.
Article II. Application Procedure
Sec. 46-31. Right to apply.
Sec. 46-32. Application interview.
Sec. 46-33. Contents of application.
Sec. 46-34. General assistance administrator's responsibilities at time of application.
Sec. 46-35. Responsibilities of applicant at time of application.
Sec. 46-36. Action on applications.
Sec. 46-37. Withdrawal of an application.
Sec. 46-38. Temporary refusal to accept application.
Sec. 46-39. Emergencies.
Sec. 46-40. Residence.
Secs. 46-41--46-60. Reserved.
Article III. Eligibility Factors
Sec. 46-61. Generally.
Sec. 46-62. Initial application; repeat applicants.
Sec. 46-63. Eligibility for categorical assistance.
Sec. 46-64. Personal property.
Sec. 46-65. Ownership of real estate.
Sec. 46-66. Work requirement.
Sec. 46-67. Municipal work program.
Sec. 46-68. Use of resources.
Sec. 46-69. Period of disqualification.
Secs. 46-70--46-90. Reserved.
Article IV. Determination of Eligibility
Sec. 46-91. Recognition of dignity and rights.
Sec. 46-92. Determination; redetermination.
Sec. 46-93. Verification.
Sec. 46-94. Fraud.
Sec. 46-95. Period of eligibility.
Sec. 46-96. Determination of need.
Sec. 46-97. Income.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:2
Sec. 46-98. Basic necessities; maximum levels of assistance.
Sec. 46-99. Notice of decision; disbursements.
Secs. 46-100--46-120. Reserved.
Article V. Fair Hearing
Sec. 46-121. Right to fair hearing.
Sec. 46-122. Method of obtaining.
Sec. 46-123. The fair hearing authority.
Sec. 46-124. The fair hearing procedure.
Sec. 46-125. The fair hearing decision.
Secs. 46-126--46-145. Reserved.
Article VI. Recovery of Expenses
Sec. 46-146. Recipients.
Sec. 46-147. Relatives.
*Cross references: Administration, ch. 2.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:3
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 46-1. Introductory provisions.
(a) The city shall administer a program of general assistance available to all persons who are
eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided in
this chapter and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
(b) Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant for general assistance
and to encourage self-reliance. The program will help each person achieve selfmaintenance
and will encourage the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to
alleviate needs other than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective
services. General assistance will promote strengthening the family, especially with regard
to the care and protection of children.
(c) The general assistance program will place no restrictions on the personal rights of the
applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on gender, age,
race, religion, disability or political affiliation. The applicant or recipient will be
informed of his rights and responsibilities under the general assistance program.
(d) The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. Within 24 hours of receiving an application, the applicant
will receive a written decision whether or not assistance is granted, and that will state the
specific reasons for the decision. The administrator will also give the applicant written
notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing authority, if dissatisfied
with the decision. When an applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate
to the need will be furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted,
except when the administrator issues nonemergency assistance conditionally on the
successful completion of a workfare assignment.
(e) The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each
applicant and recipient. These records are confidential.
(f) The administrator will post a notice stating the days and hours the administrator will be
available. A copy of this chapter and the Maine General Assistance Law, 22 M.R.S.A. §
4301 et seq., will be readily available to any member of the public upon request.
(g) The general assistance administrator will refer to and abide by any other city ordinance to
define a condition, area or situation. The administrator will not pay rent or utilities to a
building owner or landlord when that building, or the specific unit within that building
which is to be rented, has been placarded, condemned, is unlicensed when a license is
required, or is known to be in violation of any other municipal ordinance, except that, if
the violation(s) is determined to be non-life threatening by the Director of Planning and
Code, weekly rent vouchers may be issued for up to a 30 day period and utility vouchers
may be issued one time in that 30 day period for existing tenants. Vouchers may be
issued beyond the 30 day period if an extension is granted by code enforcement.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-1, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-1, 5-5-94; Ord. No.12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 18-10,
11-15-18)
Cross references: Municipal work program, § 46-67.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:4
Sec. 46-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Applicant means a person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency, requested
assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an
application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been granted shall be
considered applicants.
Application form means a standardized form used by the general assistance administrator
for the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact that a
person has made application. The application form must be signed by the applicant to be
considered complete.
Basic necessities means food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, nonelective medical
services as recommended by a physician, nonprescription drugs, telephone where it is necessary
for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of
the applicant's place of residence, and any other commodity or service determined essential by
the city. The term "basic necessities" does not include security deposits for rental property,
except for those situations where no other permanent lodging is available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver, deferral or installment arrangement cannot be made between the
landlord and tenant to satisfy the need for the immediate payment of the security deposit or
payment in full.
Case record means an official file containing application forms, correspondence,
narrative records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient, written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types and
amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant's request for fair hearing
and those fair hearing decisions.
Caseworker. The term "overseer" shall be that official so designated by the municipal
officers, and the term shall incorporate those personnel within the division of general assistance
who act as agents of the overseer.
Categorical assistance means all state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant means a person who has requested a fair hearing.
Disabled person means a person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due
to a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician.
Dwelling unit means a building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit.
Eligible Person means a resident who is otherwise qualified to receive general assistance
from the municipality, according to the requirements of this chapter and 22 M.R.S. §4301(3).
For purposes of this chapter, the term “Eligible Person” shall include all U.S. citizens and
permanent residents aliens who otherwise meet the qualifications of this chapter. Eligible person
shall also include a nonresident alien who:
(a) has been lawfully admitted or paroled into the United States and who is not
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:5
unlawfully present under U.S. immigration and nationality law ; or
(b) is seeking benefits under United States immigration and nationality law, as evidence
by: a receipt notice or other documentation of a pending application for benefits or relief,
a sworn statement from the Applicant’s attorney identifying the requested relief and
confirming that the applicant has a meritorious basis for requesting the relief, or a sworn
statement from the applicant identifying the requested relief and confirming that he or she
is taking all reasonable steps necessary to obtain the relief; or
(c) is an unaccompanied minor; or
(d) is the parent, guardian, or sibling of a U.S. citizen who is a minor; or
(e) is living in the United State with the knowledge and permission of the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) and DHS does not contemplate enforcing the applicant’s
departure.
The term “Eligible Person” does not include a person who is a fugitive from justice as
defined in 15 M.R.S. §201 or any person for whom the municipality is ineligible for
reimbursement in accordance with the rules, regulations, and statutes governing the State of
Maine’s General Assistance program.
Emergency means any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to
the health or safety of a person.
General assistance administrator means a municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare
records and communications concerning assistance. The administrator may be an overseer or an
authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or caseworker.
General assistance program means a service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific amount and type
of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a continuing
"grant-in-aid" or "categorical" welfare program. This definition shall not in any way lessen the
responsibility of each municipality to provide general assistance to a person each time that the
person has need and is found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance.
Household means an individual or a group of individuals who share a dwelling unit.
When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals, even when a landlordtenant
relationship may exist between individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible
applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the
shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of assistance established
in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of
assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members. The
income of household members not legally liable or otherwise responsible for supporting the
household shall be considered as available to the applicant only when there is a pooling of
income.
Income means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household,
including net remuneration for services performed, cash received on either secured or unsecured
credit, any payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits, veterans' pensions,
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:6
workers' compensation, unemployment benefits, benefits under any state or federal categorical
assistance program, supplemental security income, social security and any other payments from
governmental sources, unless specifically prohibited by any law or regulation, court ordered
support payments, income from pension or trust funds, household income from any other source,
including relatives or unrelated household members and any benefits received pursuant to Title
36, chapter 907 and Title 36, section 5219-II, unless used for basic necessities as defined in
section 4301, subsection 1.
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets which must be liquidated for the
purposes of deriving income.
(1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
(2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such as
taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and from
work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
(3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall be a 30-day
period commencing on the date of application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify
an applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities, provided that the income
does not exceed the income standards established by the municipality.
Notwithstanding this prospective calculation, if any applicant or recipient receives a lump sum
payment prior or subsequent to applying for assistance, that payment must be prorated over
future months.
Just cause means a valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying
with one or more conditions of eligibility.
Lump sum payment means a one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to
an applicant or recipient. "Lump sum payment" includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment
benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money received from
inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property damage claims or divorce
settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount of money available to the applicant
after payment of required deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump
sum payment does not include conversion of a nonliquid resource to a liquid resource if the
liquid resource has been used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for
other necessary expenses.
Maximum levels of assistance means the amount of assistance as established in article IV
or the actual cost of any basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA§1043 (23).
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her duties or
obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of irresponsible behavior to the
detriment of the employer’s interests may also be found guilty of misconduct.
Municipality means any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:7
program.
Municipality of responsibility means the municipality which is liable for the support of an
Eligible Person at the time of application.
Need means the condition whereby a person's income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the individual's
family are less than the maximum levels of assistance.
Net general assistance costs means those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to Eligible Persons according to standards established by the municipal
officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general assistance program.
Period of eligibility means the time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance, provided, however, that in no
event shall this period extend beyond one month.
Pooling of income means the financial relationship among household members who are
not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs any commingling of funds or sharing
of income or expenses. Municipalities may by ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption
that persons sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are
requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one or more household
members are not pooling their income have the burden of rebutting the presumption of pooling
income.
Real estate means any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes, and any other things
affixed to the land.
Recipient means a person who has applied for and is currently receiving general
assistance.
Registered Domestic Partner means an individual registered as the domestic partner of
the applicant pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2710.
Resident means a person who is physically present in Lewiston with the intention of
remaining in Lewiston in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no other residence.
A person who applies for assistance in Lewiston who is not a resident of Lewiston or any other
municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first applies. That
municipality must take an application and grant assistance to the applicant if he is eligible, until
he establishes a new residence in another municipality. See section 46-40.
Resources means and includes any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of resources:
available and potential.
(1) Available resources. Available resources include resources which are
immediately available to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured by
the applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank accounts, assets for
which there is an immediate and available market, or support from relatives which
is being made available at the time of application and for which the applicant does
not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the
immediate region). Available resources also include the services, commodities or
facilities made available by private organizations when:
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:8
a. The applicant voluntarily agrees to utilize such services;
b. The municipality has established a contractual relationship with the
private organization to provide services or commodities when requested;
c. The municipality is able to secure the services or commodities needed by
an applicant from the private organization for any consideration
acceptable to both the organization and the municipality; and
d. The service is available and offered at no cost to the applicant and deemed
necessary by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist.
Charities may be considered private organizations which are available resources
only if the charity places no unreasonable requirements on the applicant which are
violative of the applicant's fundamental rights. (Fjeld v. Lewiston, Andro. Sup. Ct.
CV 87-4; Bolduc v. Lewiston, Andro. Sup. Ct. CV 87-248)
(2) Potential resources. Potential resources are programs, services, nonliquid assets,
or trusts which typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a period of
time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released. Potential
resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance program,
employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available trust
funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly
held resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the
individual. Potential resources include TANF, food supplement, fuel assistance
(HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar programs.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-20, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-20, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 13-11, 7-1-13;
Ord. No. 15-14, 01-14-16; Ord. No. 17-18, 11-16-17)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (8-A), (9), (10),
(11), (13), 4307, 4308, 4309(1), 4310, 4311, 4316-A(5), 4317, 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23).
Sec. 46-3. Confidentiality of information.
(a) Confidentiality. Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or
recipient of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general
public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be
released. (Janak v. D.H.S., Aroostook Cty #CV-89-116).
(b) Release of information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a legal representative or
other third party, however, unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the
applicant expressly authorizing the release of his records. Whenever the administrator
releases any information, he will make a notation in the applicant's file stating to whom
the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for
the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
(c) Information from other sources; penalty.
(1) Information furnished to the municipality by the department of human services or
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:9
any other agency or institution pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314 is confidential.
The general assistance administrator will also comply with laws relating to the
confidentiality of records concerning birth, marriage and death.
(2) Any representative of a financial institution or any employer of a general
assistance applicant who, upon receipt of a written release signed by the depositor
and a written request from the Administrator, refuses to provide necessary
information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must
state in writing the reason for the refusal. National banks are also obligated to
disclose deposit information to the Administrator upon receipt of a written request
and release signed by the depositor. Additionally, when a municipality or its
agents are acting in accordance with section 4313(2) to verify eligibility for
funeral or cremation benefits, an officer of a financial institution must disclose the
amount deposited upon receipt of a written request from the municipality or its
agents and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the municipality or
agents stating that the named depositor is deceased. Any person who refuses to
provide necessary information to the administrator in order to verify an applicant's
eligibility must state in writing the reason for the refusal. Any person who refuses
to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council. Any
person, including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully gives false
information to the administrator is committing a class E crime.
(d) Misuse of information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is a
punishable offense.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-30, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-30, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 08-06f, 8-14-08; Ord. No. 17-
18, 11-16-17)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 42(2), 2706, 4306, 4314, 4315.
Sec. 46-4. Maintenance of records.
(a) Purpose. The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records. These records are necessary to:
(1) Provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
(2) Document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
(3) Assure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
(b) Case records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record for
each applicant or recipient. Each case record will include at least the household's
applications, budget sheets, information concerning the types and amounts of assistance
provided, narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency situation whenever
general assistance is granted in amounts greater than the applicant's unmet need, written
decisions, any requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority decisions.
Workfare participation will also be recorded, as will any cash repayments to the
municipality. The record may also include a narrative writings documenting the need for
general assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information, referrals, changes in
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:10
status, the reason(s) for the release of confidential information, adjustments in aid and
suspension or termination of eligibility.
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to an applicant's or
recipient's application or to the general assistance administrator's decisions.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-31, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-31, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306.
Secs. 46-5--46-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Sec. 46-31. Right to apply.
(a) Who may apply. Any Eligible Person may apply for general assistance. The head of the
family, any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must
apply in person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 46-39 or
except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has
made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter residents to be eligible
for general assistance. The administrator may require a duly authorized representative to
present a signed statement documenting that he is in fact authorized to apply for general
assistance on behalf of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must
complete a written application and any other required forms so that the administrator can
determine eligibility.
(b) Telephone applications. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, lack of child care, or other good
cause, and the person cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application over the telephone. The telephone application process will include
the administrator receiving written verification via mail or visiting the applicant's home
with the applicant's permission.
(c) Written application upon each request. Each request for assistance will be administered
in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an independent
determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person applies.
(d) Applications accepted; posted notice. Applications will be processed during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance, and will include the information on the emergency
contact available to take emergency applications at all other times. Completed
applications will be accepted and interviews given only during the regular hours
established and posted by the administrator; however, in an emergency, the administrator
will be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-40, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-40, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 15-14, 01-14-
16)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4304, 4305, 4308, 4309.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:11
Sec. 46-32. Application interview.
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in private,
although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or family member.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-41, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-41, 5-5-94)
Sec. 46-33. Contents of application.
At a minimum, the application will contain the following information:
(1) Applicant's name, address, date of birth, Social Security Number, and phone
number;
(2) Names, dates of birth, and Social Security Numbers of other household members
for whom the applicant is seeking assistance;
(3) Total number of individuals in the building or apartment where the applicant is
residing;
(4) Employment and employability information;
(5) All household income, resources, assets, and property;
(6) Expenses;
(7) Types of assistance being requested;
(8) Penalty for false representation;
(9) Applicant's permission to verify information;
(10) Signature of applicant and date.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-42, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-42, 5-5-94)
Sec. 46-34. General assistance administrator's responsibilities at time of application.
(a) Generally. The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their
rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with
applying for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements,
eligibility guidelines, applicant rights, and reimbursement obligations.
(b) Application requirements. The administrator will fill out the application as described in
section 46-33, with information and documentation provided by the applicant. The
administrator will inform the applicant of any other information or documentation that
the applicant will have to provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant's
eligibility for assistance. The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release
of information form or reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant's
signature or written authorization.
(c) Eligibility requirements. The administrator will inform the applicant of the eligibility
requirements of the program, including the income standard of need; the applicant's
ongoing use-of-income, work related, and resource related responsibilities, as described
in section 46-35; the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:12
household income on non-necessities; and the disqualification penalties associated with
committing fraud, failing to perform work related assignments without just cause, or
failing to make a good faith effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to
attempt to obtain those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
(d) Applicant rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to, review
this chapter and the state general assistance law, apply for assistance, receive a written
decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for assistance, confidentiality,
contact the department of health and human services, and challenge the administrator's
decision by requesting a fair hearing.
(e) Reimbursement, recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he has been granted in
the event of a subsequent ability to pay. In addition to seeking repayment from a
recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance granted to a
recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for the applicant's
support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see article VI, relative to
recovery of expenses). Whenever applicable, the administrator will explain the various
liens a municipality may place against a recipient's real or personal property, such as the
mortgage or capital improvement lien, the workers' compensation lump sum payment lien
or the SSI interim assistance agreement lien, as these liens are described in article VI.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-43, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-43, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4318, 4319.
Sec. 46-35. Responsibilities of applicant at time of application.
(a) The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current information and verifiable documentation concerning the
applicant's income, resources, assets, household employment, how the applicant has spent
his income, the names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant's
support, and any change in this information from a previous application that would affect
the applicant's eligibility.
(b) In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows that the applicant:
(1) Has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without just
cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
(2) Has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a parttime
basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has satisfactorily
performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to perform those
assignments;
(3) Has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in writing to
such a program by the administrator, including but not limited to other
government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient
means; and
(4) Has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative program
when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program by the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:13
administrator, in order to diminish the applicant's need for general assistance.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-44, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-44, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4309, 4316-A, 4317.
Sec. 46-36. Action on applications.
(a) Written decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to the
applicant concerning his eligibility within 24 hours after he submits a written application
and will furnish assistance to eligible applicants within that period except when the
municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 46-67) to issue assistance
conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment. A written decision
will be given each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced
or terminated.
(b) Content of decision. The written decision on the application will contain the following
information:
(1) The type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant's
ineligibility;
(2) The period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
(3) The specific reasons for the decision;
(4) The applicant's right to a fair hearing; and
(5) The applicant's right to notify the department of health and human services if he
believes the municipality has acted illegally.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-45, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-45, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305, 4321.
Sec. 46-37. Withdrawal of an application.
An application is considered withdrawn if:
(1) The applicant requests, in writing, that his application be withdrawn; or
(2) The applicant refuses to complete or sign the application, or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-46, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-46, 5-5-94)
Sec. 46-38. Temporary refusal to accept application.
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily refuse
to accept applications for 24 hours. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be requested to leave. If the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will be
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:14
accepted when his conduct is under control;
(2) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant. That person
may be required to provide written verification that he has been duly authorized to
act as a representative for the applicant.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-47, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-47, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4308.
Sec. 46-39. Emergencies.
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the
control of the applicant which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to
pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the household. Although
applicants may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who
apply for assistance to alleviate an emergency will be granted assistance, except as provided
below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and
have not had sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency. The following exceptions
and conditions apply when determining eligibility for emergency assistance.
(1) Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving general
assistance due to a violation of sections 46-66, 46-67, 46-68 and 46-94 is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance. Dependents of a disqualified person
may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of this section, "dependents" are
defined as: (i) a dependent minor child; (ii) an elderly, ill or disabled person; or
(iii) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child under the
age of six years or any ill or disabled member of the household. If one or more
members of a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the
remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as
though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that all
household income will be considered available to them.
(2) Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator
that he needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending
verification, the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a. After interviewing the applicant, the administrator has determined that he
will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b. The applicant submits documentation, when possible, to verify his need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the applicant's
statements about needing emergency assistance. No further assistance will be
authorized until the applicant's eligibility has been confirmed.
(3) Telephone applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, lack of child care, or other
good cause, and if there is no authorized representative who can apply for the
applicant, the administrator will accept an application over the telephone.
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:15
application if the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the
information either by visiting his home, or by mail, and the administrator cannot
determine his eligibility through any other means.
(4) Limitation on emergency assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are
not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace that money. Applicants have the responsibility to provide the
administrator with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did
not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation.
According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit emergency
assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money necessary
for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income available to
the household during the applicable time period.
a. The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application
for emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was
created by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as
rent, mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was
created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time
period shall be the consecutive length of time the account balance has
been in the negative.
b. The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to
the applicant's ability to provide for his basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources for the
applicable time period.
c. The administrator shall compute all costs for the household's basic
necessities during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance
with the maximum levels established by this chapter for the specific basic
necessities or the actual monthly cost, whichever is less, including all
costs associated with averting the particular emergency situation for which
the applicant is seeking assistance.
d. From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable
time period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump
sum payments available to the household for the applicable time period as
well as the total general assistance actually received during the applicable
time period.
e. The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (4)d, above, even
when such a grant will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
f. The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in
life threatening situations or for first time applicants, that is, persons who
have never before applied for general assistance.
g. Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:16
from electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective
manner available, provided such a determination of eligibility for
emergency assistance is in conformance with general assistance law.
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines that an
emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and
unnecessary costs.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency assistance may not
be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate need solely on the basis of the proration of
a lump sum payment. Upon subsequent applications, that household's eligibility is subject to all
the standards established by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-48, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-48, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(4), 4308, 4308(2)(A), 4308(3), 4309(3), 4310.
Sec. 46-40. Residence.
(a) Eligibility. The administrator shall provide general assistance to all Eligible Persons
applying for assistance who are residents of this municipality. A "resident" is a person
who has no other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends
to remain here and establish a household. The municipality also recognizes its
responsibility to provide assistance to Eligible Persons who apply here and who are not
residents of this municipality or any other municipality. If a person who is not a resident
of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator will determine his
eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance until he establishes a residence in another
municipality.
(b) Moving, relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after the applicant
moves, provided the recipient remains eligible.
(c) Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitative center, nursing home, or
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he will be the responsibility of
this municipality for up to six months after he enters the institution. The municipality
thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he intends to return. The municipality
also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in this
municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution.
(d) Temporary housing. Hotels, motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
[Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance, and as a result of the
denial the applicant stays in temporary lodging, are responsible for the applicant for up to
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:17
six months and may be subject to other penalties.]
(e) Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality, but that municipality disputes its responsibility, the administrator will
notify the department of human services in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the
applicant applies in this municipality first, the administrator will determine his eligibility
and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the department has concluded which
municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another municipality was
responsible, the department will recover the amount due from the other municipality.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-49, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-49, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307, 4307(4), (5), (6).
Secs. 46-41--46-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ELIGIBILITY FACTORS
Sec. 46-61. Generally.
An Eligible Person may receive general assistance if he is in need and has complied with
the eligibility requirements set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 92-6, art. V, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, art. V, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 15-14, 01-14-16)
Sec. 46-62. Initial application; repeat applicants.
(a) Initial application.
(1) For initial applicants, except as provided below, need will be the sole condition of
eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by law, applies to all
applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period
for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct. See section 46-66. An initial applicant is a person
who has never before applied for general assistance in any Maine municipality.
(2) Need means that the applicant's income, including pro-rated income where
applicable, property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum levels of assistance established in accordance with section 46-98 or the
actual 30-day costs, whichever is less, and he doesn't have adequate income or
other resources available to provide basic necessities.
(b) Subsequent applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants.
Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in the
past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance application
was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not a
dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for general
assistance, they must be in need, have used their income and resources to secure basic
necessities, and meet all other eligibility requirements.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-50, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-50, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308(1), 4316-A(1A).
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:18
Sec. 46-63. Eligibility for categorical assistance.
(a) Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance, if he is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance programs
will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of food stamps,
which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into consideration
when determining need (7 U.S.C. section 2017(b)). Also, any fuel assistance
(HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be considered as income or resources;
that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs of an applicant who has
received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his total fuel costs (42 U.S.C. section
624(f); Dept. of Health and Welfare v. Block, 784 F.2d 895). The computation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP shall
be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under types of income at section 46-
96.
(b) Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within seven days after
being advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
without just cause, fail to make a good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-51, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-51, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
Sec. 46-64. Personal property.
(a) Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including, but not
limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit and other marketable
security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and until he uses these assets to
meet his basic needs and thereby exhausts them.
(b) Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property consisting of more
than one motor vehicle, or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are
convertible into cash and are nonessential to the maintenance of the applicant's household
will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person is making
an initial application and when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at fair market
value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment
used for the production of income are exempt from the above category and are not
considered available assets.
(c) Automobile ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a
person ineligible for assistance, if such vehicle is essential for transportation to
employment, medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or if it is essential to the
maintenance of the applicant and his family. Recipients of general assistance who own an
automobile with a market value greater than $8,000.00 may be required, with written, 30-
day notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that automobile in to a reputable
automobile dealer for an automobile with a market value of less than $8,000.00. Any
income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade-down must be used for his
basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade down the excess value of an automobile
asset can result in disqualification. The municipality will neither pay, nor consider as
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:19
necessary expenses, any car payment for which the applicant is responsible. General
assistance for travel-related needs shall be computed in accordance with section 46-98,
regarding work related expenses.
(d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a noncontributory basis, or that is
required as a condition of employment, will not be a factor in determining eligibility for
general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may be considered as a
tangible asset when an applicant has received assistance for four weeks or more after an
application for assistance.
(e) Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market value to
someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general assistance will
not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred
asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up to the uncompensated value of
the asset which was transferred unless the transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented,
in which case a 120-day disqualification will issue. There will be a presumption that the
applicant transferred his assets in order to be eligible for general assistance whenever
property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30
days prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can demonstrate the
existence of an arms-length transaction.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-52, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-52, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
Sec. 46-65. Ownership of real estate.
(a) If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that occupied as the principal
home, continued eligibility will depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:
(1) Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the property into
cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
(2) Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present need.
Applicants who transfer their excess property to someone solely to appear eligible
for general assistance will be ineligible.
(b) If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property. The lien
shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the
recipient. See section 46-97.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-53, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-53, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320.
Sec. 46-66. Work requirement.
All general assistance recipients are required to work, look for work, and fulfill the work
requirements, unless they are exempt as provided in this section.
(1) Employment, rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older will be required to accept any
suitable job offer or opportunity for rehabilitative services, except as provided in
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:20
this article (see exemptions). Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator
that they are available for work and are actively seeking full time employment.
a. Suitable job means any job (at a rate of at least the state's minimum wage)
which the applicant is mentally and physically able to perform.
b. Available for work means that applicants must make themselves available
for work during the normal business hours prevailing in the area and show
that no circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying
with the work requirement.
(2) Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis
will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of
employment at the time of each application. At a minimum, such documentation
shall consist of a list of the employers contacted, the date and time of the
application contact, and the name of the employer representative contacted. If
employment is pursued online, an actual application must be completed, and a
receipt for the completed application must be provided Pursuit of employment
means actually submitting a written application or applying for a job in person
when reasonable, or submitting an online application. For the duration of any
repeat applicant's period of unemployment or partial employment, each recipient
will be responsible for providing documentation of their pursuit of employment
according to the conditions set forth by the administrator. Fulfillment of these
requirements will not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be
a condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
(3) Disqualification. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application,
applicants will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they,
without just cause:
a. Refuse to register for employment with the state job service;
b. Refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable
and appropriate. Recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same
places repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent work
search and will be disqualified;
c. Refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d. Refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitative
program that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e. Fail to be available for work;
f. Refuse to participate, or participate in a substandard manner, in the
municipal work program. See section 46-67.
(4) Disqualification for quitting job, discharge for misconduct. No applicant, whether
an initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his full-time or part-time job without
just cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct will be
eligible to receive general assistance of any kind for a 120-day period from the
date of separation from employment.
(5) Just cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:21
to comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. Just
cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable evidence
that:
a. The applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability, which prevents
him from working;
b. Employment pays below minimum wage;
c. The applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d. The applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job
tasks, or to meet piece work standards;
e. The applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training
or rehabilitation program;
f. The applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members;
g. Any reason found to be good cause by the state department of labor or any
other verifiable reason which the administrator considers reasonable and
appropriate will be accepted as just cause.
(6) Applicant's burden of establishing just cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work related rule without just cause, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause.
(7) Eligibility regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they
violated the work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they
become employed or otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying
with the work requirement by fulfilling the work requirement they violated.
Persons who have been disqualified for 120 days for failing or refusing to
participate in the municipal workfare program or for performing their workfare
assignment in a substandard manner shall be limited to a single opportunity to
regain eligibility. If a workfare participant fails to regain eligibility, without just
cause, after being offered a distinct and separate opportunity to do so, the
administrator shall enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial
duration. If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is
subsequently disqualified within the initial period of disqualification for failing to
comply with the municipal work program, that participant shall be ineligible for a
new 120-day period beginning with a new disqualification date, but with no
opportunity to requalify.
(8) Dependents. Failure of an otherwise Eligible Person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person's
household who is not capable of working, including:
a. A dependent minor child;
b. An elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
c. A person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under six years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:22
If one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for those remaining members of the household who are dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is
composed of the dependents only, except that all household income will be
considered as available to them.
(9) Exemptions.
a. The work requirements of this section do not apply to any person who is
elderly, physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence
is required to care for any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled
member of the family residing in the household is also exempt from the
requirements of this section.
b. The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with
an applicant's existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer,
ability to attend an interview for possible employment, classroom
participation in a primary or secondary educational program intended to
lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site participation in a
training program which is either approved or determined by the
department of labor to be expected to assist the applicant in securing
employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program
under the control of the department of human services or department of
labor.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-54, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-54, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(8), 4309(3), 4316-A(1A), (4).
Sec. 46-67. Municipal work program.
(a) Participation. Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of
working may be required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a
nonprofit organization, as a condition of receiving assistance. The work requirement
provisions found in section 46-66 regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also
apply to the municipal workfare program.
(b) Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work and
the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is calculated. In
addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to adequately
perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
(c) Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations:
(1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of
work that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work under
this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance the value of which is
computed at the rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state or
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:23
federal law.
(2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant's basic religious beliefs.
(3) In no case shall Eligible Persons performing work under this section replace
regular municipal employees.
(4) In no case will work performed under this section interfere with an Eligible
Person's:
a. Existing employment;
b. Ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c. Attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d. Classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e. Classroom or on-site participation in a training program which is approved
or determined by the department of labor to be reasonably expected to
assist the person in securing employment, or classroom participation in a
degree granting program operated under the control of the department of
human services or the department of labor.
(5) In no case may an Eligible Person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An Eligible Person who has full- or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement, to the extent that the work requirement in
combination with his regular employment would result in the person working
more than 40 hours per week.
(6) In no case will an Eligible Person be required to perform work beyond his
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an Eligible Person
may be required, as a condition of receiving assistance, to present a medical
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness. If the administrator
requires a medical statement to verify an applicant's illness or disability, the
municipality will pay for the doctor's evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam; however, in such a case, the administrator will choose the
medical provider. The administrator will not require verification of medical
conditions which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a
reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention.
(7) In no case may an Eligible Person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this section
prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate
needs upon receiving written assurance from the Eligible Person that he is willing
to perform workfare in order to continue to be eligible for general assistance.
When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be
required prior to receiving general assistance in accordance with the following
workfare first policy.
(d) Workfare first policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:24
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
(1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
(2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a. A specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b. The period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued, in days or weeks but not to exceed 30 days;
c. The rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis, but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage, upon which the duration of the workfare assignment is
calculated;
d. The actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed, in
hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e. The specifics of the workfare assignments, including the general nature of
the type of work being assigned, locations of work sites, dates and times
of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors' names and contact telephone
numbers; and
f. Any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignments the
recipient will be expected to perform.
(3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his workfare related
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform all or
part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
(4) In addition to any disqualification penalty that may apply, the consequences of
refusing to perform or failing to completely perform the workfare assignment,
without just cause, or performing the entire workfare assignment below the
average standards for that job, without just cause, will be the termination of the
entire general assistance grant. Notice of the grant termination will be provided to
the workfare participant in accordance with section 46-99.
(5) If some of the workfare first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there has
been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just cause, the
administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount of the number
of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate used to calculate
the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any disqualification
penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally issued general
assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial termination and the
reasons therefore will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance with
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:25
section 46-99.
(6) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
cause reasons shall be reassigned.
(e) Work-related expenses. A participant's expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the person.
The municipality will provide any special clothes or equipment the recipient needs to
perform his work assignment, if they are not available through other sources.
(f) Disqualification. Any person who willfully fails to perform or willfully performs below
average standards the work assigned by the municipality, without just cause, will be
ineligible for 120 days. As soon as the administrator knows that a recipient failed to
fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify the recipient that he is
disqualified for 120 days unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the workfare
participant.
(g) Eligibility regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions:
(1) Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have
been given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120
days, although dependents in the household may be eligible (see section 46-66).
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient makes a timely and
reasonable request to perform the work assignment which he, without just cause,
failed to perform, the disqualified recipient will be given an opportunity to regain
his eligibility. The administrator will give the recipient a work assignment as soon
as possible. If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency
need and the administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to
alleviate the emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the
recipient to avert the emergency but the provision of such emergency assistance
will not bar the administrator from subsequently enforcing the 120-day
disqualification if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily
performing the work assignment. The amount of emergency assistance granted
will be considered in the computation of the total number of hours the recipient
must work.
Recipients who have asked to regain their eligibility during a 120-day
disqualification period and who agree to fulfill the assignment which they
previously failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their
municipal work assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such
a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the
term of its initial duration.
(2) If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of disqualification for failing to
comply with the municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a
new 120-day period beginning with the new disqualification date, but with no
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:26
opportunity to requalify.
(3) Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property or harms other
employees by his actions and is discharged by the work supervisor will not be
entitled to regain eligibility by returning to the work program. Eligibility may be
regained by otherwise becoming employed and meeting the definition of need.
(4) For the purposes of regaining eligibility under section 46-66 and this section by
becoming employed, "employment" shall mean employment by an employer as
defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq., or a service performed for an employer
who withholds from the employee a social security tax pursuant to federal law.
(h) Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to persons
who work for the municipality in reports to the department of human services.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-55, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-55, 5-5-94)
Cross references: Nonemergency assistance issued conditionally upon successful completion of workfare
assignment, § 46-1(d).
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4309, 4316(5), 4316-A(1), (2), (3).
Sec. 46-68. Use of resources.
(a) Required. Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize
every available or potential resource which may reduce his need for general assistance
(see definition of resources, section 46-2). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are disqualified
from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are
required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the resource.
(b) Minors. A minor under the age of 18 years who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
(1) The minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement;
(2) The minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the parents are unknown;
(3) No parent will permit the minor to live in the parent's home;
(4) The minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child;
(5) The department of human services determines that the physical or emotional
health or safety of the minor or the minor's dependent child or children would be
jeopardized if the minor and his child or children lived with a parent; or
(6) The department of human services determines, in accordance with its regulations,
that there is good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:27
Any person under the age of 25 years who is applying independently from his parents for general
assistance will be informed that until he reaches the age of 25, the applicant's parents are still
legally liable for his support, and the municipality has the right to seek recovery from the parents
of the cost of all assistance granted to such a recipient to the extent his parents are financially
capable of repaying the municipality. With regard to any such application, the municipality may
seek verification of the applicant's need for general assistance by contacting his parents (City of
Bangor v. DHS, Penob. Cty #CV-90-28). If the applicant's parents declare a willingness to
provide the applicant with his basic needs directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the
applicant would be jeopardized by relying on his parents for basic needs, the administrator may
find the applicant to be in no need for general assistance for the reason that his needs are being
provided by a legally liable relative.
(c) Mental or physical disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability must
make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have been
recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant provided they
would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
(d) Written notice; disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
that he is required to utilize any and all potential resources. Any applicant who refuses to
utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving a written seven-day notice,
will be ineligible for further assistance until he has made a good faith effort to utilize the
resources. General assistance will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a
resource if the applicant has made, or is in the process of making, a good faith effort to
obtain the resource.
(e) Forfeiture of benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program's rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture. An
applicant who is found to be ineligible for unemployment compensation benefits because
of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant to Title 26, section 1051,
subsection 1 is ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited
unemployment compensation benefits for the duration of the forfeiture established by the
Department of Labor.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-56, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-56, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 13-11, 7-1-13)
State law references: Similar provisions, 19 M.R.S.A. §§ 441--443, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4309(4), 4317, 4319.
Sec. 46-69. Period of disqualification.
(a) Notice; hearing. No one will have his assistance terminated, reduced or suspended prior
to being given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing. Each person will be
notified in writing of the reasons for his ineligibility, and any person disqualified for not
complying with this chapter will be notified in writing of the period of disqualification.
(b) Work requirement. People who do not comply with a work requirement are disqualified
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:28
from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility; see
section 46-66). Recipients who do not comply with the work requirement and are
disqualified before the period covered by the grant of assistance expires shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the assistance grant.
People who do not comply with a work requirement and are disqualified after the period
covered by the grant of assistance expires will be disqualified for 120 days from the date
of the written notice of disqualification. The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision of disqualification.
(c) Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 46-94, fraud) and they are required to reimburse the
municipality. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision. If a disqualification for fraud is issued before the expiration of a grant
of assistance, the period of disqualification shall commence on the day following the end
of the period covered by the grant of assistance or on the day the fair hearing authority
renders its decision, whichever is later. If fraud is discovered after the period covered by
the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility will commence on the day
of the written notice of disqualification, unless subsequently modified by the fair hearing
authority.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-57, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-57, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 17-18, 11-16-17)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4321, 4322.
Secs. 46-70--46-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY
Sec. 46-91. Recognition of dignity and rights.
Any determination or investigation into an applicant's eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant's privacy or personal dignity or violate his individual
rights.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-60, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-60, 5-5-94)
Sec. 46-92. Determination; redetermination.
(a) The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly, but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant's assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
(b) The administrator may redetermine a person's eligibility at any time during the period he
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:29
is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the recipient's
circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a
recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or rescind the
grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining the reasons for the
decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair
hearing authority.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-61, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-61, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.
Sec. 46-93. Verification.
(a) Applicant's responsibility. Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time
of application and continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current
information and documentation concerning his need, income, use of income, expenses,
and any changes in information previously reported on the application. The administrator
will require documentation of the applicant's income, use of income, assets and resources
plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical services and other
basic necessities that are reasonably obtainable. The recipient is responsible for notifying
the administrator of any changes in his household or income that may affect his
eligibility. When determining an applicant's eligibility, the administrator will seek all
necessary information first from the applicant. Information needed from other sources,
with the exception of public records, will be gathered only with the knowledge and
consent of the applicant.
(b) Decision. If an applicant does not have the necessary information at the time of
application, the administrator will give the applicant the opportunity to provide the
information prior to the expiration of the 24-hour period within which the administrator
must act on the application. Except when assistance is conditionally granted pursuant to
this municipality's workfare first policy (see section 46-67). If all the necessary
information has been provided and the applicant is eligible, assistance will be granted. If
the applicant does not provide the required information needed within the 24-hour period,
and the administrator cannot determine the applicant's eligibility, the applicant will be
denied assistance for that reason.
(c) Denial of assistance. The administrator will not grant assistance to any applicant who
refuses to supply necessary information and documentation concerning his needs, income
and other resources, or who refuses to grant permission for the administrator to contact
other persons to verify the information. If the administrator has attempted to verify the
information but is unable to determine if the applicant is eligible because the applicant
has refused to provide or allow the administrator to verify the necessary information, the
applicant will be denied assistance until the necessary verification has been
accomplished.
(d) Right to verify. It is the administrator's responsibility to determine and verify the
eligibility of each applicant. The administrator may seek and verify information from all
appropriate sources including, but not limited to: The department of human services and
any other department of the state having information that has a bearing on an applicant's
eligibility, financial institutions, employers and landlords, physicians, and legally liable
relatives. The administrator will request the applicant's written consent authorizing the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:30
administrator to receive the necessary information.
(e) Penalty for refusing to release information. Any person who refuses to provide necessary
information to the administrator, after it has been requested, must state in writing the
reasons for the refusal within three days of receiving the request. Any person who refuses
to provide the information, without just cause, commits a civil violation and may be
subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, which may be adjudged
in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false
information to the administrator is guilty of a class E crime.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-62, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-62, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4309(1-B), 4314, 4315.
Sec. 46-94. Fraud.
(a) Generally. It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false
representation of a material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance
or cause someone else to receive general assistance. A "material fact" is any information
which has direct bearing on the person's eligibility. "False representation" shall consist of
any individual knowingly and willfully:
(1) Making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either orally or
in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or the applicant's
household is not entitled;
(2) Concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order to
obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant's household is not entitled; or
(3) Using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which they
were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to being given
an opportunity for a fair hearing.
(b) Period of ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person has
knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making himself
eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that
he has been disqualified from receiving assistance and is required to reimburse the
municipality for any assistance rendered for which he was ineligible and is ineligible
from receiving further assistance for 120 days and until that reimbursement is made, or
the person enters into a written agreement, which must be reasonable under the
circumstances. For the purpose of this section, a "material misrepresentation" is a false
statement about an eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of the assistance
would not be or would not have been granted. The notification of disqualification issued
by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his right to appeal the administrator's
decision to the fair hearing authority within five working days of receipt. Unless modified
by the fair hearing authority, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of disqualification, whichever is later.
(c) Right to a fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:31
authority in accordance with article V of this chapter. No recipient shall have his
assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified and
given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied with the
decision of the fair hearing authority may appeal that decision to the superior court
pursuant to rule 80-B.
(d) Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing authority
determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will be required
to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he was not entitled.
(e) Dependents. In no event will the disqualification of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household. If one or more members of a
household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the household is comprised of
the dependents only, except that the entire household income will be considered available
to them.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-63, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-63, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 17-18, 11-16-17; Ord. No. 17-
21, 1-4-18)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4315.
Sec. 46-95. Period of eligibility.
The administrator will grant assistance to all Eligible Persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in excess of
one month. Upon any application the administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on
the basis of a 30-day prospective analysis. For reasons of administrative efficiency, however, the
administrator may elect to disburse that applicant's assistance for shorter periods of time, such as
weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the administrator elects to disburse
general assistance for a period of time less than 30 days, subsequent grants of assistance during
that 30-day period may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the
applicant's financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of
eligibility.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-64, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-64, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4309.
Sec. 46-96. Determination of need.
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application. The administrator will calculate applicants' expenses according to the actual expense
of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the specific necessities allowed in the general
assistance policy, whichever is less. Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income
and other resources exceed this calculation, except in an emergency. See section 46-39.
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income, property,
credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their household are
greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in the general assistance
policy. The difference between the applicant's income/resources and the overall maximum levels
of assistance established by this chapter is the applicant's deficit. Once an applicant's deficit has
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:32
been determined, the specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity listed in the
general assistance policy shall be used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance
for which the applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic
necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of
health and decency.
(1) Income for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive
assistance to replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to the
application for assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All
income spent on goods and services that are not basic necessities will be
considered available to the applicant and combined with the applicant's
prospective 30-day income for the purposes of computing eligibility. Applicants
who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities, but who use that
income to purchase goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be
considered eligible for assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic
necessities and who still need assistance with other basic necessities will be
eligible, provided that their income does not exceed the overall maximum levels
of assistance.
(2) Use-of-income requirements. Anyone applying for general assistance must
document his use of income to the administrator. This documentation can take the
form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has
exhausted all household income received over the last 30-day period. Any repeat
applicants must verify that such an expenditure of income was for basic
necessities.
a. Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage);
the cost of heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance
maximums; nonprescription drugs up to the ordinance maximums;
telephone costs at the base rate if the household needs a telephone for
medical reasons; the costs of nonelective medical services as
recommended by a physician which are not otherwise covered by medical
entitlement or insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing; and the
costs of any other commodity or service determined essential by the
administrator.
b. Cable television, cigarettes, alcohol, gifts purchased, costs of trips or
vacations, court fines paid, repayments of unsecured loans, credit card
debt, costs associated with pet care, etc., are not considered basic
necessities and will not be included in the budget computation.
c. The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income
requirements to any applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to
use his income for basic necessities or fails to reasonably document his
use of income. Those additional requirements will be applied in the
following manner:
1. The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of
his income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic
necessities. The administrator may prioritize such required
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:33
expenditures so that most or all of the applicant's income is applied
to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e., heating fuel,
electricity), or other specified basic necessities.
2. The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific
use-of-income requirements placed on them.
3. If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the
applicant's income was spent, or if it is determined that some or all
of applicant's income was not spent as directed and was also not
spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not be eligible to
receive either regular or emergency general assistance to replace
that income.
4. If the applicant does not spend his income as directed, but can
show with verifiable documentation that all income was spent on
basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the applicant will remain
eligible to the extent of the applicant's eligibility and need.
(3) Computation of income and expenses. In determining eligibilty, the administrator
will subtract the applicant's net income from the overall maximum level of
assistance found at the beginning of section 46-98. If income is greater than the
overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in
an emergency (see section 46-39).
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the
extent the applicant is in need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant
assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 46-98 for
specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the administrator elects
to consolidate the applicant's unmet need, as provided in subsection (4) of this
section.
(4) Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit,
applicants will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not
exceeding, the maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this chapter or the
actual 30-day cost of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain
circumstances, however, and in accordance with the following conditions, the
administrator may consolidate the applicant's deficit and apply it toward a basic
necessity in an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
a. The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic
necessity in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the
exception rather than the rule;
b. The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
c. The need for the application of the recipient's consolidated deficit toward a
basic necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-65, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-65, 5-5-94)
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:34
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(7), (10), 4305(3-A), (3-B), 4308(2), 4315-A.
Sec. 46-97. Income.
(a) Income standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in the general assistance policy shall not be eligible for general
assistance except in an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual
inquiry into the applicant's income and expenses each time they apply.
(b) Calculation of income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their need.
For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider as
available income any income that was spent during the previous 30-day period on basic
necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable
excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a household's income
exceeds the amount of the household's need for basic necessities, up to the maximum
levels contained in the general assistance policy, applicants will not be considered in
need. Exceptions will be made in emergency situations which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded. See section 46-39. To calculate weekly income and
expenses, the administrator will divide the applicant's monthly income and expenses by
4.3.
(c) Types of income. Income which will be considered in determining an applicant's need
includes:
(1) Earned income. Income in cash or in-kind earned by the applicant through wages,
salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee, is
considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions required
by state, federal and local law. Rental income and profit from produce that is sold
is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the
applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered as earned income.
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will not be
considered available income and will be deducted.
(2) Income from other assistance or social services programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, social security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other government
sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited by federal law
or regulation. Federal law prohibits food stamps and fuel assistance payments
made by the home energy assistance program (HEAP) from being considered
income. The value of the food stamps or fuel assistance will not be used to reduce
the amount of general assistance the applicant is eligible to receive, although
applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general assistance for
heating fuel or electricity if a recently received HEAP benefit has sufficiently
credited their account or otherwise obliviated an actual fuel-related cost over the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:35
prospective 30-day period. The administrator's obligation is to always compute
the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP as if that applicant paid
for his total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget
for the household's heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant's deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant's fuel
tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a positive
credit balance with his utility company. The municipality is not obligated to divert
any recipient's heating energy allowance toward nonheating purposes solely on
the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP.
(3) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the state department of human services' support enforcement location
unit.
(4) Income from other sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered income
as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any other
source, including relatives.
(5) Earnings of a son or daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 years who are full-time students and who are not working
full-time will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the
household will be considered available to the household.
(6) Income from household members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to
provide support to one another. (Boisvert v. Lewiston, CV#80-436, Androscoggin
County Superior Court)
(7) Pooling or nonpooling of income. When two or more individuals share the same
dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable presumption
that the entire household is pooling income. One or more applicants for assistance
can successfully rebut the presumption that all household income is being pooled
by providing the administrator with verifiable documentation affirmatively
demonstrating a pattern of nonpooling for the duration of the shared living
arrangement. Such documentation would include evidence of the entire household
expenses as well as bank statements, cancelled checks, receipts, landlord
statements or other vendor accounts clearly supporting a claim that the applicant
has been and is presently solely and entirely responsible for his pro rata share of
household costs. If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality's
presumption that all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire
household will be determined based on total household income. If the applicant
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:36
successfully rebuts the municipality's presumption that all household income is
being pooled, the applicant's eligibility will be determined on the basis of his
income and his pro rata share of actual household expenses.
(8) Lump sum income. A lump sum payment received by an applicant or recipient,
prior to or subsequent to applying for assistance shall be considered as income
available to the household, with the exception of any required payments (i.e., any
third party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump sum
payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump
sum payment was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which the
applicant or recipient can document was spent on basic necessities, as described
below. The lump sum payment must be prorated over future months according to
the following criteria:
The period of proration is determined by disregarding any portion of the lump
sum payment that the applicant or recipient has spent to purchase basic
necessities, including but not limited to: all basic necessities provided by general
assistance; reasonable payment of funeral or burial expenses for a family member;
reasonable travel costs related to the illness or death of a family member; repair or
replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or
purchase of a motor vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other
day-to-day living necessities; repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of bills
earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid. All income received
by the household between the receipt of the lump sum payment and the
application for assistance is added to the remainder of the lump sum. The period
of proration is then determined by dividing the remainder of the lump sum
payment by the verified actual monthly amounts for all of the household's basic
necessities. That dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment. The
prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the household for 12
months from the date of application or during the period of proration, whichever
is less.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-66, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-66, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 13-11, 7-1-13)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(7), (8-A), (12-A), 4308.
Sec. 46-98. Basic necessities; maximum levels of assistance.
(a) Overall maximum levels of assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in this section, an applicant's eligibility for
general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his income from the overall
maximum level of assistance, established in Title 22, section 4305, subsection 3-C, as set
in the general assistance policy for the applicable household size. The difference yielded
by this calculation shall be the applicant's deficit. Applicants will be eligible for general
assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is unable to otherwise
provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families. Applicants
with no deficit shall be found ineligible for general assistance unless they are in an
emergency, in which case eligibility for emergency general assistance will be determined
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:37
according to section 46-39.
(b) Maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities. The municipality will grant
assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum levels for
specific types of assistance as set forth in the general assistance policy. The
administrator, in consultation with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant's
deficit toward assistance with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the
total deficit. These maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator
determines that there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist,
in which case these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs
(Glidden v. Town of Fairfield, et al, CV79-17, Somerset County Superior Court). In all
cases, either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the
maximum amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in
determining need. The applicant's need for common living expenses for food, rent, fuel,
etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other household members'
proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. This presumption may be
rebutted by evidence that the other household members had no income with which to pay
their share of common expenses. No applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any
expense which has been or will be paid by another person, or which has been incurred in
another person's name.
(1) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to Eligible Persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts as established by the city council in the general
assistance policy, such amounts being as designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food
Plan for the appropriate household size, and distributed by the state department of
human services on or about October of each year. In determining need for food,
the administrator will not consider the value of food stamps an applicant receives
as income (7 USC sec. 2017(b); Dupler, et al v. City of Portland, et al, CV-74-134
SD). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
(2) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage
payments that are reasonable and within the allowed maximum levels established
by the city council in the general assistance policy, and in accordance with the
housing assistance limits provided in Title 22, section 4308, subsection 1-A; and
in accordance with the housing exceptions provided in Title 22, section 4308,
subsection 1-B. It is the applicant's responsibility to find suitable housing,
although the administrator may help the applicant find housing when appropriate.
The administrator will inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to
assist the applicant in his search for housing. The allowed maximum for any
applicant will be the categorical housing maximum representing the minimum
dwelling unit space necessary to adequately shelter the applicant household.
Applicants requesting assistance for housing that contains more bedrooms than
are necessary for the number of household members will be provided assistance
according to the maximum level for the number of rooms actually needed. Single
individuals will be required to live in rooms, boardinghouses or shelters when
such housing is available. Persons will be required to find rooms or apartments
that have utilities furnished, unless they are residing in subsidized housing.
Persons will be required to apply for, and accept, subsidized housing. The
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:38
municipality will not pay security deposits or back bills, except in an emergency
as provided in section 46-39.
(3) Rental payments to relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant's relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant's relatives rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a "relative" is defined as the
applicant's parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent's
siblings, or any of those relatives' children.
(4) Rental payments to private homes.
a. When applicants are living in private homes or sharing dwelling units with
other people who are not requesting general assistance, the amount
allowed as the applicant's shelter expense will be the applicant's pro rata
share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to the ordinance maximum.
b. Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be
issued, whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner
with most superior legal or equitable interest in the property.
c. When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600.00 in rental
payments to any landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the
total amount of rental payments during the calendar year will be
forwarded to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS
regulation. See section 6041(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
d. Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the
municipality on behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord's
own residence must, at a minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a
lodging license from the department of human services, division of health
engineering, pursuant to 10-144A Code of Maine Regulations, chapter
201, as a condition of that landlord receiving future general assistance
payments on behalf of his tenants.
(5) Mortgage payments.
a. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage payment, the
general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such
aid. In making this determination, the administrator will consider the
extent and liquidity of the applicant's proprietary interest in the housing.
Factors to consider in making this determination include:
1. The marketability of the shelter's equity;
2. The amount of equity;
3. The availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the
applicant an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to
meet immediate needs;
4. The extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant's financial
rehabilitation;
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:39
5. A comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and of
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if
he were to be dislocated to rental housing;
6. The imminence of the applicant's dislocation from owned housing
because of his inability to meet the mortgage payments;
7. The likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent
such dislocation; and
8. The applicant's age, health and social situation.
b. These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in
the shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance
the municipality would otherwise be required to provide. If after
reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines that the payment
of the mortgage is not necessary to meet the applicant's immediate shelter
needs, the administrator may elect not to make any mortgage payment
unless the applicant has been served a notice of foreclosure, although
mortgage payments, up to the ordinance maximum for housing, will be
budgeted as an expense.
c. If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual
amount due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels
established by the city council in the general assistance policy, whichever
is less. After an initial application, assistance with such payments will be
given only after the applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow
against the equity of his home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home
with which to secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are not
realistically in line with the rental rates for similar housing in the area that
could meet the applicant's needs, the administrator will inform the
applicant that he is responsible for finding alternative housing within his
ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to secure
such housing.
(6) Liens.
a. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its
costs of granting assistance with mortgage payments. No lien may be
enforced against a recipient, except upon his death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is
currently receiving any form of public assistance or who would again
become eligible for general assistance if the lien were enforced.
b. If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a
person's property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a
mortgage payment, it must file a notice of the lien with the county register
of deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the
mortgage payment. That filing shall secure the municipality's or the state's
interest in an amount equal to the sum of that mortgage payment and all
subsequent mortgage payments made on behalf of the same Eligible
Person, plus interest and costs. Not less than ten days prior to filing the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:40
lien notice in the registry, the municipal officers must send a different
notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient, and
any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry.
This notice must clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon
enforcement plus the name, title, address and telephone number of the
person who granted the assistance. The municipal officers must also give
written notice to the recipient each time the amount secured by the lien is
increased because of an additional mortgage payment or the imposition of
interest. This notice must include the same information that appeared on
the original notice of proposed filing sent to the recipient.
c. The municipality will charge interest on the amount of money secured by
the lien. The city council will establish the interest rate, not to exceed the
maximum rate of interest allowed by the state treasurer to be charged
against delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the date the lien is
filed.
(7) Property taxes. If an applicant requests assistance with his property taxes, the
administrator will inform the applicant that there are two procedures on the local
level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process and general assistance.
If the applicant chooses to seek property tax assistance through general assistance,
or if the applicant is denied a poverty tax abatement, the administrator may
consider using general assistance to meet this need only if:
a. The property tax in question is for the applicant's place of residence;
b. There is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days
of the date of application;
c. As a matter of policy or practice it is reasonably certain that a tax lien
foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential property;
and
d. The applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief
through the state resident property tax program, when available.
(8) Housing maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
chapter have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing
are derived from the HUD values as those values are prepared and distributed by
the state department of human services on or about November 1 of each year,
those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. If and when the maximum
levels of housing contained in this chapter are derived from a locally developed
fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be submitted to the
department of human services, general assistance unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this chapter pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305. The maximum
amounts allowed for housing are as established by the city council in the general
assistance policy.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:41
(9) Utilities.
a. Expenses for lights, cooking and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including
entering into a special payment arrangement if necessary.
b. Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most
recent bill. The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility
security deposits. Exceptions may be made in emergency situations
pursuant to section 46-39. Disconnection of utility service will not be
considered an emergency in all cases. The administrator will make an
individual, factual analysis to determine if the termination of utility
service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will consider the
household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to
pay their utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their
income on items which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to
receive general assistance to replace those funds. Applicants have the
burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income for the
applicable time period. See section 46-39. The administrator will notify
applicants in writing that they must give the administrator prompt notice if
their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is low. It is
the applicants' responsibility to attempt to make arrangements with the
utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
c. In accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may allow
as a budgetable expense the amount of an applicant's summer-loaded
special payment arrangement (SPA) or budget payment arrangement
(BPA), as calculated by the electric utility and entered into by the
applicant:
1. The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above
monthly maximums, when annualized, for nonelectrically heated
dwelling units.
2. The SPA or BPA, when annualized, does not exceed the above
monthly maximums and the fuel assistance maximums, when
annualized, for electrically heated dwelling units.
3. The administrator determines, in consultation with the utility, that
the payment arrangement does not include in any part the
installment payment of past debt unless the municipality
guaranteed to the utility the allowance of such an arrangement as a
condition of averting a disconnection.
d. Pursuant to the use-of-income requirements in section 46-96, whenever
the administrator budgets for SPAs or BPAs under this section, the
recipient will be required to pay the SPA or BPA himself to the extent of
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:42
the income capacity of the household.
(10) Nonelectric utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will
be budgeted at the actual 30-day cost for those services.
(11) Fuel.
a. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need
for fuel during the heating season (September through May), provided
such expenses are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the
administrator determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and
appropriate.
b. Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most
recent bill. The municipality is not responsible for back bills, except in an
emergency as provided in section 46-39. Applicants are responsible for
monitoring their fuel supply and requesting assistance prior to depleting
their fuel supply. When applicants who have been informed of this
responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for
failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the
administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicant's
control, and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to
section 46-39. Running out of fuel will not necessarily be considered an
emergency unless the applicants have just cause for failing to give the
administrator timely notice of their need for fuel.
c. When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount
allowed for heating purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number
of gallons of fuel allowed for that month by the current price per gallon.
d. When fuel such as wood, coal and/or natural gas is used to heat, they will
be budgeted at actual rates, if they are reasonable. No eligible applicant
shall be considered to need more than seven tons of coal per year, eight
cords of wood per year, 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or 1000
gallons of propane.
(12) Personal/household supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and household
supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant's actual need for
these items, up to the maximums. Personal and household supplies include hand
soap, toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry
supplies and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as
toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags, and lightbulbs.
(13) Other basic necessities. Expenses falling under this subsection may be granted
when they are deemed essential to an applicant's or recipient's health and safety
by the general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
a. Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing, although, in most instances, clothing will be a
postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if fire or
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:43
unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity,
special clothing is necessary for the applicant's employment. Before
assistance will be granted for clothing, the general assistance administrator
must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available resources to
secure the necessary clothing. Clothing will be budgeted at a fee as
determined by the city council in the general assistance policy when the
general assistance administrator finds it necessary to authorize clothing.
b. Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other
than hospital bills (see hospital bills), provided that the municipality is
notified and approves the expenses and services prior to their being made
or delivered. The municipality will grant assistance for medical service
only when assistance cannot be obtained from any other source and the
applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical care without the
municipality's assistance. The applicant is required to utilize any resource,
including any federal or state program, that will diminish his need to seek
general assistance for medical expenses. The municipality will grant
assistance for nonemergency medical services only if a physician verifies
that the services are essential. All medical costs authorized by the
municipality will be at Medicaid rates. The administrator may require a
second medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality at
the municipality's expense to verify the necessity of the service. In order
for telephone service to be considered an allowable expense, the applicant
must provide a written statement from a physician certifying that the
telephone is absolutely essential to the applicant's health and safety. Only
the basic rate will be considered.
c. Hospital bills.
1. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the hospital
must notify the administrator within five business days of the
admission. Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by
certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a hospital fails to give
timely notice to the administrator, the municipality will have no
obligation to pay the bill.
2. Any person who cannot pay his hospital bill must apply to the
hospital for consideration under the hospital's charity care program
as provided in 22 M.R.S.A. § 396-F(1). Anyone who is not eligible
for the hospital's charity care program may apply for general
assistance. Applicants must apply for assistance within 30 days of
being discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from the
hospital certifying that they are not eligible for the hospital's
charity care program.
3. Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital
bill as a necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a
reasonable payment arrangement with the hospital. The payment
arrangement will be based upon the Medicaid rate. In determining
an applicant's eligibility, the municipality will budget the monthly
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:44
payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The
applicant's need for assistance with a hospital bill will be
considered each time he applies by including the amount of the bill
in the applicant's monthly budget, but the recipient will be
responsible for making any necessary payments to the hospital
pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at section 46-96
of this chapter.
d. Dental. The municipality will not furnish dental services, except in cases
of emergency. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the municipality
will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no other resources to pay
for dentures. The applicant will be referred to a dental clinic in the area
whenever possible. The administrator will expect the applicant to bear a
reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including extractions and
dentures, taking into account the applicant's ability to pay.
e. Eye care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for
eyeglasses, an applicant must have his medical need certified by a person
licensed to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will
provide assistance for eyeglasses to Eligible Persons only after the
applicant has exhausted all other available resources.
f. Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include child care costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation (if it is
not available by the local bus service or car pooling) at the actual costs,
not to exceed the ordinance maximum as established by the city council in
the general assistance policy. The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were
necessary.
g. Burial, cremations.
1. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the procedures
and limitations described below, the municipality recognizes its
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of Eligible
Persons. The administrator will provide for burial and cremation
services to Eligible Persons up to the allowed maximum amounts
as established by the city council in the general assistance policy.
2. Funeral directors must give timely notice. In order for the
municipality to be liable for a burial or cremation expense, the
funeral director must notify the administrator prior to the burial or
cremation or by the end of 3 business days following the funeral
director's receipt of the body, whichever is earlier. This contact by
the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an
application for burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the
deceased. It is the funeral director's responsibility to determine if
the family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the
burial expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay the
expenses and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:45
or part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely
contact with the municipal administrator. In addition, the funeral
director may refer legally liable relatives to the administrator so
that a timely determination of financial capacity may be
accomplished.
3. Application for assistance shall be created on behalf of the
deceased. For the purposes of determining residency, calculating
eligibility and issuing general assistance for burial or cremation
purposes, an application for assistance shall be created by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
4. With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for
burial expenses shall be the municipality in which the eligible
deceased person was a resident at the time of death as residency is
determined under section 46-40.
5. Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses, that information will not be construed as an application
for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible
for burial assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally
liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the burial
or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only
exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are
eligible for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no
legal obligation to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives.
For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial or
cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name
of, the deceased.
6. The financial responsibility of certain family members. Spouse,
registered domestic partner, grandparents, parents, children and
grandchildren of the deceased are financially responsible for the
burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives,
individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the
burial or cremation either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted
payment arrangement with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the
request of the administrator, all legally liable relatives must
provide the municipal administrator, with any reasonable requested
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses. If any responsible family members refuse to provide the
requested information or refuse to allow the municipality to
investigate their resources, the municipality will not grant the
requested burial or cremation assistance. If the administrator
makes a finding that one or more legally liable relatives has a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, the
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:46
municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation
assistance. Any representative of a financial institution or any
employer of a general assistance applicant who, upon receipt of a
written release signed by the depositor and a written request from
the Administrator, refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state
in writing the reason for the refusal. National banks are also
obligated to disclose deposit information to the Administrator upon
receipt of a written request and release signed by the depositor.
Additionally, when a municipality or its agents are acting in
accordance with 22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2) to verify eligibility for
funeral or cremation benefits, an officer of a financial institution
must disclose the amount deposited upon receipt of a written
request from the municipality or its agents and a notarized affidavit
signed by the overseer of the municipality or its agents stating that
the named depositor is deceased.
7. Eight days to determine eligibility. The administrator may take up
to eight days from the date of contact by the funeral director to
issue a written decision regarding the amount of the municipal
contribution toward the burial or cremation.
8. The municipal obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or
others can contribute. The figures provided in the general
assistance policy are the maximum benefits provided by the
municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation
are available from any other source.
h. Burial expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family
members with regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of
burial or cremation. Burial services required, at a minimum, shall include
removal of the body from a local residence or institution, a secured death
certificate and obituary, preparation of the body, a minimum casket, and
necessary transportation. Other reasonable and necessary specified direct
costs may be approved for reimbursement by the administrator, and may
include the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery bylaws require
one, the opening and closing of the gravesite, and a lot in the least
expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able to provide a
cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery, or in a cemetery under
municipal control, or in a cemetery that donates the lots to the city, the
cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery will not be paid by the
municipality.
i. Cremation expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family
members of the deceased, the administrator will issue general assistance
for cremation services. Cremation services required, at a minimum, shall
include removal of the body from a local residence or institution, a
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:47
secured death certificate and obituary, an appropriate container for
cremation, and necessary transportation. Other reasonable and necessary
specified direct costs may be approved for reimbursement by the
administrator, and may include the wholesale cost of a liner if the
cemetery bylaws require one, and a cremation lot in the least expensive
section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able to provide a cemetery
lot in a municipally owned cemetery, or in a cemetery under municipal
control, or in a cemetery that donates the lots to the city, the cost of the
cemetery lot in any other cemetery will not be paid by the municipality.
j. Capital improvements. The costs associated with capital
improvements/repairs (e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will
generally not be budgeted as a basic necessity. Exceptions can be made
only when the capital improvement/repair has been preapproved by the
administrator as a necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital
improvement/repair has been reduced as far as reasonably possible, for
example, by means of the applicant entering into an installment payment
arrangement with the contractor. The administrator may grant general
assistance for capital improvements when:
1. The failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2. There are no other resources available to effect the capital repair;
and
3. There is no more cost-effective alternative available to the
applicant or municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can
be mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment
arrangement with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place
a lien on any property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general
assistance has been used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process
shall be accomplished in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as
described in subsection (b)(2) of this section.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-67, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-67, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 99-8, 4-15-99; Ord. No. 12-06,
7-5-12; 12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 15-14, 01-14-16; Ord. No. 17-18, 11-16-17)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(6), (7-A), 4305, 4308(2), 4309, 4313(2), 4319(2),
4320, 36 M.R.S.A. § 841(2).
Sec. 46-99. Notice of decision; disbursements.
(a) Written decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving an application. See section 46-36.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the general
assistance administrator to explain the applicant's right to a fair hearing in the written notice of
decision.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:48
(b) Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written notice
of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the contents of a
written decision listed in section 46-36, the notice will state that applicants:
(1) Have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing;
(2) Have the right to contact the department of human services if they believe the
municipality has violated the law. The decision will state the method for notifying
the department.
(c) Disbursement of general assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or purchase
order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or
services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to an
applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which case the
administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form
of cash.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-68, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-68, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3), (6).
Secs. 46-100--46-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. FAIR HEARING
Sec. 46-121. Right to fair hearing.
Within five working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination
of assistance, or within ten working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant or his
authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing. The right to review a decision by
the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the applicant to a fully evidentiary hearing
and is not limited solely to a review of the decision. (Carson v. Oakland, 442 A.2d 170 (Me.
1982); Thibodeau v. Lewiston, Androscoggin Superior Court, 1979, CV78-388)
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-70, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-70, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322.
Sec. 46-122. Method of obtaining.
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that are not
clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the
general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or explanation, the
administrator will make an entry in the case record and file any correspondence involved.
(1) Written request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant must make a written
request within five working days of receiving the administrator's decision to deny,
reduce or terminate assistance, or within ten working days after any other act or
failure to act. The administrator will make available a printed form for requesting
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:49
a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if necessary. On the
printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a. The decision on which review is sought;
b. The reasons for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why the claimant
believes he is eligible to receive assistance; and
c. The relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has
been withdrawn by the claimant.
(2) Scheduling the fair hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request, the
fair hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within five working days.
The administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing
will be held. In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of
fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant's rights
to:
a. Be his own spokesperson at the fair hearing or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant's own
expense;
b. Confront and cross examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against
the claimant;
c. Present witnesses on his own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into
consideration the convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant
will be given notice early enough to allow preparation and will also be given
adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for
effective preparation of the claimant's case.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-71, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-71, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322.
Sec. 46-123. The fair hearing authority.
(a) The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority, which will review decisions
of the general assistance administrator when requested by any claimant. The authority is
charged with the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in
accordance with state law and local ordinance.
(b) The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the hearing authority or, if designated, the
board of appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691. In determining the organization of
the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria. The
person(s) serving as fair hearing authority must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
(2) Be impartial;
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:50
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence
and the facts necessary to make a fair determination;
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-72, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-72, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322.
Sec. 46-124. The fair hearing procedure.
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time and place for the
hearing in writing, he will also be given adequate preliminary information about the hearing
procedure to allow for effective preparation of his case. The claimant shall be permitted to
review his file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the claimant will be told the following
information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair hearings will:
(1) Be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his agents, counsel and witnesses;
(2) Be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
(3) Be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
(4) Allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
(5) Give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal, question witnesses presented at the hearing,
and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
(6) Result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing;
(7) Be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-73, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-73, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4322.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:51
Sec. 46-125. The fair hearing decision.
(a) The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within five working
days after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the
following:
(1) A statement of the issue;
(2) Relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
(3) Pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision;
(4) The decisions and reasons for it.
(b) A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
(c) The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he has a further legal right to appeal the decision, pursuant to the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure, rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must file
a petition for review with the superior court within 30 days of receipt of the fair hearing
decision.
(d) When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, that assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-74, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-74, 5-5-94)
Secs. 46-126--46-145. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. RECOVERY OF EXPENSES
Sec. 46-146. Recipients.
(a) Generally. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or from his
executors or administrators in a civil action. Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover
the amount of assistance, the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the
recipient by notifying him in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The
municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs if, as a result of the repayment, the
person would again become eligible for general assistance.
(b) Recipients anticipating workers' compensation benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump sum
payment made to that recipient under the workers' compensation act or similar law of any
other state. After issuing a general assistance payment on behalf of a recipient who has
applied for or is receiving workers' compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of
the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the office of secretary of
state, uniform commercial code division. The notice of lien shall be filed un a UCC-1
form. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient's
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Lewiston Code Chapter 46
CH 46:52
workers' compensation attorney, if known, the applicant's employer or the employer's
insurance company, and, at the administrator's discretion, to the workers' compensation
board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum workers' compensation
benefit is issued.
(c) Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
supplemental security income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an interim assistance agreement form distributed by the department of
human services that authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of
any retroactive SSI payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the
general assistance granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who
may be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22
M.R.S.A. § 4317 and who refuses to sign the interim agreement SSI authorization form
will be found ineligible to receive general assistance until he provides the required
signature.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-80, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 92-14, § 1, 7-23-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-80, 5-5-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39 M.R.S.A. § 106.
Sec. 46-147. Relatives.
The spouse of an applicant and the parents of any applicant under the age of 25 years are
liable for the support of the applicant. In addition, spouse, registered domestic partner, children,
grandchildren, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs of each other. The
municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the support of their
relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may complain to any court of
competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives
fail to fulfill their responsibility.
(Ord. No. 92-6, § 13-81, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 94-2, § 13-81, 5-5-94; 12-9, 8-16-12; Ord. No. 17-18, 11-16-
17)
State law references: Similar provisions, 22 M.R.S.A. § 4319.
Chapter 47
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 48
CH 48:1
Chapter 48
LIBRARY*
Article I. In General
Sec. 48-1. Established.
Sec. 48-2. Failure to return library property.
Secs. 48-3--48-20. Reserved.
Article II. Board of Trustees
Sec. 48-21. Membership, vacancies on board of trustees.
Sec. 48-22. Responsibilities.
*Cross references: Department of library, § 2-336 et seq.
LIBRARY
Lewiston Code Chapter 48
CH 48:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 48-1. Established.
The act of the legislature entitled "An Act authorizing the City of Lewiston to accept
donations of money and property to establish and maintain a Free Public Library in Lewiston and to
accept conveyances of land for a site there," approved February 20, 1901, is hereby accepted. The
trustees provided for in this act shall be known as the trustees of the Free Public Library of
Lewiston.
(Code 1982, § 16-1)
State law references: Authority for a town to establish a free public library, 27 M.R.S.A. § 101;
municipal authority to accept gifts and devices, 27 M.R.S.A. § 109.
Sec. 48-2. Failure to return library property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to retain any book, pamphlet, magazine, newspaper,
manuscript, or other property belonging to the Lewiston Public Library for a period exceeding 15
days after such library has given written notice to return the same. Such notice shall be given in
accordance with the library policy on overdue materials.
(Code 1982, § 16-4)
Secs. 48-3--48-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF TRUSTEES*
*Cross references: Boards, commissions, committees and bureaus, § 2-151 et seq.
Sec. 48-21. Membership, vacancies on board of trustees.
(a) In accordance with the provisions of the act mentioned in section 48-1, the board of trustees
shall consist of ten members of whom the mayor, ex officio, shall be one, and the remaining
nine members shall be such other suitable persons as the mayor may select; provided,
however, that all members shall be residents of the city. All non ex-officio members shall
serve a term of three years. Members of the board of trustees shall not be eligible to serve
for more than three full successive terms. The terms of office of members of the board of
trustees appointed following the adoption of the amendment of this Code shall be
established by the mayor who shall appoint one member to serve a one-year term; one
member to serve a two-year term; and one member to serve a three-year term. Thereafter, all
members shall be appointed for three-year terms.
(b) After the first election, the vacancies occurring annually in the board of trustees under the
provisions of the act shall be filled by the mayor in January of each year, and in case of a
vacancy during the year, the mayor shall select a successor for the residue of the term. In
case a member of the board of trustees is elected to and accepts the office of mayor, his
office as trustee shall be vacated and such vacancy shall be filled as above provided.
(Code 1982, § 16-2; Ord. No. 04-01, 2-19-04; Ord. No. 05-19, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 07-04, 5-17-07; Ord. No.
11-12, 12-15-11)
LIBRARY
Lewiston Code Chapter 48
CH 48:3
Sec. 48-22. Responsibilities.
(a) The board shall act in an advisory capacity for the purpose of providing assistance to other
municipal officials charged with the responsibility of furnishing quality public library
service, except that the trustees shall have the authority to decide policy as to the following:
(1) Identification and promotion of general library objectives;
(2) Establishing the character and quality of books and other materials to be contained in
the library collection;
(3) Promoting cooperation with other libraries;
(4) Providing effective programs and services to schools and other specialized groups in
need of library service; and
(5) Establishing and supporting cultural programs sponsored by the library.
(b) The board may receive such property or other valuables as may be left to the library and
shall advise the library director about their retention, sale or disposition. The retention, sale
or disposition of any property or valuables shall be subject to the approval of the city
administrator and the City Council, with regard to expenditures, in accordance with existing
city policies.
(c) The trustees may solicit and receive cash donations made to the library to be used for library
purposes. They shall advise the library director as to the investment and use of such funds,
such use to be in accordance with any conditions imposed by the donor. They may also
solicit and accept donations to the library’s permanent endowment fund and advise the
library director as to the investment and use of the endowment in accordance with existing
city policies. The expenditure of any donated funds shall be subject to the approval of the
city administrator and/or designee, and the City Council where appropriate, who shall ensure
that applicable policies are adhered to.
(d) The trustees may authorize the library director to apply for and accept grants to the extent
that such grants do not require a cash match from the City or the commitment of City
resources in future years. Where such match is required or future resources must be
committed, the trustees may request that the City Council authorize and accept such grants.
(e) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the position of library director, the trustees shall act in an
advisory capacity and assist the city administrator in the selection of a new director.
(Code 1982, § 16-3; Ord. No. 01-5, 5-3-01; Ord. No. 11-12, 12-15-11)
Chapter 49
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:1
Chapter 50
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Article I. In General
Sec. 50-1. Aiding or abetting.
Sec. 50-2. False information to police.
Sec. 50-3. Obedience to police.
Sec. 50-4. Loitering, lurking for malicious, unlawful purposes; peeping Toms.
Sec. 50-5. Loitering generally.
Sec. 50-6. Desecration and defacement.
Sec. 50-7. Removing or destroying public plants, fixtures.
Sec. 50-8. Defacing fences.
Sec. 50-9. Public indecency.
Sec. 50-10. Police supervision of public gatherings; fee.
Sec. 50-11. Improper conduct; dispersing of assembly.
Sec. 50-12. Fire supervision of public gatherings; fee.
Sec. 50-13. Unlawful noise.
Sec. 50-14. Exemptions.
Sec. 50-15. Penalties.
Sec. 50-16. Nuisance parties.
Sec. 50-17. Owners failure to prevent a second nuisance party.
Sec. 50-18. Penalty.
Sec. 50-19. Prohibiting tobacco use in designated public rights of way.
Sec. 50-20. Penalty.
Secs. 50-21--50-35. Reserved.
Article II. Citation System of Code Enforcement
Sec. 50-36. Purpose.
Sec. 50-37. Applicability.
Sec. 50-38. Investigations.
Sec. 50-39. Notice of violation.
Sec. 50-40. Civil proceedings.
Sec. 50-41. Citations--Issuance.
Sec. 50-42. Same--Contents.
Sec. 50-43. Same--Service of.
Sec. 50-44. Time limits for corrective action.
Sec. 50-45. Penalty.
Sec. 50-46. Further violations.
Sec. 50-47. Penalty for nonpayment of penalty; collection proceedings.
Sec. 50-48. Repeat violations.
Sec. 50-49. Appeals.
Sec. 50-50. Effect of article on other ordinances.
Sec. 50-51. Severability of provisions.
Secs. 50-52--50-70. Reserved.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:2
Article III. Minors
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 50-71. Employment of underaged persons in alcoholic beverage establishments.
Secs. 50-72--50-80. Reserved.
Division 2. Curfew
Sec. 50-81. Definitions.
Sec. 50-82. Offenses.
Sec. 50-83. Defenses.
Sec. 50-84. Enforcement.
Sec. 50-85. Penalties.
Sec. 50-86. Severability.
Sec. 50-87. Effective date.
Secs. 50-88--50-105. Reserved.
Article IV. Weapons and Explosives
Sec. 50-106. Permit to carry concealed weapons.
Sec. 50-107. Discharging firearms.
Sec. 50-108. Blasting restricted; permit.
Sec. 50-109. Storage limit on gunpowder unless licensed.
Sec. 50-110. License to sell gunpowder; appeal.
Sec. 50-111. Exception.
Secs. 50-112--50-160. Reserved.
Article V. Obscenity
Sec. 50-161. Definitions.
Sec. 50-162. Wholesale promotion of obscene material or devices.
Sec. 50-163. Validity.
Sec. 50-164. Penalty.
Sec. 50-165. Application of violations to liquor licenses and special amusement permits.
Secs. 50-166--50-180. Reserved.
Article VI. Operation of Noise-Creating Devices Upon Public Rights-of-way
Sec. 50-181. Purpose.
Sec. 50-182. Definitions.
Sec. 50-183. Creation of certain noises upon a public right-of-way prohibited.
Sec. 50-184. Exceptions.
Sec. 50-185. Penalty.
Secs. 50-186--50-199. Reserved.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:3
Article VII. Graffiti Violations
Sec. 50-200. Purpose.
Sec. 50-201. Definitions.
Sec. 50-202. Prohibited acts.
Sec. 50-203. Prohibited possession of graffiti implements.
Secs. 50-204--50-210. Reserved.
Sec. 50-211. Penalties.
Article VIII. Sale and Use of Consumer Fireworks
Sec. 50-220. Definitions.
Sec. 50-221. Fireworks restricted use.
Sec. 50-222. Exception.
Sec. 50-223. Violations.
Sec. 50-224. Sale of fireworks.
Sec. 50-225. Seizure and disposal of fireworks.
Article IX. Synthetic Drugs
Sec. 50-251. Purpose.
Sec. 50-252. Definitions.
Sec. 50-253. Prohibition of illicit synthetic drugs.
Sec. 50-254. Sale of certain products for human consumption prohibited.
Sec. 50-255. Violation and seizure.
Article X. Aggressive Panhandling
Sec. 50-266. Purpose.
Sec. 50-267. Definitions.
Sec. 50-268. Prohibited acts generally.
Sec. 50-269. Invasively aggressive solicitation.
Sec. 50-270. Penalty.
Article XI. Sex Offender Restricted Zone
Sec. 50-280. Purpose.
Sec. 50-281. Authority.
Sec. 50-282. Definitions.
Sec. 50-283. Restrictions.
Sec. 50-284. Exceptions.
Sec. 50-285. Violation; injunctive relief and penalties.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. Aiding or abetting.
The prohibition of any act by any ordinance of the city, or in any amendment thereof,
shall include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person to do such act.
(Code 1982, § 19-1)
Sec. 50-2. False information to police.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give any information or report to the department of
police or to any member of such department, relating to any crime or offense, which information
or report is false and which information or report such person knows to be false.
(Code 1982, § 19-3)
Sec. 50-3. Obedience to police.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer.
(Code 1982, § 19-4)
Sec. 50-4. Loitering, lurking for malicious, unlawful purposes; peeping Toms.
(a) No person shall loiter or lurk in any of the streets or public places adjacent thereto for
malicious or unlawful purposes.
(b) No person shall loiter unnecessarily in or about any private dwelling or peep into the
window of any private dwelling to the discomfort or alarm of the occupants of such
dwelling, the neighbors or any person going to and from such dwelling.
(Code 1982, § 19-8)
Sec. 50-5. Loitering generally.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either
alone and/or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to commit in or
upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or
building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or
upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
(b) When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a)
of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to
stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who
fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Code 1982, § 19-9)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:5
Sec. 50-6. Desecration and defacement.
(a) A person is guilty of desecration and defacement if he intentionally desecrates any public
monument or structure, any place of worship or burial, or any private structure not owned
by him.
(b) As used in this section, "desecrate" means marring, defacing, damaging or otherwise
physically mistreating, in a way that will outrage the sensibilities of an ordinary person
likely to observe or discover the actions.
(c) Desecration is an offense.
(Code 1982, § 19-13)
State law references: Similar provisions, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 507.
Sec. 50-7. Removing or destroying public plants, fixtures.
No person shall climb, peel, cut, remove or in any way deface or destroy any tree, shrub,
plant, sign or fixture on the commons, cemeteries, parks or in any street or public place of the
city; nor deface any public building or any building not his own, by cutting, breaking, dashing
with paint or in any manner defacing or injuring such building.
(Code 1982, § 19-11)
Cross references: Parks and recreation, ch. 54.
Sec. 50-8. Defacing fences.
No person shall deface any fence around the parks, commons or public squares by putting
up billboards or posting bills thereon, or in any other way.
(Code 1982, § 19-12)
Sec. 50-9. Public indecency.
(a) A person is guilty of public indecency if:
(1) In a public place:
a. He engages in sexual intercourse or a sexual act, as defined in 17-A
M.R.S.A. § 251; or
b. He knowingly exposes his genitals under circumstances which, in fact, are
likely to cause affront or alarm; or
(2) In a private place, he exposes his genitals with the intention that he be seen from a
public place or from another private place.
(b) For purposes of this section "public place" includes, but is not limited to, motor vehicles
which are on a public way.
(c) Public indecency is an offense.
(Code 1982, § 19-14)
State law references: Similar provisions, 17-A M.R.S.A. § 854.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:6
Sec. 50-10. Police supervision of public gatherings; fee.
(a) The chief of police when notified of the plans for any public gathering shall, if in his
judgment police supervision of such public gathering shall be required in order to
maintain and preserve the public health, safety and morals, assign such number of police
officers to supervise such public gathering as may be necessary in his judgment to carry
out the provisions of this section.
(b) The fee to be paid any officer acting in accordance with this section shall be determined
by the city council and shall be paid by the person conducting the event causing such
public gathering.
(Code 1982, § 19-15)
Cross references: Outdoor pageants, music festivals, concerts, etc., § 10-3.
Sec. 50-11. Improper conduct; dispersing of assembly.
If a policeman at a public gathering has probable cause to believe any illegal or unlawful
conduct is occurring in the place of assembly, he shall order the assembly dispersed.
(Code 1982, § 19-16)
Sec. 50-12. Fire supervision of public gatherings; fee.
(a) The Fire Chief when notified of the plans for any public gathering shall, if in his
judgment fire supervision of such public gathering shall be required in order to maintain
and preserve the public health, safety and morals, assign such number of fire guards to
supervise such public gathering as may be necessary in his judgment to carry out the
provisions of this section.
(b) The fee to be paid any fire guard acting in accordance with this section shall be
determined by the city council and shall be paid by the person conducting the event
causing such public gathering.
(Ord. No. 11-11, 10-20-11)
Sec. 50-13. Unlawful noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create, assist in creating, continue or allow to
continue any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the reasonable quiet, comfort, repose, or the health or safety of others
within the City of Lewiston. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, injurious,
unnecessary, and unlawful noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be
exclusive:
(a) Radio, Phonograph, Amplified Sound, Musical Instruments, Television, and other
Electronically Generated Sound. The playing of any radio, phonograph, television set,
amplified or musical instruments, loudspeakers, tape recorder, or other electronic sound
producing devices in such a manner or with volume at any time or place so as to annoy or
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:7
disturb the reasonable quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, hospital, or
other type of residence or in any office of any persons in the vicinity.
(b) Shouting and Singing. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or the making of any
other loud noises on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 pm and 7:00 am, or the
making of any such noise at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the reasonable quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, hospital, or other type of residence or in
any office or of any person in the vicinity.
(c) Animal Noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall disturb the reasonable comfort or repose of any person.
(d) Devices to Attract Attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind
for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise. This section shall not apply to
any person who is a participant in a school band or a duly licensed parade or who has been
otherwise authorized by the City to engage in such activity or to safety devices required for
the safe operation of equipment or machinery and which are operated in accordance with
manufacturers’ instructions.
If the person or persons responsible for the activity that violates section 50-13 cannot be
determined, the person in lawful custody and/or control of the premises, including but not limited
to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property on which the activity is located, shall be deemed
responsible for the violation. (Ord. 17-16, 11-02-17)
Sec. 50-14. Exemptions.
None of the terms or prohibitions of the previous sections shall apply or be enforced against:
(a) Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance while engaged in necessary emergency
business.
(b) Necessary excavation in or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways, or any utility
installation by or on behalf of the City, the State of Maine, or any public utility.
(c) The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers for public addresses for which a city
permit has been granted.
(d) Noise caused by agricultural, farm-related, or forestry-related activities including but not
limited to the operation of farm equipment, sawmills, harvesting equipment, noises from
farm animals, and the like.
(e) Noise associated with non-residential uses that conform to the performance standards of
Appendix A, Zoning and Land Use Code, Article XII, Section 19 (2), Noise.
(Ord. 17-16, 11-02-17)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:8
Sec. 50-15. Penalties.
A violation of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine as established by a policy adopted
by the City Council. For purposes of Section 50-13, each such act, which either continues or is
repeated more than one-half hour after issuance of a written notice of violation, shall be a
separate offense and shall be subject to escalating penalties as established by the City Council.
(Ord. 17-16, 11-02-17)
Sec. 50-16. Nuisance parties.
(a) A nuisance party is defined as a social gathering or party which is conducted on premises
within the City and which, by reason, in whole or in part, of the conduct of the persons in
attendance, results in any one or more of the following conditions or events occurring at the
site of the party or social gathering, or on neighboring public or private property:
(1) disorderly conduct;
(2) illegal open container;
(3) outdoor urination or defecation in a public place;
(4) unlawful sale, furnishing, dispensing or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor or
controlled substance to an underage person;
(5) illegal use of a controlled substance;
(6) public indecency in violation of applicable laws;
(7) unlawful deposit of litter or refuse;
(8) damage or destruction of property without the consent of the property owner;
(9) unlawful pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
(10) unlawful standing or parking of vehicles that obstructs the free flow of traffic on the
public streets and sidewalks or that impedes the ability to render emergency services;
(11) unlawfully loud noise;
(12) or any other unlawful conduct or condition that threatens injury, inconvenience, or
alarm to persons or damage to property.
Such parties are hereby declared to be an unlawful public nuisance.
(b) Duty to Control Premises. Any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant, or otherwise has
rightful possession or possessory control, individually or jointly with others, of any
premises, who either sponsors, conducts, hosts, invites, or permits a social gathering or party
on said premises which is or becomes a nuisance party, as defined in part (a) of this Section,
and which nuisance is either the intentional result of, or within the reasonable expectations
of, the person or persons having such possessory control is deemed to be in violation of
this Section.
(c) Order to Cease and Disperse. A party or social gathering that is or becomes a nuisance
party, as defined in part (a) of this Section, shall cease upon the order of the Police Chief, or
the Police Chief’s designee; and all persons not residing in the site of such social gathering
or party shall leave the premises immediately. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and
abide by such an order shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:9
(d) Retaliation. No person shall direct a verbal, physical, or electronic act against the person,
family, or property of any individual who complains of or witnesses a violation of the
Nuisance Party regulations for the purpose of intimidating or retaliating against that person
for the exercise of the right to complain or testify to a violation of this code.
(Ord. No. 17-17, 11-02-17)
Sec. 50-17. Owners failure to prevent a second nuisance party.
(a) Within ten (10) days of a nuisance party declaration, the police department shall send the
premises owner a notice of nuisance party ordinance violation. The notice shall set forth the
date, place, names of occupants/tenants involved, and nature of the violation and shall
inform the premises owner of the necessity to take action to prevent future nuisance parties
on the premises. Notice shall be given by first class mail using the premises owner’s address
on file with the City Assessor.
(b) If a subsequent nuisance party is declared at the same premises within a six (6) month
period and the same occupant(s)/tenant(s) are responsible for the second nuisance party, the
police department shall send the premises owner a second notice of nuisance party
ordinance violation within ten (10) days of the party and the premises owner shall be
charged with violating this ordinance and shall be subject to a forfeiture established by the
City Council.
1. If the premises owner meets with the Chief of Police or his/her designee within ten (10)
days of the issuance of the second notice of nuisance party violation and presents an
acceptable abatement plan to abate future nuisance party activity at the premises, the
premises owner will not be subject to a forfeiture for the nuisance party that was the
subject of the meeting.
(c) If a third or subsequent party is declared at the same premises within a six (6) month period
and the same occupant(s)/tenant(s) are responsible for this party, the Police Chief or his/her
designee shall send the premises owner a second notice of nuisance party ordinance
violations within ten (10) days of the party, and the premises owner shall be charged with
violating this ordinance and shall be subject to a forfeiture as established by the City
Council.
(d) It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of violating Section 50-18 (b) or (c) above that
the premises owner has evicted or is diligently attempting to evict all tenants and occupants
of the property who were responsible for the nuisance parties and/or it can be confirmed that
the premises owner was the original complainant to emergency dispatch.
(e) The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of any provision of this section to any person
or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the
other provisions or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid
or unconstitutional provisions or applications. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
City Council that this section would have been adopted had any invalid or unconstitutional
provision or applications not been included herein.
(Ord. No. 17-17, 11-02-17)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:10
Sec. 50-18. Penalty.
A violation of sections 50-16 and/or 50-17 shall be subject to minimum fines as established by a
policy adopted by the City Council. (Ord. No. 17-17, 11-02-17)
Sec. 50-19. Prohibiting tobacco use in designated public rights of way.
Smoking and all other use of tobacco products, including vaping and e-cigarette use, is
prohibited on certain designated public rights of way, including public streets and sidewalks,
with the exception of the use of such products by occupants of motorized vehicles traveling
through the designated area. “Tobacco Products” is defined to include all tobacco-derived or
containing products including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, spit and smokeless tobacco,
dip, chew, snuff, snus, electronic cigarettes, vape products, and other electronic nicotine delivery
systems, excluding products specifically approved ty the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for the purpose of cessation or nicotine replacement therapy. “Smoking” includes
carrying or having in one’s possession a lighted or heated cigarette, cigar, or pipe, or a lighted or
heated tobacco or plant product intended for human consumption through inhalation, whether
natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” includes the use of an electronic
smoking device. “Smoking” also includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates
an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking deice for the
purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this policy.” The designated prohibited
areas are:
(a) Campus Avenue from Sabattus Street to Central Avenue, both sides.
(b) Lisbon Street from Adams Avenue to Main Street, both sides
(c) Main Street from Hammond Street to High Street, west side
(d) High Street from Main Street to Hammond Street, both sides
(e) Hammond Street from High Street to Main Street, both sides
(Ord. No. 17-22, 01-04-18; Ord. No. 19-11, 12-19-19; Ord. No. 19-16, 01-09-20)
Sec. 50-20. Penalty.
A violation of section 50-19 shall be subject to minimum fines as established by a policy adopted
by the City Council. (Ord. No. 17-22, 01-04-18)
Secs. 50-21--50-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CITATION SYSTEM OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 50-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide additional and alternative methods and processes to
enforce the provisions of this Code in a just, speedy and inexpensive manner, to improve
compliance with the provisions of this Code and thereby to protect, preserve and enhance the
public health, safety and general welfare. (Code 1982, § 2-700)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:11
Sec. 50-37. Applicability.
This article shall provide a method for enforcing and securing compliance with the
various provisions of the Code of Ordinances, which is in addition to those methods otherwise
contained in the Code. Any and all inspectors and enforcement officials under the various
provisions of this Code are referred to in this article collectively as enforcement officials.
(Code 1982, § 2-701)
Sec. 50-38. Investigations.
Upon receipt of information indicating the likelihood of a violation of any provision of
this Code, the enforcement official shall investigate the facts and may make an inspection of the
premises when legally authorized to do so.
(Code 1982, § 2-702)
Sec. 50-39. Notice of violation.
If an investigation reveals that a code violation has occurred, the enforcement official
shall give written notice of such violation to the person (here inafter "violator") having control of
any land, building, structure, sign, licensed or permitted business or operation which is in
violation and order that the violation be corrected. Notice of the violation may be served in hand
to the violator or left with a person of suitable age and discretion at the residence or place of
business of the violator or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his last known
address. If the return receipt is not returned, a notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been
served if it is also sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, which is not returned as undeliverable
by the postal service. If the enforcement official finds that the violation is one which requires
immediate correction to protect the public health or safety, he may provide notice under this
article by means of telephone or facsimile transmission to the violator or to a person of suitable
age and discretion at the residence or place of business of the violator. Any notice under this
article shall describe the violation, including a reference to the ordinance section violated,
specify that reasonable period within which the violation must be corrected, and state the
potential consequences if the violation is not corrected. The notice shall also advise the violator
of any right to appeal to the board of appeals with respect to the enforcement official's
determination that a violation exists for which the violator is responsible.
(Code 1982, § 2-703)
Sec. 50-40. Civil proceedings.
If the violation has not been corrected within the period established in the notice, the
enforcement official or city attorney may initiate appropriate legal proceedings to compel the
violator to correct the violation and seek whatever other relief to which the city may be entitled.
Such legal proceedings may include the initiation of a land use complaint pursuant to Rule 80K
of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 et seq., as amended.
(Code 1982, § 2-704)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:12
Sec. 50-41. Citations--Issuance.
If the violation has not been corrected within the period established in the notice, the
enforcement official may issue, as an alternative to initiating a civil proceeding pursuant to
section 50-40, a citation to the violator.
(Code 1982, § 2-705)
Sec. 50-42. Same--Contents.
The citation shall be in writing, describe the nature of the violation, including the
ordinance section violated, state the date by which the violation must be corrected, that a civil
penalty set in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council is
imposed for the violation, the date by which the penalty must be paid and to whom and the
consequences of failing to pay the penalty within the period stated. The time period allowed by
the enforcement official within which the violation must be corrected shall be reasonable and
shall take into consideration any notice period previously given to the violator, the nature of the
violation to be corrected and the time which the enforcement official estimates will be
reasonably required to correct the violation. The citation shall state the penalties which may be
imposed if the violation is not corrected within the time period set forth in the first citation and
shall also state the penalties which may be imposed if any additional citation must be issued for
the same violation. The citation shall also state that all additional penalties are cumulative.
(Code 1982, § 2-706; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-43. Same--Service of.
A citation may be served upon the violator by giving the citation to the violator in hand,
by leaving it with a person of suitable age and discretion at the residence or place of business of
the violator or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his last known address. If the
return receipt is not returned, the citation shall be conclusively presumed to have been served if it
is also sent by regular mail postage prepaid, which has not been returned as undeliverable by the
postal service.
(Code 1982, § 2-708)
Sec. 50-44. Time limits for corrective action.
The time period specified in a citation within which a violation must be corrected shall be
reasonable in consideration of:
(1) The threat posed by such violation to the health, safety and welfare of the public;
(2) The nature of the work required to correct the violation; and
(3) Any notice period given to the violator in a previous citation for the same
violation or pursuant to section 50-39.
(Code 1982, § 2-707)
Sec. 50-45. Penalty.
The civil penalty set in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:13
council shall be imposed for the issuance of citations. The civil penalties imposed are
cumulative.
(Code 1982, § 2-709; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-46. Further violations.
If the violation has not been corrected within the time specified in the first citation, the
enforcement official may issue a second citation. The second citation shall contain the same
information set forth in the first citation regarding the nature of the violation but may do so by
reference to the first citation. It shall also state that, in addition to the civil penalty imposed for
the first citation, as set in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city
council, a civil penalty has been imposed for the second citation as set in accordance with the
city's policy manual as approved by the city council. The second citation shall also state that the
continued failure to correct the violation may result in the issuance of further citations and shall
indicate the penalties provided for the issuance of subsequent citations. The time limits specified
for correcting the violation may be the same as that allowed in the first citation or may be altered
if there has been a change in circumstances. The same procedure shall be followed with regard to
the issuance of subsequent citations.
(Code 1982, § 2-710; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-47. Penalty for nonpayment of penalty; collection proceedings.
All civil penalties imposed by citation shall be due within five days after the date by
which the violation was ordered to be corrected. All civil penalties not paid when due shall bear
interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum. The failure to pay when due any civil penalty
imposed for violation of any of the laws, ordinances or rules set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A. §
4452(5), as amended, shall itself constitute a violation of such law, ordinance or rule for which
the violator shall be liable for the penalties provided for in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452(3). The
enforcement official or city attorney may initiate appropriate proceedings to collect any civil
penalty which is not timely paid together with all interest thereon. Such legal action may include
proceedings pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(Code 1982, § 2-711)
Sec. 50-48. Repeat violations.
If a violator has been previously served with a notice of violation with regard to a specific
violation, he shall not be entitled to receive any further notice of the same violation if it is
repeated. If the enforcement official determines that a violator has repeated the same violation,
he may proceed in accordance with section 50-43 without further notice.
(Code 1982, § 2-712)
Sec. 50-49. Appeals.
Appeals from a determination by the enforcement official that a violation of the Code has
been committed may be taken to the board of appeals in accordance with the specific provisions
of the particular ordinance alleged to have been violated. (Code 1982, § 2-713)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:14
Sec. 50-50. Effect of article on other ordinances.
This article does not supersede or repeal any other provision of the Code, nor preclude
the initiation of any other legal proceeding which may be provided by applicable state or federal
law. (Code 1982, § 2-714)
Sec. 50-51. Severability of provisions.
If any provision of this article is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgment shall be confined in its operation to that provision of this article directly involved
in the controversy which gave rise to the judgement and shall not affect or impair the validity of
any other provision of this article. (Code 1982, § 2-715)
Secs. 50-52--50-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. MINORS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 50-71. Employment of underaged persons in alcoholic beverage establishments.
(a) No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on licensed premises may employ any
person under the age of 17 years in the serving or selling of liquor on the premises where
liquor is sold. The licensee may employ a person who is 17 years of age but less than 21
years of age in the serving or selling of liquor only in the presence of an employee who is
at least 21 years of age and is in a supervisory capacity or who was at least 18 years of
age prior to January 1, 1994 and was employed in a supervisory capacity by the employer
before that date.
(b) If upon complaint and investigation by the police department, the chief of police
reasonably believes that any provision of subsection (a) of this section has been or is
being violated, or upon conviction for any violation of subsection (a), the city council
may, upon recommendation of the chief of police, revoke its approval of such special
permit for dancing or entertainment, and direct the city clerk to communicate such fact to
the state liquor commission, with recommendation that such special license or permit,
issued by it, be revoked; provided, however, that the revocation of any license as above
set forth, or of its approval by the city council, shall not prevent any criminal prosecution
under section 1-8.
(Code 1982, § 19-7)
State law references: Similar provisions, 28-A M.R.S.A. § 704(1).
Secs. 50-72--50-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CURFEW*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 96-12, effective Oct. 31, 1996, amended this division in its entirety, in effect repealing
former §§ 50-81--50-84 and enacting similar new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, such sections derived from
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:15
§§ 19-51--19-54 of the city's 1982 Code.
Sec. 50-81. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Curfew hours means 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day, and 12:01 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday until
5:00 a.m. of the following day.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that
calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or
automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury
or loss of life.
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which
the public is invited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor means any person under 18 years of age.
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating,
managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an
association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person, or at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
Remain means to linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a
police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function
of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Cross references: Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 50-82. Offenses.
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by
insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:16
any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he
knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
(Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Sec. 50-83. Defenses.
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 50-82(b) that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour
or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a nextdoor
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the
minor's presence;
(7) Either; (i) attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or (ii) within 45 minutes after
the termination of an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, going to or returning home
from such activity;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution,
such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly;
(9) Exercising rights protected under Article I, Section 2, 3, 4 or 5 of the Maine
Constitution; or
(10) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with 15 M.R.S.A. § 3306A.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 50-82(c) that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Sec. 50-84. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the
apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:17
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense
has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection
50-83(a) is present. (Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Sec. 50-85. Penalties.
A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each
day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each
offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a civil penalty set in accordance with the city's policy
manual as approved by the city council. (Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-86. Severability.
The terms and provisions of this division are severable and are governed by chapter 1 of
the Lewiston Code of Ordinances, as amended. (Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Sec. 50-87. Effective date.
This division shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of subsection 2.11(c) of
the Charter of the City of Lewiston. (Ord. No. 96-12, 10-31-96)
Secs. 50-88--50-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES*
*Cross references: Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.
State law references: Authority to regulate the discharge of firearms, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2011(3).
Sec. 50-106. Permit to carry concealed weapons.
The chief of police is designated as the issuing authority for permits issued under 25
M.R.S.A. § 252. (Ord. No. 92-23, § 30, 10-15-92)
Sec. 50-107. Discharging firearms.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the discharge of firearms within the
city in order to promote and enhance the safety and welfare of its inhabitants. This
section is intended to protect the rights of landowners and the interests of persons who
use firearms in work and recreation while meeting these objectives.
(b) Zones created. For the purposes of this section, the city is divided into two zones
denominated as zone 1 and zone 2. The boundaries of the zones are as follows:
Zone 1. Zone 1 includes the area between the corporate boundaries of the City of
Lewiston and lying southeasterly, easterly and northeasterly of a line delineated by the
centerline of the Maine Turnpike from the point where the turnpike crosses the
Androscoggin River to the point where Grove Street crosses the turnpike; then
northwesterly on Grove Street to the point where the Central Maine Power Company
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:18
double transmission lines cross Grove Street; then by the centerline of the right-of-way of
the double transmission lines northerly and then northwesterly to the point where they
cross the Androscoggin River.
Zone 2. Zone 2 is that area within the corporate bounds of the City of Lewiston and not
included in zone 1.
(c) Zone 1 discharge restrictions. In zone 1, no person shall discharge a firearm unless that
person is in possession of the written permission of the owner of the land on which such
discharge occurs. The form of such written permission shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name of landowner;
(2) Name of permittee;
(3) General description of size and location of land; and
(4) Dates and times for which such permission is valid.
(d) Zone 2 discharge restrictions. In zone 2, no person shall discharge any firearm.
(e) Exceptions. No provision of this section shall be construed to limit the authority to
discharge a firearm by a person who is:
(1) A law enforcement officer, or a government official, acting within the scope of
his official duties.
(2) Acting in lawful defense of person.
(3) Within the physical confines of a duly authorized firing range, rifle range, pistol
range, target range or shooting gallery.
(4) A member of the National Guard, veterans' organizations and similar
organizations in connection with public ceremonials.
(5) Discharging a firearm for signalling purposes.
(6) Discharging a firearm with blank cartridges for theatrical purposes or for signal
purposes in athletic contests or sport events.
(7) A property owner, or his authorized agent, engaged in commercial agriculture
acting in lawful defense of his own crops from damage or destruction by wild
animals.
(f) "Firearm" defined. A "firearm" includes any instrument used in the propulsion of pellet,
shot, slug, or bullet by the action of gunpowder, compressed air or gas exploded or
released within it.
(g) Penalties for violation. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a penalty set in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council.
(h) Prima facie evidence of violation. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section if a person carries a firearm on his person, the discharge of which is prohibited in
the zone in which the person is located, unless that firearm is unloaded and rendered
incapable of firing without further assembly or is unloaded and enclosed in a case.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the authority to carry a concealed
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:19
firearm by a person licensed to do so.
(Ord. No. 92-23, § 30, 10-15-92; Ord. No. 95-13, 10-19-95; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-108. Blasting restricted; permit.
(a) No person shall blast any rock or other substance at any time within the city limits
without first obtaining a written permit from the fire prevention bureau, which permit
shall specify the terms and conditions on which it is granted. Such permit shall be granted
if the blasting will be conducted in accordance with all laws and ordinances. The remedy
of persons injured by a blast of rocks shall not be affected by this section or any permit
granted thereunder, nor shall it be construed as applying to the superintendent of streets
in the discharge of his official duties.
(b) As provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2791, persons engaged in blasting limerock or other rocks
shall, before each explosion, give reasonable notice thereof, so that all persons or teams
approaching shall have time to retire to a safe distance from the place of such explosion;
and no such explosion shall be made after sunset. Whoever violates the provisions of this
section shall be punished as provided by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2791.
(Code 1982, § 30-3)
Sec. 50-109. Storage limit on gunpowder unless licensed.
No person shall keep or have in any shop, store, dwelling house or tenement in the city, at
any one time, a larger quantity of gunpowder than one pound, unless he is licensed by the bureau
of fire prevention to keep and sell gunpowder, or except as provided in this article.
(Code 1982, § 30-4)
State law references: State regulation of the keeping, dispensing or transporting of
gunpowder, 25 M.R.S.A. § 2441.
Sec. 50-110. License to sell gunpowder; appeal.
It shall not be lawful for any person to sell at retail or wholesale gunpowder in any form
(bulk or cartridges, etc.) without having first obtained from the bureau of fire prevention a
license to sell gunpowder. Every such license shall be in force for one year from the date thereof,
unless revoked by the bureau. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the bureau shall have the
right of appeal to the city council, such appeal to be in writing and filed with the city clerk.
(Code 1982, § 30-5)
State law references: Municipal authority to regulate the keeping, dispensing or transporting of explosives, 25
M.R.S.A. § 2441.
Sec. 50-111. Exception.
This article shall not apply to any person on military duty in the public service of the
United States or of this state. (Code 1982, § 30-6)
Secs. 50-112--50-160. Reserved.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:20
ARTICLE V. OBSCENITY
Sec. 50-161. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
Material means anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted to arouse
interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound, or in any other manner, but
does not include an actual three-dimensional obscene device.
Obscene means material or a performance that:
(1) The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find
that taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex;
(2) Depicts or describes:
a. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts,
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including sexual intercourse,
sodomy and sexual bestiality; or
b. Patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation,
excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibition of the genitals,
the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal,
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device designed and
marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the human genital organs;
and
(3) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
Obscene device means a device including a dildo or artificial vagina, designed or
marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.
Patently offensive means so offensive on its face as to be intolerable to the average
person, applying contemporary community standards.
Performance means a play, motion picture, dance, or other exhibition performed before
an audience.
Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or
agree to do the same.
Prurient interest in sex means a shameful or morbid interest in sex.
Wholesale promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer,
transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or agree to do the same for
purpose of resale.
(Ord. No. 03-06, 7-3-03)
Sec. 50-162. Wholesale promotion of obscene material or devices.
(a) A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he wholesale
promotes or possesses with intent to wholesale promote any obscene material or obscene
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:21
device.
(b) A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he:
(1) Promotes or possesses with intent to promote any obscene material or obscene
device; or
(2) Produces, presents, or directs an obscene performance or participates in a portion
thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity.
(c) A person who promotes or wholesale promotes obscene material or an obscene device or
possesses the same with intent to promote or wholesale promote it in the course of his
business is presumed to do so with knowledge of its content and character.
(d) A person who possesses six or more obscene devices or six or more obscene articles,
whether such devices or articles are similar or identical, is presumed to possess them with
intent to promote the same.
(e) This section does not apply to a person who possesses or distributes obscene material or
obscene devices or participates in conduct otherwise proscribed by this section when the
possession, participation, or conduct occurs in the course of law enforcement activities.
(Ord. No. 03-06, 7-3-03)
Sec. 50-163. Validity.
If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this article are
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully included herein, this declaration
shall not invalidate this article as to other patently offensive sexual conduct included herein.
(Ord. No. 03-06, 7-3-03)
Sec. 50-164. Penalty.
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine set in accordance
with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council. Each act of violation and every day
upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such
penalty, the city may enjoin or abate any violation of this article by appropriate action. In
addition to such penalty, if the court finds for the city, the city shall recover its costs of suit
including reasonable experts' fees, reasonable attorneys' fees and reasonable investigative costs.
(Ord. No. 03-06, 7-3-03; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Sec. 50-165. Application of violations to liquor licenses and special amusement permits.
Any violation of this article may result in the nonrenewal by the city council of the liquor
license held by the violator at the time the council first considers the liquor license following
adjudication under this article. Additionally, any violation of this article may result in suspension
or revocation of any special amusement permit pursuant to the provisions of 28A MRSA §
1054(7).
(Ord. No. 03-06, 7-3-03)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:22
Secs. 50-166--50-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION OF NOISE-CREATING DEVICES UPON PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 04-04, effective April 1, 2004, provided for the inclusion of art. V, §§ 50-130--50-135.
Inasmuch as Ord. No. 03-06, effective July 3, 2003, provided for the inclusion of art. V, currently codified as §§ 50-
161--50-165, the provisions of Ord. No. 04-04 have been included as art. VI, §§ 50-181--50-185 at the discretion of
the editor.
Sec. 50-181. Purpose.
The City of Lewiston City Council finds that excessive noise on public ways may:
(1) Cause distraction to other drivers which impairs the safe operation of motor
vehicles;
(2) Unreasonably disturb the quiet and normal functioning of the city's residential
neighborhoods;
(3) Threaten and/or intimidate pedestrians; and
(4) Project a negative image of the city, all to the detriment of the health, welfare and
safety of Lewiston's citizens and guests.
Accordingly, it is the policy of the City of Lewiston to prohibit unnecessary,
excessive, annoying or distracting noise on any public right-of-way within the
City of Lewiston Maine.
(Ord. No. 04-04, 4-1-04)
Sec. 50-182. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
(1) City means the City of Lewiston, Maine.
(2) Noise-creating device means any electrical, mechanical or chemical device or
instrument, or combination thereof that creates noise during its operation.
(3) Motorcycle means an unenclosed motor vehicle, having a saddle/seat for the use
of the operator, with two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including,
but not limited to, motorcycles, motorscooters and minibikes.
(4) Operation means actual control by a person.
(5) Public right-of-way means any street, roadway, alley, sidewalk or any other area
deeded or dedicated for public travel or transportation purposes.
(6) Straight pipe exhaust system means any muffler that does not contain baffles,
including, but not limited to, glass packs, steel packs, straight pipes, modified
baffle systems, and drag pipes.
(7) Internal combustion engine vehicle means a vehicle that uses a mechanical engine
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:23
of any type that requires fuel combustion to propel the vehicle.
(8) Vehicle. For the purpose of this section, a vehicle will include, and is not limited
to, an automobile, a truck, a motorcycle, a snowmobile, an ATV, a go-cart, a
minibike, an engine-propelled skateboard, and any other propelled unit that falls
into this category.
(Ord. No. 04-04, 4-1-04)
Sec. 50-183. Creation of certain noises upon a public right-of-way prohibited.
(a) No person, while occupying any public right-of-way in the city, shall operate any noisecreating
device in such a manner that the level of noise causes the public's attention to be
drawn to the source of the noise, subject to the exceptions hereafter provided.
(b) The prohibition of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following activity
or conduct:
(1) Discharging fireworks or any exploding device;
(2) Firing a starter pistol or firearm;
(3) Sounding a bell or whistle, alarm or horn for so extended a period of time as to
cause annoyance to others;
(4) Rapid throttle advance, rapid acceleration and/or revving of an internal
combustion engine resulting in increased noise from the engine and exhaust
system, to include, but not limited to the practice of motorcycle "blipping"; and
(5) Operation of an unmuffled motor vehicle or vehicle, including motorcycles, with
a straight pipe exhaust system, an exhaust system with a cutout, bypass or similar
device or an exhaust system that does not meet the requirements of Maine law,
including, but not limited to 29-A M.R.S.A. subsection 19.
(Ord. No. 04-04, 4-1-04)
Sec. 50-184. Exceptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following activity or conduct:
(1) Expression or communication protected by the United States Constitution,
including the First Amendment, or the Maine Constitution.
(2) Any activity or conduct the regulation of which has been preempted by Maine
Statute.
(3) Any noise created by a governmental entity in the performance of an official duty.
(4) Any noise for which a permit has been issued by an authority having jurisdiction
to issue the permit, or any noise that is allowable under other sections of the City
Code.
(5) The sounding of any signaling device permitted by law.
(6) Properly licensed common carriers and service vehicles in the performance of
their customary duties.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:24
(7) Any vehicle equipped with a factory installed, original and untampered with
exhaust system, not being operated in such a fashion as to accentuate the sound of
the exhaust.
(Ord. No. 04-04, 4-1-04)
Sec. 50-185. Penalty.
Violations of this article constitute civil violations, punishable in accordance with the
city's policy manual as approved by the city council.
(Ord. No. 04-04, 4-1-04; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
Secs. 50-186--50-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. GRAFFITI VIOLATIONS
Sec. 50-200. Purpose.
The city council has determined that graffiti creates a visual blight and can adversely
impact property owners financially as well as their enjoyment and value of property. This article
is intended to deter graffiti and to establish penalties for graffiti.
(Ord. No. 07-08, 10-04-07)
Sec. 50-201. Definitions.
Graffiti means any inscription, word, figure, design, painting, writing, drawing or carving
that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or otherwise applied to property without the
prior authorization of the owner of the property regardless of the content or nature of the material
used.
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped marker, gum label,
paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or
leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface.
Graffiti removal means the removal or attempted removal or painting over of graffiti by
the owner of the affected property or by another person with the consent of the owner or owner's
designee or by court order.
Immediately adjacent means near enough to the property to apply graffiti.
Owner means the person listed on the assessor's records for the City of Lewiston as the
owner of property.
Property means any real or personal property, including, but not limited to, any portion
of any premises, structure, house, building, fence or vehicle.
(Ord. No. 07-08, 10-04-07)
Sec. 50-202. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:25
(1) Applying graffiti to any private or public property without the permission of the
owner;
(2) Soliciting or commanding another person to apply graffiti to any private or public
property without the permission of the owner; or
(3) Aiding or abetting or agreeing to aid or abet another person in planning to apply
or applying graffiti to any private or public property without the permission of the
owner.
(Ord. No. 07-08, 10-04-07)
Sec. 50-203. Prohibited possession of graffiti implements.
Possession of graffiti implements in the following situations and under reasonable
suspicion is deemed to be evidence of an intent or attempt to commit a prohibited act and is
prohibited:
(1) By minors on or near school facilities. No person under the age of 18 years may
possess any graffiti implement while on or within 50 feet of any school property.
Notwithstanding this provision, a person under 18 may possess a broad-tipped
marker if traveling to or from a school in which the minor is participating in a
class or activity that requires the possession of a broad-tipped marker. The burden
of proof shall be on the minor to demonstrate that possession was required for a
school class or activity.
(2) By any person on or immediately adjacent to private property without the
permission of the owner of the property.
(3) By any person in any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool,
recreational facility, or other public building, structure, premises or vehicle
without the city's permission, or within 50 feet of any underpass, bridge abutment,
or similar infrastructure without permission of the owner.
(Ord. No. 07-08, 10-04-07)
Secs. 50-204--50-210. Reserved.
Sec. 50-211. Penalties.
(a) Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine set in accordance with the city's
policy manual as approved by the city council. Each day any violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate violation.
(b) In addition to the fine stated in subsection (a), any person found to have committed a
violation of section 50-202 shall be subject to restitution for all costs of graffiti removal,
and/or to perform community service to the City of Lewiston.
(Ord. No. 07-08, 10-04-07; Ord. No. 08-06g, 8-14-08)
ARTICLE VIII. SALE AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:26
Sec. 50-220. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in this section:
(1) Consumer fireworks shall have the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products
that are tested and certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as conforming with
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission standards in accordance
with 15 united States Code, Chapter 47. “Consumer fireworks” does not include
the following products:
a. Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
b. Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
and
c. Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this paragraph, “sky rockets
and bottle rockets” means cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams
of chemical composition, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a
wooden stick attached for guidance and stability, that rise into the air upon
ignition, and that may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height
of flight.
(2) Display means an entertainment feature where the public or a private group is
admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks or special
effects.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Sec. 50-221. Fireworks Restricted Use.
The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the City of Lewiston’s restricted fire arms
zone, Zone 2 as defined in Chapter 50, Section 107 of this Code, is prohibited.
The use, discharge or ignition of fireworks within the City of Lewiston’s restricted fire arms
zone, Zone 1 as defined in Chapter 50, Section 107 of this Code, is permitted on and only on the
dates of December 31, January 1, and July 4 provided, however, that:
(1) The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on all public property,
including all public parks, public rights of way, and School Department property;
(2) The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on any day specified by
the Fire Chief as presenting a high fire danger as identified by posting such
designation on the City website;
(3) The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks shall not be permitted in close
proximity to any building in the City of Lewiston by maintaining a distance of no
less than 75’ from said building;
(4) No fireworks will be permitted before 10 a.m. and after 10 p.m. on July 4th;
(5) No fireworks will be permitted before 10 a.m. on December 31st; and
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:27
(6) No fireworks will be permitted between the hours of 1 a.m. and 10 a.m. or after
10 p.m. on January 1st.
(7) The use of fireworks must be approved by the owner of the property where they
are to be used.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Sec. 50-222. Exception.
This section does not apply to a person issued a fireworks display permit by the City of Lewiston
and/or the State of Maine pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. §227-A.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Sec. 50-223. Violations.
(1) Any person who uses consumer fireworks or possesses consumer fireworks with
the intent to use in the City of Lewiston in violation of this ordinance shall
receive a citation.
(2) The civil penalty set in accordance with the city’s policy manual as approved by
the city council shall be imposed for the issuance of citations. The Civil penalties
imposed are cumulative.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Sec. 50-224. Sale of Fireworks.
The sale of fireworks in the City of Lewiston shall be prohibited within the City of Lewiston.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Sec. 50-225. Seizure and disposal of fireworks.
The City may seize consumer fireworks that the City has probable cause to believe are used,
possessed, or sold in violation of this section. Seized consumer fireworks shall be forwarded to
the State for disposal.
(Ord. No. 12-02, 04-05-2012)
Secs. 50-226--50-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Sec. 50-251. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the availability of products which are enhanced
with synthetic chemicals, which chemicals mimic the effects of controlled substances on users,
because these products are a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 13-06, 07-18-13)
Sec. 50-252. Definitions.
For purposes of interpreting this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings given herein unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:28
different meaning:
Spice, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic marijuana means any aromatic plant material in
granular, loose leaf or powder form, or in liquid or as a food additive, or any herbal-incense-type
stimulant or hallucinogen product, when the label is in any way false or misleading, or which
does not contain a label specifying (1) the identity of the commodity and (2) the name and place
of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor. Street names for these products include,
but are not limited to: Bliss, Black Mamba, Bombay Blue, Fake Weed, Genie, Spice, Zohai, K2,
K3, Smoke, Pot-Pourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Stinger,
Ocean Blue, Serenity, Chronic Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, Skunk, Mr. Nice Guy, Mr.
Happy, K3 Legal, Sence, Smoke, Chill X, Earth Impact, Galaxy Gold, Space Truckin, Solar
Flare, Moon Rocks, Aroma, Scope, Sky High, Atomic, G-20, Guerrilla Warfare, Makes Scents,
g-13, Tiger Shark, California Dreams, Dank, Bullet, Mind Trip, Voodoo Child, Jazz, Nightlights,
Matrix, Hypnotiq, AK47, Maui Wowie, Cloud 9, Daylights, Joker, Dead Man Walking, Brain
Storm, Soul Sence, Kush, Kush Mania, Dragons Fire, Lucid, Mad Hatter, Scooby Snax, D-ZL,
0MG, Demon, Barely In, Pineapple Express, Hayze. This definition shall include any plant
material to which any Synthetic Chemical or Synthetic Chemical Compound has been added
which has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product whether or not the label
meets the requirements herein.
Bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic stimulants means any crystalline or powder
product in crystalline, loose-powder, block, tablet, or capsule form, or any stimulant-type
product, when the label is in any way false or misleading. Street names for these products
include, but are not limited to: Bliss, Blue Silk, Cloud Nine, Drone, Energy-1, Ivory Wave,
Lunar Wave, Meow Meow, Ocean Burst, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Snow Leopard,
Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Knight, White Lightening, Blizzard, Bonzai Grow,
Charge Plus, Charlie, Euphoria, Hurricane, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Pixie Dust, Posh, Scarface,
Lovely Dovey, Aura, MDPV, MDPK, MTV, Maddie, Hurricane Charlie, Black Rob, Super
Coke, PV, Peeve, Meph, Drone, MCAT. This definition shall include any product to which any
Synthetic Chemical or Synthetic Chemical Compound has been added which has no legitimate
relation to the advertised use of the product whether or not the label meets the requirements
herein.
Drug means an article that is intended to affect the function of the body of humans.
Misbranded drug means any drug for which the label is in any way false or misleading.
Illicit synthetic drugs means spice, synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic marijuana, bath
salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic stimulants, and misbranded drugs as defined herein.
Synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound means any chemical or chemical
compound whose molecular make up is similar to those substances listed as controlled
substances in 17-A M.R.S. § 1101(16-A) (including any isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of
isomers, esters, and ethers of such substances) or to those substances listed in 17-A M.R.S. §
1102(4) (F) and whose intended use when introduced into the human body is to mimic or
simulate the effects of a controlled substance.
(Ord. No. 13-06, 07-18-13)
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:29
Sec. 50-253. Prohibition of illicit synthetic drugs.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to possess, use, provide, sell, produce, manufacture, or
distribute, or to offer, display, market, or advertise for sale, any illicit synthetic drug.
(b) In determining whether a product is prohibited by this article, statements on package
labeling such as "not for human consumption" may be disregarded when other relevant
factors (viewed alone or in totality) indicate that the product is intended to be consumed
or ingested by humans, or is a product regulated by this article. Other relevant factors that
may be used to determine whether a product or sale is prohibited by this article include,
but are not limited to: verbal or written representations at the point of sale regarding the
purpose, methods, use, or effect of the product; aspects of the packaging or labeling
suggesting that the user will achieve a "high," euphoria, relaxation, mood enhancement,
or that the product has other effects on the body; the cost of the product is
disproportionately higher than other products marketed for the same use; the product
contains a warning label stating or suggesting that the product is in compliance with state
laws regulating controlled substances; the product's name or packaging uses images or
slang referencing an illicit street drug; illicit or underground methods of sale or delivery
are employed by the seller or provider; the product resembles an illicit street drug such as
cocaine, methamphetamine, or marijuana.
(c) Defense. It shall be a defense to the prosecution of a violation of this article that a
product is specifically excepted by, or regulated within and in compliance with, state or federal
law. For the purposes of this section, it shall not be a defense that a product is not subject to
regulation unless the product is specifically excepted from regulation; mere "non-regulation" by
these acts without a specific regulatory exemption does not render a product exempt under this
section.
(Ord. No. 13-06, 07-18-13)
Sec. 50-254. Sale of certain products for human consumption prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to provide, sell, or offer for sale a product for human consumption
when the product is labeled "not for human consumption" or contains similar warnings.
(Ord. No. 13-06, 07-18-13)
Sec. 50-255. Violation and seizure.
(a) Each package shall be a separate violation. The fine for each violation shall be $500.
(b) Any products found in violation of this section may be seized and held as evidence to be
used in any future proceeding and may be disposed of as appropriate after their use for
evidentiary purposes is no longer required.
(Ord. No. 13-06, 07-18-13)
Secs. 50-256--50-2650. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:30
Sec. 50-266. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this ordinance is: to prevent dangers to persons and property, to
prevent delays, and to avoid interference with traffic flow caused by persons soliciting
employment, business, contributions, or sales of any kind, or collecting monies for the same, in
or on a publicly maintained street, road or highway used primarily for the conveyance of
motorized vehicle traffic; to ensure unobstructed pedestrian travel within the public right of way,
including sidewalks; and to protect the safety of the general public by imposing reasonable
manner and place restrictions on the conduct of persons engaged in solicitation while respecting
their constitutional rights of free speech. These purposes are derived from the following findings:
(1) Actively soliciting from occupants of vehicles distracts drivers from their primary
duties to watch traffic and avoid potential hazards, including pedestrians, in the
roadway, to observe all traffic control signals or warnings, and to prepare to move
through the City’s travel ways and intersections.
(2) When persons approach vehicles to solicit from occupants, traffic flow is
impeded, delays result due to obstruction of the free flow of travel, and
congestion and blockage of travel ways, driveways to parking areas, and
sidewalks results.
(3) Distracted drivers are more prone to accidents, which constitute a serious traffic
safety problem and impede and prevent the orderly flow of traffic. Distracted
drivers constitute a threat to the safety of the person engaging in solicitation as
well as that of other pedestrian traffic and traffic in general.
(4) Aggressive solicitation creates fear and intimidation and results in a loss of access
to and enjoyment of public places.
(5) The State Statute dealing with divided highways, Title 29-A M.R.S. §2052(5),
authorizes a municipality to limit the use of travel ways and to prohibit
pedestrians from those ways. The State Statute addressing pedestrian traffic, Title
29-A M.R.S. §2056(2), clarifies how pedestrians are expected to conduct
themselves on a public way. The State Statute dealing with offenses against
public order, Title 17-A M.R.S.A. §505, addresses obstruction of a public way.
(Ord. No. 13-08, 10-17-13)
Sec. 50-267. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
(1) “City” means the City of Lewiston, Maine.
(2) “Curb” means the lateral lines of a street, road or highway, whether constructed
above grade or not, beyond which vehicular travel is not intended.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:31
(3) “Median” means the area within a street, road or highway, generally in the
middle, which separates traffic traveling in one direction from traffic traveling in
another direction or which, at intersections, separates traffic turning left or right
from traffic proceeding straight. A median may be physically separated from the
area used by motor vehicles by curbing, landscaping, or other physical obstacles.
A median may also be delineated by traffic control markings which prohibit use
of a portion of the pavement of a street, road or highway by motor vehicles other
than to drive generally perpendicularly across them or to idle on them awaiting
the opportunity to cross or merge with opposing lanes of traffic (also known as
“painted medians”, which are wider than a double yellow line). Medians also
include other areas of a street, road or highway that are separated from motor
vehicle traffic lanes by curbing, landscaping, or other physical obstacles
designed to exclude motor vehicles (also known as an “island”).
(4) “Public right-of-way” means real property:
a. Owned by a governmental entity or by a non-governmental entity
or person and deeded, used, reserved or dedicated to or for public
use for travel, transportation, or public utility purposes, including
but not limited to, sidewalks, medians, curbs, shoulders, improved
shoulders, walkways, paths and any other area so owned,
dedicated, used, or reserved; and
b. The public right-of-way includes the area extending from the right
and left of the center line of a public street, road, highway,
sidewalk or walkway to the nearest property line which marks the
juncture of private property and the public right-of-way.
(5) “Shoulder” means the portion of a street, road or highway that is:
a. Adjacent to the travel way;
b. Designed or ordinarily used for parking, standing, or stopping;
c. Distinguished from the travel way by different design,
construction, or markings; and
d. Not intended for normal vehicular travel.
(6) “Sidewalk” means an improved surface which is located between the curb or
lateral lines of a street, road or highway and the adjacent property line and which
is designed, intended, and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
(7) “Solicitation” means the act of asking another for money or other items of value,
whether or not in exchange for a service or item of value.
(8) “Street, road or highway” means that portion of the public way open to vehicular
travel, including shoulders but excluding sidewalks.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:32
(9) “Traveled portion” means that portion of the publicly maintained street, road or
highway which is improved, designed or ordinarily used by moving motor vehicle
traffic.
(Ord. No. 13-08, 10-17-13)
Sec. 50-268. Prohibited acts generally.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to solicit a ride, employment, business, contributions
or sales of any kind, or collect monies for the same, from the occupant of any
motor vehicle traveling upon any publicly maintained street, road or highway,
when the person, while actively soliciting:
a. Enters onto the traveled portion of a publicly maintained street,
road or highway;
b. Is located on or within any median;
c. Is located on a sidewalk or shoulder intended for or capable of
pedestrian travel such that the free passage of foot traffic is
unreasonably obstructed or where such solicitation results in
vehicles stopping within the travel lane to respond to the
solicitation; or
d. Is located such that vehicles are unreasonably obstructed from
moving into or out from a legal parking area into the travel way.
(2) A person may not stand on or near any publicly maintained street, road or
highway to solicit payment for watching or guarding a vehicle parked or to be
parked on the public right of way.
(Ord. No. 13-08, 10-17-13)
Sec. 50-269. Invasively aggressive solicitation.
(1) It is unlawful for a person to intentionally or recklessly position his or her self or
any held or placed sign or object in such a manner as to interfere with the line of
sight of a vehicle operator while actively engaging in solicitation.
(2) A person may not intentionally or recklessly block, follow, accompany without
consent, or threaten another person on a public right-of-way during a solicitation
or after the solicited individual has declined the request.
(3) A person may not use abusive or profane language, or make a statement, gesture,
or other communication that is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent
reaction, before, during or after engaging in solicitation.
(4) A person may not intentionally or recklessly block another person’s entrance to a
building or vehicle while engaging in solicitation.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:33
(5) A person who is making a solicitation request may not intentionally or recklessly
touch or cause physical contact with another person without that person’s consent.
(Ord. No. 13-08, 10-17-13)
Sec. 50-270. Penalty.
The civil penalty imposed for a citation issued for a violation of Chapter 50 Article X shall be in
accordance with the city’s policy manual as approved by the city council. The civil penalties
imposed are cumulative. (Ord. No. 13-08, 10-17-13)
Secs. 50-271-279. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. SEX OFFENDER RESTRICTED ZONE
Sec. 50-280. Purpose.
The city of Lewiston recognizes that it has an obligation to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of its children by prohibiting convicted sex offenders from residing in identified areas within the
city where there is a significant concentration of children. The city recognizes that sex offenders
who prey upon children may have a high rate of recidivism. Notwithstanding that certain persons
convicted of sex offenses or sexually violent offenses are required to register with the state, the
city finds that further protective measures are necessary and warranted to safeguard places where
children congregate. The purpose of the ordinance is to provide such further protective
measures, while balancing the interests and residential needs of sex offenders.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Sec. 50-281. Authority.
This ordinance is adopted in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3014, as may be amended from time to time as outlined below.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Sec. 50-282. Definitions.
A) Registered Sex Offender – An individual convicted of a crime against a person under the
age of 14 years and, as a result, is required to register pursuant to Title 34-A MRSA
Chapter 15.
B) Sex Offender Restricted Residing Zones – The city has identified the areas of where
significant concentrations of children exist under city ordinance 54-8 “Public drinking of
alcoholic beverages prohibited.” Also, city ordinance 54-9 “Designation of Drug-Free
“Safe Zones” further identifies the locations listed in ordinance 54-8 as “Safe Zones.”
C) Residence – the temporary or permanent occupation or use of a place, including but not
limited to a domicile, for the purpose of living, residing, or dwelling.
D) Domicile - the status or attribution of being a permanent resident in a particular
jurisdiction. A person can remain domiciled in a jurisdiction even after they have left it, if
they have maintained sufficient links with that jurisdiction or have not displayed an
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:34
intention to leave permanently.
E) Premises – shall mean the building structure and any accessory buildings attached to or
detached from the primary structure, playground area, playing field, or courts.
F) Radius – distance shall be measured from the property line of the school, as defined
above, closest to a registered sex offender’s residence.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Sec. 50-283. Restrictions.
A) Any person, who is a registered sex offender, as defined above, shall not reside within a
750 foot radius of the property line of a school, “safe zone”, or premise as defined above.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Sec. 50-284. Exceptions.
A) A designated Sex Offender maintaining a residence within the radius from a school,
“safe zone”, or premise as defined above is not in violation if the residence was
established and consistently maintained as a residence prior to the date of passage of this
ordinance.
A designated Sex Offender is not in violation of this ordinance if the school, “safe zone”,
or premise as defined above is created, moved or enlarged which results in a designated
Sex Offender residing within the radius of a school, “safe zone”, or premise as defined
above as long as the residence was in place and consistently maintained prior thereto.
B) A property owner leasing or renting a residence for use by a designated Sex Offender
within the radius of a school, “safe zone”, or premise as defined above is not in violation
if the residence was established and consistently maintained as a residence prior to the
passage of this ordinance.
A property owner is not in violation of this ordinance if the school, “safe zone”, or
premise as defined above is created, moved or enlarged which results in a designated Sex
Offender residing within the radius of a school, “safe zone”, or premise as defined above
as long as the residence was in place and consistently maintained prior thereto.
C) A designated Sex Offender shall not be in violation of this ordinance for residing in a
residence within the 750 foot radius of the property line of a school, “safe zone”, or
premise as defined above if all of the following conditions are met: (1) the residence in
question is owned by the offender or an immediate family member, (2) it is not the
residence of anyone who was victimized by the offender, and (3) no probation conditions
restrict the offender from living in a residence within the safe zone radius. For purpose
of this exception, immediate family is defined as a parent; sibling; child by blood,
adoption, or marriage; spouse; grandparent, or grandchild.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Sec. 50-285. Violation; injunctive relief and penalties.
A) A designated Sex Offender who, thirty (30) days after written notice from the city of
Lewiston, is in violation of Section 50-283(A) of this Ordinance shall be subject to an
action brought by the city of Lewiston in District Court or Superior Court to enforce the
requirements of this Ordinance.
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code Chapter 50
CH 50:35
The city of Lewiston may seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500 per day, for
each day of violation of Section 50-283(A) of this Ordinance after thirty (30) days.
In the event the city of Lewiston is the prevailing party in any action under this
Ordinance, it shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs
and the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the city of Lewiston.
B) Property Owners who, thirty (30) days after written notice from the city of Lewiston,
leases or rents any residence to a designated Sex Offender within the radius of school,
“safe zone”, or premise as defined above shall be subject to an action brought by the city
of Lewiston in District Court or Superior Court to enforce the requirements of this
Ordinance.
The city of Lewiston may seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500 per day, for
each day of violation of Section 50-283(A) of this Ordinance after thirty (30) days.
In the event the city of Lewiston is the prevailing party in any action under this
Ordinance, it shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs
and the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the city of Lewiston.
(Ord. No. 17-19, 12-21-17)
Secs. 50-286 –50-289. Reserved.
Chapters 51-53
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 54
CH 54:1
Chapter 54
PARKS AND RECREATION*
Sec. 54-1. Public park established; commercial uses forbidden.
Sec. 54-2. Lewiston City Park or Common defined.
Sec. 54-3. Riding and driving on public grounds regulated.
Sec. 54-4. Reserved.
Sec. 54-5. Depositing of offensive substances; committing nuisances.
Sec. 54-6. Unlawful to be in Kennedy Park during certain hours; exception.
Sec. 54-7. Unlawful to be in the following city parks and school grounds during certain
hours; exception.
Sec. 54-8. Public drinking of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
Sec. 54-9. Designation of Drug-Free “Safe Zones”.
Sec. 54-10. Smoking in public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities prohibited.
Sec. 54-11. Penalties.
*Cross references: Department of recreation, § 2-386 et seq.; removing or destroying public plants or fixtures
prohibited, § 50-7.
State law references: Authority to establish parks, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3252.
PARKS AND RECREATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 54
CH 54:2
Sec. 54-1. Public park established; commercial uses forbidden.
The Lewiston City Park, or Common, so-called, which was conveyed to the Town of
Lewiston by the Franklin Company on December 18, 1861, shall at all times be kept open for a
public park, or common, to be used by the public in general; no building whatsoever shall at any
time be erected thereon, and the park shall not at any time be used by any person for commercial
purposes. No license or permission shall be granted for the use of such park or common in
violation of the above restrictions without the approval of the city administrator or deputy city
administrator.
(Code 1982, § 20-1; Ord. No. 01-8, 7-5-01; Ord. No. 05-24, 2-16-06)
Sec. 54-2. Lewiston City Park or Common defined.
The term "Lewiston City Park" or "Common" when used in this chapter shall mean
Kennedy Park.
(Code 1982, § 20-2)
Sec. 54-3. Riding and driving on public grounds regulated.
No person shall ride, lead or drive any horse or vehicle in or on the open grounds of the
city, nor in or upon any enclosed public square, unless by permission of the council.
(Code 1982, § 20-3)
Cross references: Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
Sec. 54-4 Reserved.
Editor’s note – Ord. No. 09-03, effective 7-02-09, repealed § 54-4 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to depositing substances likely to cause injury while in or adjacent to park.
Sec. 54-5. Depositing of offensive substances; committing nuisances.
No person shall, in any manner, carry or cause to be carried into the commons, parks or
public squares or places of the city any dead carcass, filth or any offensive matter or substance
whatsoever; and no person shall commit any nuisance on such commons, parks, public squares
or places of the city.
(Code 1982, § 20-5)
Cross references: Nuisances, § 34-26 et seq.
State law references: Maine Litter Control Act, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2261 et seq.
Sec. 54-6. Unlawful to be in Kennedy Park during certain hours; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be or remain in Kennedy Park in the city between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such person is in lawful employment making it
necessary to be in Kennedy Park between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or participating in a program
or activity sponsored or authorized by the city.
(Code 1982, § 20-6; Ord. No. 18-05, 8-09-18)
PARKS AND RECREATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 54
CH 54:3
Sec. 54-7. Unlawful to be in the following city parks and school grounds during certain
hours; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be or remain in Farwell School grounds, Franklin
Pasture Athletic Complex, Geiger School grounds, Jude’s Place at Marcotte Park, Judge Armand
A. Dufresne, Jr. Plaza, Knox Street Park, Leeds Park, Lewiston Athletic Park, Lincoln Street
Boat Launch and Park, Lionel Potvin Park, Longley School grounds, Marcotte Park, Mark W.
Paradis Park, Martel School grounds, Mayher Park, McMahon School grounds, Montello School
grounds, Pettingill School Park, Randall Road Softball Complex, Raymond Park, Ricker Park,
Simard-Payne Police Memorial Park, Smiley Park, Sunnyside Park and Veterans Memorial Park
in the city between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless such person is in lawful
employment, participating in a program or activity sponsored or authorized by the city.
(Code 1982, § 20-7; Ord. No. 94-11, 10-6-94; Ord. No. 01-8, 7-5-01; Ord. No. 01-16, 10-18-01; Ord. No.
09-03, 7-02-09; Ord. No. 13-02a, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 15-05, 7-2-15; Ord. No. 15-11, 11-05-15; Ord. No.
18-05, 8-09-18; Ord. No. 19-08, 10-31-19)
Sec. 54-8. Public drinking of alcoholic beverages prohibited.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
Liquor means and includes any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquors, intended for human consumption, which
contains more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.
Open container means not having a cap, stopper or other cover in place.
Public park, playground or recreational facility means any of the following city-owned
or operated public fields, parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities:
Child’s Park;
Couture Park;
Farwell School grounds;
Franklin Pasture Athletic Complex;
Geiger School grounds;
Jude’s Place at Marcotte Park;
Judge Armand A. Dufresne, Jr. Plaza;
Kennedy Park;
Knox Street Park;
Leeds Park;
Lewiston Athletic Park;
Lewiston Memorial Armory;
Lincoln Street Boat Launch and Park;
Lionel Potvin Park;
PARKS AND RECREATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 54
CH 54:4
Longley School grounds;
Marcotte Park;
Mark W. Paradis Park;
Martel School grounds;
Mayer Park;
McMahon School grounds;
Montello School grounds;
Pettingill School Park;
Randall Road Softball Complex;
Raymond Park;
Ricker Park;
Riverside Greenway;
Simard-Payne Police Memorial Park;
Smiley Park;
Sunnyside Park;
Veterans Memorial Park.
(b) Penalty. A person is guilty of public drinking if he drinks liquor while at any public park
or playground, unless at specific events authorized by the city council.
(c) Evidence. The possession of an open container of liquor at a public park or playground is
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(Code 1982, § 20-8; Ord. No. 94-11, 10-6-94; Ord. No. 01-8, 7-5-01; Ord. No. 01-16, 10-18-01; Ord. No.
09-01, 3-19-09; Ord. No. 13-02a, 3-21-13; Ord. No. 15-04, 6-4-15; Ord. No. 15-05, 7-2-15; Ord. No. 19-
08, 10-31-19)
Sec. 54-9. Designation of Drug-Free “Safe Zones”.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
Drug means any natural or synthetic substance or chemical compound recognized as
having a pharmaceutical or chemical effect process used in the diagnosis, treatment, or
prevention of a disease or other abnormal condition, or as a component of a medication; such a
substance as recognized or defined by the US Food and Drug Administration; a substance used
recreationally, such as a narcotic or hallucinogen, which affects the central nervous system,
causing changes in behavior and often addiction.
Dealer means any person(s) illegally engaged in buying, selling and distribution;
trafficking or administration the use of a drug.
PARKS AND RECREATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 54
CH 54:5
Public park, playground or recreational facility means any of the city-owned or operated
public fields, parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities frequented by minors.(see listing in
Sec.54-8)
(b) Penalty. A person found to be engaging in drug dealing activity within 1000 feet of a
designated “safe zone” will be made subject to an enhanced penalty as specified by legislation.
(c) Evidence. Informational signs posted at a public athletic field, park, playground or
recreational facility, being conspicuously marked using wording provided by the Commissioner
of Public Safety which designate the area to be a Drug-Free Safe Zone with increased penalties
for drug crimes committed within this zone as specified by legislation.
(Ord. No. 09-01, 3-19-09)
Sec. 54-10. Smoking in public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities prohibited.
Smoking and all other use of tobacco products, including vaping and e-cigarette use, will not be
permitted on city-owned public parks, playgrounds or recreational facilities. “Tobacco Products”
is defined to include all tobacco-derived or containing products including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, spit and smokeless tobacco, dip, chew, snuff, snus, electronic cigarettes, vape
products, and other electronic nicotine delivery systems, excluding products specifically
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the purpose of cessation or
nicotine replacement therapy. “Smoking” includes carrying or having in one’s possession a
lighted or heated cigarette, cigar, or pipe, or a lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended
for human consumption through inhalation, whether natural or synthetic, in any manner or in any
form. “Smoking” includes the use of an electronic smoking device. “Smoking” also includes
the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in
any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition
of smoking in this policy.
(Ord. No. 09-03, 7-02-09; Ord. No. 15-05, 7-2-15; Ord. No. 19-08, 10-31-19)
Sec. 54-11. Penalties
A violation of section 54-10 shall be subject to minimum fines as established by a policy adopted
by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 09-03, 7-02-09; Ord. No. 19-08, 10-31-19)
Chapters 55-57
RESERVED
CH 58:1
Chapter 58
PERSONNEL*
Article I. In General
Secs. 58-1--58-25. Reserved.
Article II. Personnel System
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 58-26. Purpose.
Sec. 58-27. Political activities.
Sec. 58-28. Residency.
Sec. 58-29. Compliance with applicable laws.
Sec. 58-30. Personnel policies.
Secs. 58-31--58-70. Reserved.
Division 2. Appeals
Sec. 58-71. Generally.
Sec. 58-72. Grievance procedure.
Secs. 58-73--58-85. Reserved.
Article III. Retirement and Disability
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 58-86. Definitions.
Sec. 58-87. Minimum requirements for pension plan for city employees.
Sec. 58-88. Established.
Sec. 58-89. Administration; pension board.
Sec. 58-90. Rules and regulations authorized.
Sec. 58-91. Record of pension board's proceedings.
Sec. 58-92. Legal advisor to pension board.
Sec. 58-93. Fraud prohibited.
Sec. 58-94. Corrections in retirement records authorized.
Sec. 58-95. Appeals.
Sec. 58-96. Persons subject to regulations.
Sec. 58-97. Appropriations.
Sec. 58-98. Departments to furnish employee information to pension board.
Sec. 58-99. Certification of creditable prior service of municipal employees.
Sec. 58-100. Employee's claim for prior service; service certificates.
Sec. 58-101. Eligibility for credit for prior service; year's service defined.
Sec. 58-102. Leave of absence.
Sec. 58-103. Requirements to receive retirement benefits.
Sec. 58-104. Service beyond retirement.
Sec. 58-105. Payment of retirement benefits.
Sec. 58-106. Retirement benefits exempt from execution and unassignable.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:2
Sec. 58-107. Application for disability retirement; medical examination; computation of
benefits.
Sec. 58-108. Subsequent to retirement for disability physical examinations may be
required.
Sec. 58-109. Refusal to take physical examination.
Sec. 58-110. Reentry into service after disability retirement.
Sec. 58-111. Cost of living adjustments for retired employees and beneficiaries.
Sec. 58-112. Sick leave.
Secs. 58-113--58-125. Reserved.
Division 2. Fire Department Retirement and Disability
Sec. 58-126. Retirement age.
Sec. 58-127. Pension for retirement.
Sec. 58-128. Qualifications of permanent members for disability pensions.
Sec. 58-129. Pensions for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
Sec. 58-130. Pensions.
Sec. 58-131. Payment of pensions.
Sec. 58-132. Application for disability pensions.
Sec. 58-133. Pensions, applications for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
Sec. 58-134. Granting of pensions.
Sec. 58-135. Pensions previously granted to remain valid.
Sec. 58-136. Limitations.
Sec. 58-137. Sick leave.
Secs. 58-138--58-150. Reserved.
Division 3. Police Department Retirement and Disability
Sec. 58-151. Retirement; permanent disability.
Sec. 58-152. Pensions.
Sec. 58-153. Pensions, ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
Sec. 58-154. Application for disability pensions.
Sec. 58-155. Application for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
Sec. 58-156. Granting of pensions.
Sec. 58-157. Payment of pensions.
Sec. 58-158. Petition for retirement.
Sec. 58-159. Pension benefits; computation of service credit.
Sec. 58-160. Pension provisions for chief of police.
Sec. 58-161. Pensions previously granted to remain valid.
Sec. 58-162. Limitations.
Sec. 58-163. Sick leave.
Secs. 58-164--58-175. Reserved.
Division 4. Public Works Department Retirement and Disability
Sec. 58-176. Pensions for widows and children of deceased employees.
Sec. 58-177. Sick leave; compensation for unused sick leave upon retirement.
Secs. 58-178--58-190. Reserved.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:3
Division 5. State Retirement System
Sec. 58-191. Membership.
Sec. 58-192. Teachers excluded.
Sec. 58-193. Certification of creditable prior service.
Sec. 58-194. Determining retirement allowance.
Sec. 58-195. Purchasing creditable prior membership service.
Sec. 58-196. State laws adopted.
Sec. 58-197. Human resources director's duty to assist.
*Charter references: Personnel ordinance required, § 4.02; personnel board, § 4.03.
Cross references: Administration, ch. 2; officers and employees, § 2-76 et seq.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 58-1--58-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERSONNEL SYSTEM
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 58-26. Purpose.
A comprehensive personnel system is hereby being established and designed to create an
equitable and uniform system of personnel administration governing employment with the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-231)
Sec. 58-27. Political activities.
The city encourages every employee to exercise the right to vote in all legal elections.
However, city employees shall not:
(1) Engage in political activities while on duty;
(2) Be required as a duty of office or employment, or as a condition for employment,
promotion or tenure of office, to contribute funds for political or partisan
purposes;
(3) Coerce or compel contributions for political or partisan purposes by other city
employees or use office or influence to coerce the political action of any person;
(4) Use any supplies or equipment of the city for political purposes; or
(5) Be a candidate for political or partisan elected office, unless on unpaid leave of
absence authorized for such purpose.
(Code 1982, § 2-231)
Sec. 58-28. Residency.
In considering applications for employment, all municipal authorities empowered to employ
personnel shall give preference, whenever practicable, to qualified persons who have been
inhabitants of the city for at least three months. (Code 1982, § 2-233)
Sec. 58-29. Compliance with applicable laws.
The city shall comply with all requirements of state and federal laws which apply to persons
applying for jobs or employed by the city. (Code 1982, § 2-234)
Sec. 58-30. Personnel policies.
The director of human resources, with the advice of the city administrator, shall prepare
and propose such changes through the personnel committee for city council approval to the
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:5
personnel policies as necessary to ensure effective administration of the personnel system. The
personnel policies and revisions thereof shall be filed in the human resources department and
available for public inspection during normal business hours. The policies shall cover specific
procedures covering the following phases of the personnel system:
Classification and pay plan.
Education and training.
Leaves (paid and unpaid.)
Outside employment.
Probationary period.
Reimbursements.
Safety.
Terminations.
Wage supplementals.
Working hours.
(Code 1982, § 2-235; Ord. No. 99-7, 4-15-99)
Secs. 58-31--58-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. APPEALS*
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 06-16, effective Feb. 8, 2007, renumbered div. 3 as div. 2 to read as herein set out. Formerly,
div. 2 consisted of sections 58-41--58-59 and pertained to civil service and derived from Code 1982, §§ 2-261--2-279.
Sec. 58-71. Generally.
The appeals procedure established in this division is intended to provide full opportunity
for permanent noncontractual employees to bring to the attention of management, acts or
omissions, working conditions or administrative actions that the employee feels need either
adjustment or information. It is the intent and desire of the city to adjust complaints or
grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort to
resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be matters which can
only be resolved after an appeal and review. The submission of a grievance by an employee shall
in no way adversely affect the employee or his future employment with the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-251; Ord. No. 06-16, 2-8-07)
Sec. 58-72. Grievance procedure.
In order to ensure the employee of a method in which he/she may obtain review of his/her
particular grievance effectively, the following steps are provided:
(1) The aggrieved employee shall, within ten working days of the incident, discuss
and explain his/her grievance orally with the immediate supervisor. The
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:6
supervisor shall make a decision and notify the employee within ten working days
after the discussion.
(2) If the aggrieved employee feels that the matter has not been settled or adjusted to
his/her satisfaction by the immediate supervisor, he/she then may submit the
matter in writing within ten days to the department head. The department head
shall schedule a meeting within ten working days after receipt of the grievance
from the employee. If the matter is not resolved at this meeting, the department
head shall submit the written answer within ten working days after the scheduled
meeting.
(3) If the decision of the department head is not satisfactory to the aggrieved
employee, the grievance may then be submitted in writing within ten working
days thereafter to the city administrator. The hearing shall be held within ninety
working days after receipt of the request. The city administrator shall have the
right to issue subpoenas, to examine witnesses under oath and to require the
production of evidence. At such hearing, either party may be represented or
assisted by counsel. The decision of the city administrator shall be final and may
include any remedy appropriate to the dispute, including partial or complete
restitution of back pay and/or benefits. The decision shall be submitted in writing
within thirty working days after the close of the hearing.
(4) In the event of a suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee, the employee
shall commence the grievance procedure at the city administrator level
(subsection (3) of this section).
(Code 1982, § 2-252; Ord. No. 02-26, 2-6-03; Ord. No. 06-16, 2-8-07)
Secs. 58-73--58-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY*
*Charter references: Prior retirement benefits preserved, § 8.06.
State law references: Pension system authorized, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3007(4).
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 58-86. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Average final compensation means the annual average of the pay received for a period of
five consecutive years of service preceding retirement.
State law references: Similar provisions, 5 M.R.S.A. § 1001(3).
Beneficiary means any person in receipt of a pension or benefit under the provisions of
the retirement system.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:7
Board means the pension board provided for in section 58-89 to administer the retirement
system.
Creditable service means service after the establishment of the retirement system plus
prior service.
Disability, as a basis for retirement, means permanent disability or disability of extended
and uncertain duration, as determined by the board upon the basis of competent medical and
other information.
Employee means any person who is regularly and permanently in the employ of the city.
Prior service means service rendered prior to the date of establishment of the retirement
system.
Retirement system means the retirement system as defined in this article.
Service means service as an employee for which compensation is paid by the city.
(Code 1982, § 2-301)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 58-87. Minimum requirements for pension plan for city employees.
(a) The powers to promulgate, enact and amend, by ordinance, a pension plan for the
employees of the city who prior to the year 1945 were not provided for in a system of
retirement or disability benefits, shall be vested in the city council, subject, however, to
the provision that no such ordinance, or amendment thereto, involving a matter of cost,
expense or finances, shall be enacted by the city council without the approval or the
recommendation of the finance committee. Provided, also, that such pension plan shall
include the following:
(1) Pension to be not over one-half of employees' average final compensation, at the
time of retirement:
a. Retired for disability received while acting in the scope of employment,
provided the employee has ten or more years of creditable service. Any
amount paid to employee under state workmen's compensation law shall
be deducted from employee's annual allowable pension.
b. Reaches age 65 and/or has served not less than 25 years.
c. Reaches age 65 and has served 20 years or more, the employee shall be
entitled to a pension equal to 1/50 of his average final compensation
multiplied by the number of years of his creditable service.
(2) "Average final compensation" shall mean the annual average of the highest pay
received for a period of five consecutive years of service preceding retirement.
(3) No less than 190 days' service of eight hours duration shall constitute one year of
service, nor shall more than one year of service be creditable for all service in any
one calendar year.
(4) "Creditable service" shall mean service after establishment of the retirement
system plus prior service.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:8
(5) "Prior service" shall mean service rendered prior to the date of establishment of
the retirement system.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any employee of the city who
elects to participate in any contributory employees' retirement system which may
be established, authorized or approved by the city council upon the
recommendation of the finance committee nor to any person who shall become
employed by the city after the date of the establishment of any contributory
employees' retirement system which may be established, authorized or approved
by the city council upon the recommendation of the finance committee.
(b) Any person who shall become employed by the city after the effective date of the
establishment of any contributory employees' retirement system which may be
established, authorized or approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the
finance committee shall, as a condition of employment, become a participating member
in such contributory employees' retirement system.
(Code 1982, § 2-302)
Sec. 58-88. Established.
A retirement system is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3007(4), for the purpose of providing retirement and disability benefits for
employees of the city not presently provided for.
(Code 1982, § 2-303)
Sec. 58-89. Administration; pension board.
(a) The general administration and the responsibility for the operation of the retirement
system and for making effective the provisions of this division are hereby vested in a
board to be known as the pension board.
(b) The pension board shall consist of the city finance committee. The pension board may
employ such medical and other services as shall be required, which services shall be
charged to and paid out of the retirement fund.
(Code 1982, § 2-304)
Sec. 58-90. Rules and regulations authorized.
Subject to the limitations of this article, the pension board may from time to time
establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary to regulate its activities.
(Code 1982, § 2-305)
Sec. 58-91. Record of pension board's proceedings.
The pension board established pursuant to this article shall keep a record of all of its
proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection.
(Code 1982, § 2-306)
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:9
Sec. 58-92. Legal advisor to pension board.
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the pension board. (Code 1982, § 2-307)
Sec. 58-93. Fraud prohibited.
Any person who shall knowingly make any false statement, or shall falsify or permit to
be falsified any record of this retirement system, in any attempt to defraud such system as a
result of such act, shall be guilty of an offense.
(Code 1982, § 2-308)
Sec. 58-94. Corrections in retirement records authorized.
Should any change or error in the records result in any member or beneficiary receiving
from the retirement system more or less than he would have been entitled to receive had the
records been correct, the pension board shall have the power to correct such error and to adjust as
far as practicable the payments which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled to.
(Code 1982, § 2-309)
Sec. 58-95. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision or ruling of the pension board shall have the right of
appeal from such decision or ruling to the next term of the superior court to be held in the
county, held not less than 30 days after the rendition of such decision or ruling. The appellant
shall file a written notice of his appeal from such decision or ruling with the board and with the
clerk of the superior court. Certified copies of the ruling or decision, together with a copy of the
appeal, shall be forwarded by the board to the clerk of the superior court. The city attorney shall
appear for and in behalf of the board. The procedure in such court shall be the same as in appeal
from decisions of the district courts. (Code 1982, § 2-310)
Sec. 58-96. Persons subject to regulations.
Each member and beneficiary shall be subject to all the provisions of this division and to all the
rules and regulations adopted by the pension board, and shall furnish to the board such
information affecting his status as a member or beneficiary of the system as the board may from
time to time require. (Code 1982, § 2-311)
Sec. 58-97. Appropriations.
The retirement fund shall be the fund provided by the city in the annual appropriation resolve.
Each municipal department shall furnish annually to the board a list of their respective
employees who have attained or shall attain the retirement age within the next ensuing fiscal
year. The board, after verification, shall then submit to the city administrator an estimate of the
sum or sums necessary for the retirement fund for the ensuing fiscal year. (Code 1982, § 2-312)
Sec. 58-98. Departments to furnish employee information to pension board.
It shall be the duty of the head of each department to submit to the pension board a statement
showing the name, title, compensation, duties, date of birth, and length of service of each
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:10
member, and such other information regarding employees in his department as the board may
require. (Code 1982, § 2-313)
Sec. 58-99. Certification of creditable prior service of municipal employees.
It shall be the duty of the pension board to establish and institute the procedure and
machinery necessary to investigate and properly certify the creditable prior service of all the
employees in the various departments of the city now subject to any existing noncontributory
retirement or pension plan, and of those employees who shall participate in any contributory
employees' retirement plan which may be established, authorized or approved by the city council
upon the recommendation of the finance committee, and to maintain a complete file of the data
pertaining to the employment and service of all employees in the employment of the city. It shall
be the duty of the finance committee to certify to the proper authorities the creditable prior
service of all employees in the employ of the city under any retirement or pension system.
(Code 1982, § 2-314)
Sec. 58-100. Employee's claim for prior service; service certificates.
(a) Under such rules and regulations as the pension board shall adopt, each employee in
service on February 14, 1980, shall file a detailed statement of all service as an employee
rendered by him prior to such date for which he claims credit, and of such other facts as
the board may require for the proper operation of the retirement system.
(b) The board shall verify, as soon as practicable after the filing of such statement of service
under subsection (a), the service therein claimed. Upon verification of the statement of
service, the board shall issue prior service certificates certifying to each employee the
length of prior service rendered with which he is credited. So long as membership
continues, a prior service certificate shall be final and conclusive for retirement purposes
as to such service; provided, however, that any employee may, within one year from the
date of issuance or modification of such certificate, request the board to modify or correct
his prior service certificate.
(Code 1982, § 2-315)
Sec. 58-101. Eligibility for credit for prior service; year's service defined.
(a) Credit for prior service shall be granted to each employee who has rendered such service
as defined in this division and who was employed on February 14, 1980, or who becomes
employed thereafter, provided that prior service rendered prior to a discontinuance of city
service followed by reentrance into city service after a lapse of three years shall not be
credited; except, that the three-year limitation shall not apply to city employment prior to
the adoption of the City Charter in 1939, nor to city employees who were employed on
federal projects during the years between 1933 and 1942, both inclusive; and except that
any absence from city service by reason of service in the military or naval services of the
United States in any war in which the United States has engaged shall not be considered
as a break in city service, and the period of such absence shall count as city service.
(b) No less than 190 days' service of eight hours duration shall constitute one year's service,
nor shall more than one year of service be creditable for all service in any one calendar
year.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:11
(Code 1982, § 2-316)
Sec. 58-102. Leave of absence.
No employee shall be entitled to or be credited with prior service upon discontinuance of
city service unless such employee before such discontinuance of service obtains a leave of
absence. No leave of absence shall be granted to any employee at any one time for more than one
year's duration, except if, for good reason shown and upon the written application of the
employee, the leave of absence is further extended. Such extension shall not exceed the further
term of one year.
(Code 1982, § 2-317)
Sec. 58-103. Requirements to receive retirement benefits.
Any employee may retire upon his written application to the pension board, stating at
what time, not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days subsequent to the filing thereof, he
desires to be retired, provided that such employee shall be credited, at the time so specified for
his retirement, with the following:
(1) Reaching age 65 or having served not less than 25 years, in which case he shall be
entitled to one-half of his average final compensation at the time of his retirement.
(2) Reaching age 65 and having served 20 years or more, in which case the employee
shall be entitled to 1/50 of his average final compensation multiplied by the
number of years of his creditable service, but in no case shall he receive more
than one-half of his average final compensation at the time of his retirement.
(Code 1982, § 2-318)
Sec. 58-104. Service beyond retirement.
The pension board may allow any city department to retain the services of any member of
their department after the age of retirement, from year to year, if he consents, while it deems it
for the best interest of the city. In such cases, the employee shall be entitled to his pension from
the date of actual retirement.
(Code 1982, § 2-319)
Sec. 58-105. Payment of retirement benefits.
Retirement benefits granted under the provisions of this article shall be payable in equal
monthly installments.
(Code 1982, § 2-320)
Sec. 58-106. Retirement benefits exempt from execution and unassignable.
Retirement benefits granted under the provisions of this article shall not be subject to
execution, garnishment, attachments or any other process whatsoever, and shall be unassignable.
(Code 1982, § 2-321)
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:12
Sec. 58-107. Application for disability retirement; medical examination; computation of
benefits.
Upon written application to the board, any employee who has had ten or more years of
creditable service may be retired because of total and permanent disability as the natural and
proximate result of an injury or disease arising out of and in the course of employment without
willful negligence on his part, provided that after a medical examination of such employee, the
medical examiners shall certify in writing to the board that such employee is mentally or
physically totally incapacitated for the further performance of duty, that such incapacity is likely
to be permanent, and that such employee should be retired; in which case, the employee shall be
entitled to one-half of his average final compensation at the time of his retirement. The
retirement benefits granted because of disability as a result of injury or disease arising out of and
in the course of employment shall be reduced by the amount of any benefits, other than medical
benefits, payable to or on account of such employee under the workmen's compensation laws,
because of the disability resulting in his retirement.
(Code 1982, § 2-322)
Sec. 58-108. Subsequent to retirement for disability physical examinations may be
required.
The pension board may, at its pleasure, require any beneficiary who has been retired for
disability and who has not attained the age of 65 to undergo medical examination, such
examination to be made by a physician or surgeon appointed by the board, at the place of
residence of such beneficiary or other place mutually agreed upon. Upon the basis of such
examination and report, the board shall determine whether such disabled beneficiary is still
incapacitated, physically or mentally, for service in the office or department of the city where he
was employed and in the position held by him when retired for disability. If the board shall
determine that such beneficiary is not so incapacitated, his retirement benefits shall be cancelled
forthwith, and he shall be reinstated to the same position or employment as that held by him
when retired for disability.
(Code 1982, § 2-323)
Sec. 58-109. Refusal to take physical examination.
Should any beneficiary retired for disability refuse to submit to medical examination, as
provided in this division, his pension or retirement benefits may be discontinued until his
withdrawal of such refusal, and should such refusal continue for one year, his retirement benefits
may be cancelled.
(Code 1982, § 2-324)
Sec. 58-110. Reentry into service after disability retirement.
Should a beneficiary, after retirement for disability, reenter the city service, he shall
receive credit for prior service in the same manner as if he had never been retired for disability.
(Code 1982, § 2-325)
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:13
Sec. 58-111. Cost of living adjustments for retired employees and beneficiaries.
Notwithstanding any other provision in the Charter, on any or all general wage
adjustments in city salaries made to active city employees on or after January 2, 1968, the same
percent increase or decrease shall be applied to all retired city employees or their beneficiaries
retired under the noncontributory city pension programs. The provisions of this section shall
apply to city employees who were retired prior to the enactment of this section and their
beneficiaries as well as to those city employees who are retired after such enactment and their
beneficiaries, except that no decrease shall be applied to retired city employees who were retired
prior to the enactment of this section or to their beneficiaries.
(Code 1982, § 2-326)
Sec. 58-112. Sick leave.
(a) Employees of the city, except teachers, employees of the department of public works,
members of the police department and members of the fire department, shall be allowed
to accumulate one day of sick leave per month, a total of 12 days per year, accumulating
to a maximum of 120 days.
(b) Upon retirement pursuant to the state employees retirement system or the city pension
plan, an employee shall receive compensation at his rate of pay at the time of retirement
for one-half of the number of days of his unused sick leave. This clause will be
retroactive to January 1, 1969.
(Code 1982, § 2-327)
Secs. 58-113--58-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FIRE DEPARTMENT RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY
Sec. 58-126. Retirement age.
Any member of the fire department who shall have arrived at the age of 65 years in active
service and who shall have served not less than 25 years shall be retired and shall be entitled to a
pension equal to one-half of the pay which such member received at the time of his retirement.
The city administrator may retain the services of any member of the department who has reached
the age of retirement, from year to year, if he consents, while they deem it for the best interests
of the department. In such cases he shall be entitled to his pension from the date of actual
retirement.
(Code 1982, § 2-351)
Sec. 58-127. Pension for retirement.
(a) Any member of the fire department who shall have served not less than 25 years shall be
retired upon his petition, and thereupon shall be entitled to a pension equal to one-half of
the pay which such member received at the time of his retirement.
(b) The death of an active member of the fire department resulting from injury or illness
incurred in the line of duty shall entitle the beneficiaries described in this division to
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:14
pension benefits. If such member so meets his death, the pension benefits payable as a
result thereof shall be the continued payment of one-half of the salary he was then
receiving. The death of a member of the department retired under the provisions of this
section or section 58-126 shall entitle the beneficiaries described in this division to
pension benefits. The pension benefits payable as a result thereof shall be the continued
payment of the full pension he was then receiving. In either event such benefits shall be
paid to his widow until her death or remarriage, and if there be no such widow, then to
his minor child or children in accordance with section 58-151.
(Code 1982, § 2-352)
Sec. 58-128. Qualifications of permanent members for disability pensions.
Any permanent member of the fire department who has become permanently disabled
while in the actual performance of duty in the department shall be entitled to a pension equal to
one-half of the pay which such member received at the time of his permanent disability.
(Code 1982, § 2-353)
Sec. 58-129. Pensions for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
(a) Any permanent member of the fire department who has completed ten or more but less
than 25 years of total service in such department, and who has become permanently
disabled, mentally or physically, for further performance of duty in the fire department
because of injury or illness which was not incurred while in the actual performance or
discharge of his duties as a member of such department, or which was not connected with
his service as a member of such department, shall be retired and shall be entitled to a
pension equal to 1/50 of the annual pay he was receiving at the time of such permanent
disability, multiplied by the total number of years of service completed. For the purpose
of computing the amount of pension to be paid, half and whole years as defined in this
section shall be counted. Six months but less than nine months shall be deemed a half
year, and nine months or more through 12 months shall be deemed a full year. For the
purpose of computing years of service under this section, service rendered prior to the
enactment of this section shall also be counted.
(b) The death of a member retired under this section shall entitle his beneficiaries, as defined
in section 58-127, to the continued payment of the full pension in the amount the member
was receiving under this section at the time of his death.
(Code 1982, § 2-354)
Sec. 58-130. Pensions.
The death of an active member of the department who shall have served not less than 17 years
therein shall entitle the beneficiaries described in section 58-127 to pension benefits equaling
one-half of the salary he was last receiving. (Code 1982, § 2-355)
Sec. 58-131. Payment of pensions.
The pensions specified in this division shall be paid monthly by the city treasurer and no pension
shall be allowed unless application therefor shall have been approved by the pension board.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:15
(Code 1982, § 2-356)
Sec. 58-132. Application for disability pensions.
When application is made for pension because of permanent disability incurred while in
the performance of duty in the fire department, the applicant shall satisfy the pension board that
he is permanently disabled and that his disability was incurred in the discharge of his duties as a
member of the department.
(Code 1982, § 2-357)
Sec. 58-133. Pensions, applications for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
When application is made for a pension as provided in section 58-129, the applicant shall
satisfy the pension board that he is permanently disabled, mentally or physically, for further
performance of duty in the fire department and that he is otherwise qualified for such pension
under the provisions of section 58-129.
(Code 1982, § 2-358)
Sec. 58-134. Granting of pensions.
The pension board shall investigate and pass upon all matters pertaining to the pensions
of firefighters, in accordance with the provisions of this division, and shall have authority to
grant such pensions as provided in this division.
(Code 1982, § 2-359)
Sec. 58-135. Pensions previously granted to remain valid.
Nothing contained in this division shall be held to deprive any member of the fire
department who may be receiving a pension when the 1939 Charter took effect of the benefits of
such pension.
(Code 1982, § 2-360)
Sec. 58-136. Limitations.
(a) The provisions of this article with reference to the retirement benefits in favor of the
members of the city fire department shall not apply to the members thereof who elect to
participate in any contributory employees' retirement system which may be established,
authorized or approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the finance
committee, nor to any person who shall become employed in the fire department after the
date of the establishment of any contributory employees' retirement system which may be
established, authorized or approved by the city council upon the recommendation of the
finance committee.
(b) Any person who shall become a permanent member of the fire department after the
effective date of the establishment of any contributory employees' retirement system
which may be established, authorized or approved by the city council upon
recommendation of the finance committee shall, as a condition of employment, become a
participating member in such contributory employees' retirement system.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:16
(Code 1982, § 2-361)
Sec. 58-137. Sick leave.
(a) Members of the fire department shall be allowed to accumulate 1 1/2 days of sick leave
per month, a total of 18 days per year, accumulating to a maximum of 120 days.
(b) Upon retirement pursuant to the state employees retirement system or city pension plan,
an employee shall receive compensation at his rate of pay at the time of retirement for
one-half the number of days of his unused sick leave. This clause will be retroactive to
January 1, 1969.
(Code 1982, § 2-362)
Secs. 58-138--58-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. POLICE DEPARTMENT RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY
Sec. 58-151. Retirement; permanent disability.
(a) Any member of the police department who shall have arrived at the age of 65 years in
active service, or any member who while in the performance of duty has become
permanently disabled, or any police officer of the city who was a member of the police
department at the time of the enactment of chapter 37 of the Private and Special Laws of
1917 and who thereafterwards, but prior to the enactment of chapter 8 of the Private and
Special Laws of 1939, arrived at the age of 65 years, while in active service, shall be
retired and shall be entitled to a pension equal to one-half of the pay which such member
received at the time of his retirement or permanent disability.
(b) The death of an active member of the police department resulting from injury or illness
incurred in the line of duty shall entitle the beneficiaries described in this section to
pension benefits. If such member so meets his death, the pension benefits payable as a
result thereof shall be the continued payment of one-half of the salary he was then
receiving. The death of a member of the department retired under this section or section
58-158 shall entitle the beneficiaries described in this section to pension benefits. The
pension benefits payable as a result thereof shall be the continued payment of the full
pension he was then receiving. In either event, such benefits shall be paid to his widow
until her death or remarriage, and if there is no such widow, then to the guardian of his
child until that child reaches the age of 18 years. When two or more children under the
age of 18 years are the survivors, such pension or compensation shall be divided pro rata,
and the pro rata share due each child shall be paid to the guardian of that child until the
child shall reach the age of 18 years.
(Code 1982, § 2-376)
Sec. 58-152. Pensions.
The death of an active member of the police department who shall have served not less
than 17 years therein shall entitle the beneficiaries described in section 38-151 to pension
benefits equaling one-half of the salary he was last receiving.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:17
(Code 1982, § 2-377)
Sec. 58-153. Pensions, ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
(a) Any permanent member of the police department who has completed 19 or more but less
than 25 years of total service in such department, and who has become permanently
disabled, mentally or physically, for further performance of duty in the police department
because of injury or illness which was not incurred while in the actual performance or
discharge of his duties as a member of such department, or which was not connected with
his service as a member of such department, shall be retired and shall be entitled to a
pension equal to 1/50 of the annual pay he was receiving at the time of such permanent
disability, multiplied by the total number of years of service completed. For the purpose
of computing the amount of pension to be paid, half and whole years as defined in this
section shall be counted. Six months but less than nine months shall be deemed one-half
year, and nine months or more through 12 months shall be deemed a full year. For the
purpose of computing years of service under this section, service rendered prior to the
enactment of this section shall also be counted.
(b) The death of a member retired under this section shall entitle his beneficiaries, as defined
in section 38-151, to the continued payment of the full pension in the amount the member
was receiving under this section at the time of his death.
(Code 1982, § 2-378)
Sec. 58-154. Application for disability pensions.
When application is made for pension because of permanent disability while in active
service, or while on authorized leave, the applicant shall satisfy the pension board that he is
permanently disabled and that his disability was incurred in the discharge of his duties as a
member of the department.
(Code 1982, § 2-379)
Sec. 58-155. Application for ordinary or nonservice connected disability.
When application is made for a pension as provided in section 58-153, the applicant shall
satisfy the pension board that he is permanently disabled, mentally or physically, for further
performance of duty in the police department and that he is otherwise qualified for such pension
under the provisions of section 58-153.
(Code 1982, § 2-380)
Sec. 58-156. Granting of pensions.
The pension board shall investigate and pass upon all matters pertaining to the pensions
of policemen, in accordance with the provisions of this division, and shall have authority to grant
such pensions as provided in this division. (Code 1982, § 2-381)
Sec. 58-157. Payment of pensions.
The pensions specified in this division shall be paid monthly by the city treasurer and no pension
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:18
shall be allowed unless application therefor shall have been approved by the pension board.
(Code 1982, § 2-382)
Sec. 58-158. Petition for retirement.
Any member of the police department who has served not less than 25 years shall be retired on
his petition, and thereupon become entitled to a pension equal to one-half of the pay which such
member received at the time of his retirement. Any special patrolman of the department who has
served continuously with pay until his regular appointment shall be given credit for such time
served towards his retirement. (Code 1982, § 2-383)
Sec. 58-159. Pension benefits; computation of service credit.
For the purpose of pension benefits, service credit shall be computed from the time that an
applicant was accepted as a member of the police department and whose name has been listed as
eligible for appointment as a permanent member of the department, and who has been on call on
a 24-hour duty basis, and has responded to calls for employment during the time that he is
eligible and before he was made a permanent member of the department. (Code 1982, § 2-384)
Sec. 58-160. Pension provisions for chief of police.
The chief of police, after having served 25 years in any capacity in the police department, or if
permanently disabled while in the performance of some duty devolving upon him as a member
of the department, shall be retired upon his petition; whereupon he shall be entitled to a pension
equal to one-half of the pay which he received at the time the disability occurred or at the time
his application was filed with the pension board petitioning for retirement benefits. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to deprive the incumbent chief of the years of service presently
accrued as chief of such department. (Code 1982, § 2-385)
Sec. 58-161. Pensions previously granted to remain valid.
Nothing contained in this division shall be held to deprive any member of the police department
who may be receiving a pension when the 1939 Charter took effect of the benefits of such
pension. (Code 1982, § 2-386)
Sec. 58-162. Limitations.
(a) The provisions of this article with reference to the retirement benefits in favor of the
members of the police department, including the chief of police and police matron, shall
not apply to those who elect to participate in any contributory employees' retirement
system which may be established, authorized or approved by the city council upon the
recommendation of the finance committee, nor to any person who shall become
employed in the police department after the date of the establishment of any contributory
employees' retirement system which may be established, authorized or approved by the
city council upon the recommendation of the finance committee.
(b) Any person who shall become a permanent member of the police department after the
effective date of the establishment of any contributory employees' retirement system
which may be established, authorized or approved by the city council upon
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:19
recommendation of the finance committee shall, as a condition of employment, become a
participating member in such contributory employees' retirement system.
(Code 1982, § 2-387)
Sec. 58-163. Sick leave.
(a) Members of the police department shall be allowed to accumulate one day of sick leave
per month, a total of 12 days per year, accumulating to a maximum of 120 days.
(b) Upon retirement pursuant to the state employees retirement system or city pension plan,
an employee shall receive compensation at his rate of pay at the time of retirement for
one-half that number of days of his unused sick leave. This clause will be retroactive to
January 1, 1969.
(Code 1982, § 2-388)
Secs. 58-164--58-175. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY
Sec. 58-176. Pensions for widows and children of deceased employees.
If an employee of the city department of public works should die, whether he is retired or
on active duty, as a result of injury received in the line of duty, his widow, or, if none, his minor
child or children, shall continue to receive the pension he was receiving at the time of his death.
If on active duty, the compensation or pension shall be one-half of the pay the member was
receiving at the time of his death. Such pension or compensation will be paid subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The widow shall receive such compensation or pension until she dies or as long as
she remains a widow.
(2) If no widow survives, a pension or compensation of the same amount shall be
paid to the guardian of his child until that child reaches the age of 18 years. When
two or more children under the age of 18 years are the survivors, such pension or
compensation shall be divided pro rata, and the pro rata share due each child shall
be paid to the guardian of that child until the child shall reach the age of 18 years.
(Code 1982, § 2-401)
Sec. 58-177. Sick leave; compensation for unused sick leave upon retirement.
(a) Employees of the department of public works shall be allowed to accumulate one day of
sick leave per month, a total of 12 days per year, accumulating to a maximum of 120
days.
(b) Upon retirement pursuant to the state employees retirement system or city pension plan,
an employee shall receive compensation at his rate of pay at the time of retirement for
one-half of the number of days of his unused sick leave. This clause will be retroactive to
January 1, 1969.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:20
(Code 1982, § 2-402)
Secs. 58-178--58-190. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Sec. 58-191. Membership.
(a) Any person who shall become an employee of any department of the city after the
effective date of the participation of the city in the state retirement system may become a
contributing member of the state retirement system, if also participating in the social
security system. Employees not participating in the social security system shall, as a
condition of employment, become a contributing member of the state retirement system.
Participation in the state retirement system shall be under the provisions of title 5, Maine
State Retirement System, rules and regulations promulgated by the state retirement
system, and acts amendatory thereof, to the extent of the benefits made applicable to the
members of such departments by terms of the city's participation in such retirement
system.
(b) Any appointed or elected official may become a contributing member of the state
retirement system at the beginning of his term. Should the appointed or elected official
choose not to become a contributing member at that time, then such person shall be
barred from becoming a contributing member during his term of office.
(Code 1982, § 2-426)
Sec. 58-192. Teachers excluded.
The provisions of this division shall not apply to those employees who are eligible for
membership in the teachers' retirement system of the state. (Code 1982, § 2-428)
Sec. 58-193. Certification of creditable prior service.
It shall be the duty of the pension board of the city to establish and institute the procedure and
machinery necessary to investigate and properly certify the creditable prior service of all the
employees in the various departments of the city now subject to any existing noncontributory
retirement or pension plan, and of those employees who shall participate in the state retirement
system, and to maintain a complete file of the data pertaining to the employment and service of
all employees in the employment of the city. It shall be the duty of the pension board to certify to
the proper authorities the creditable prior service of all employees in the employ of the city,
under any retirement or pension system. (Code 1982, § 2-430)
State law references: Prior service certificate and credit, 5 M.R.S.A. § 1094(6), (7).
Sec. 58-194. Determining retirement allowance.
(a) Full-time employees. The retirement allowance for full-time employees is to be
determined by the application of the current retirement formula in effect or the
application of the current minimum retirement allowance in effect, whichever is greater.
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:21
(b) Other than full-time employees. The retirement allowance for other than full-time
employees is to be solely determined by the application of the current retirement formula
in effect excluding the current monthly minimum retirement allowance in effect.
(Code 1982, § 2-432)
Sec. 58-195. Purchasing creditable prior membership service.
Any employee may purchase creditable prior membership service at any time, subject to
the limitations imposed by the state retirement system.
(Code 1982, § 2-433)
Sec. 58-196. State laws adopted.
The following provisions of the state retirement system laws are adopted:
Standard provisions Section of the law (title 5)
Prior service 18352
Computation of benefits 18452
Retirement allowances 18451
Cost-of-living adjustment 18407
Disability 18504/18505/18506
Survivor benefits 18553
Accidental death benefits 18601/18602/18603
Automatic option 2 18554
Military leave 18258
Termination pay 17001, 13
Vacation/sick leave credits 18356
Transferability 18253
Option withdrawal 18252/18359
Optional membership 18251
Special plans 18453
Out-of-state service credit 18354
(Code 1982, § 2-435)
Sec. 58-197. Human resources director's duty to assist.
The human resources director, under the direction of the pension board and city council,
shall submit to the board of trustees of the state retirement system such information and shall
cause to be performed such duties in respect to the employees of the city aforesaid as shall be
PERSONNEL
Lewiston Code Chapter 58
CH 58:22
prescribed by the board of trustees in order to carry out the provisions of the state retirement
system. In addition, he shall perform all acts, file all certifications, furnish all statements of data
and agreements as are necessary or required by the administrators or trustees of the state
retirement system, or both, to implement the effect of this division.
(Code 1982, § 2-436; Ord. No. 99-7, 4-15-99)
Chapter 59
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 60
CH 60:1
Chapter 60
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY
(PACE)
Article I. Purpose and Enabling Legislation
Sec. 60-1. Purpose
Sec. 60-2. Enabling Legislation
Article II. Title and Definition
Sec. 60-3. Title.
Sec. 60-4. Definitions.
Article III. Pace Program
Sec. 60-5. Establishing; funding.
Sec. 60-6. Amendments to PACE program.
Article IV. Conformity with the Requirements of the Trust
Sec. 60-7. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents.
Article V. Program Administration; Municipal Liability
Sec. 60-8. Program Administration.
Sec. 60-9. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality.
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
Lewiston Code Chapter 60
CH 60:2
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
Sec. 60-1. Purpose.
By and through this Chapter, the City of Lewiston declares as its public purpose the
establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for
energy saving improvements to their properties located in the City of Lewiston. The City of
Lewiston declares its purpose and the provisions of this Chapter to be in conformity with federal
and State laws. (Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
Sec. 60-2. Enabling Legislation.
The City enacts this Chapter pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th Maine State
Legislature -- “An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and
Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”
(codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.). (Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 60-3. Title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the City of Lewiston Property Assessed Clean
Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).” (Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
Sec. 60-4. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an improvement to
qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or similar
energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements
of residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the
Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that
meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the City of Lewiston.
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
Lewiston Code Chapter 60
CH 60:3
qualifying property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on qualifying
property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying property at the time of
the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against qualifying
property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s boundaries.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a
PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State statute by the
Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy savings
improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the PACE district
of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a fixture, product,
system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying
property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that produces energy or heat
from renewable sources, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal
systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems,
wood pellet systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal Qualified
Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10103
and/or its agent(s), if any.
(Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
Sec. 60-5. Establishment; funding.
The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing owners of qualifying property
located in the PACE district who so choose to access financing for energy saving improvements
to their property through PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds
are available from the Trust in municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE Ordinance, 2) adopt and
implement a local public outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the
municipality’s PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the municipality’s PACE program. (Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
Lewiston Code Chapter 60
CH 60:4
Sec. 60-6. Amendment to PACE program.
In addition, the Municipality may from time to time amend this Ordinance to use any other
funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE
program, and the Municipality shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those
other funding sources. (Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
Sec. 60-7. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents.
If the Trust adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to
the Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model documents
substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality shall take necessary steps to conform
this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model documents.
(Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Sec. 60-8. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A. §10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the
Municipality will enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to administer
the functions of the PACE program for the Municipality. The PACE administration
contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE program including,
without limitation, that:
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the Municipality’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE
mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to nonpayment of the
assessment;
vii. the Municipality, or the Trust or its agent on behalf of the Municipality, promptly
shall record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE
loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with adopting this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an education and outreach
program so that citizens of the Municipality are made aware of home energy saving
opportunities, including the opportunity to finance energy saving improvements with a
PACE loan.
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE)
Lewiston Code Chapter 60
CH 60:5
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate with the Trust in
its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but may be assessed
and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust and consistent with
applicable law.
(Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
Sec. 60-9. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal officers and
municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and tax collectors, are not
personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or
nature, under or related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE administration contract
with the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above, a municipality has no liability
to a property owner for or related to energy savings improvements financed under a
PACE program.
(Ord. No. 10-10, 11-4-2010)
Chapter 61
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:1
Chapter 62
SOLID WASTE*
Article I. In General
Sec. 62-1. Depositing solid waste in public places or in sources of water.
Sec. 62-2. Reserved.
Sec. 62-3. Containers required; permitting unauthorized collections.
Sec. 62-4. Duty of citizens to deliver to collectors.
Sec. 62-5. Conveyance regulated.
Sec. 62-6. Municipal collection from certain establishments.
Sec. 62-7. Reserved.
Sec. 62-8. Reserved.
Sec. 62-9. Reserved.
Sec. 62-10. Dumping of certain waste prohibited.
Sec. 62-11. Definitions.
Sec. 62-12. Reserved.
Sec. 62-13. Municipal collection of solid waste and recyclable materials.
Sec. 62-14. Fee schedule.
Sec. 62-15. Payments.
Sec. 62-16. Penalties and enforcement.
Sec. 62-17. Special waste.
Sec. 62-18. Solid wastes not accepted for disposal at the facility.
Sec. 62-19. Demolition debris.
Sec. 62-20. Covering of loads.
Sec. 62-21. Dump picking prohibited.
Sec. 62-22. Reserved.
Sec. 62-23. Spring cleanup assistance event.
Sec. 62-24. ePass program.
Secs. 62-25--62-30. Reserved.
Article II. Reserved
Secs. 62-31--62-55. Reserved.
Article III. Hazardous Materials
Sec. 62-56. Definitions.
Sec. 62-57. Disposal and storage of hazardous waste.
Sec. 62-58. Waste oil.
Sec. 62-59. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 62-60--62-69. Reserved.
*Cross references: Littering prohibited, § 6-2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.
State law references: Maine Litter Control Act, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2261 et seq.
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 62-1. Depositing solid waste in public places or in sources of water.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited in any street, or in any well,
solid waste, including household waste, commercial waste, industrial waste, construction or
demolition waste, or hazardous waste.
(Code 1982, § 29-1)
Sec. 62-2. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 03-10, effective Aug. 1, 2003, repealed § 62-2 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to placement of trash for collection as enacted by Code 1982, § 29-2.
Sec. 62-3. Containers required; permitting unauthorized collections.
All house offal, swill or garbage, whether consisting of animal or vegetable substances,
shall be deposited in suitable containers and shall be placed in some conveniently accessible
place to be taken away by such person as may be designated or licensed by the department of
public works of the city to receive and carry away such garbage and it shall be unlawful to
knowingly cause, allow or permit the receiving and carrying away of such garbage by anyone
other than the abovementioned designees or licensees.
(Code 1982, § 29-3; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06)
Sec. 62-4. Duty of citizens to deliver to collectors.
All persons shall promptly deliver all offal, swill or garbage accumulated on their
premises to the person who shall be authorized or licensed by the department of public works to
receive and carry away the same.
(Code 1982, § 29-4)
Sec. 62-5. Conveyance regulated.
No house offal, swill or garbage shall be carried or conveyed through any public street or
sidewalk in the city except in suitable containers, or in vehicles so constructed as to be watertight
and tightly covered at all times, except when such offal, swill or garbage is being deposited or
removed therefrom.
(Code 1982, § 29-5; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06)
Sec. 62-6. Municipal collection from certain establishments.
The department of public works shall not collect, or cause to be collected, from hotels,
motels, stores, manufacturing plants, restaurants, produce houses, food processing plants, nursing
homes, hospitals, social clubs, colleges or any other commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment engaged in a commercial activity, as defined in section 62-11 of this chapter, at
municipal expense, any offal, swill, garbage, refuse or trash of any kind.
(Code 1982, § 29-6; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06)
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:3
Sec. 62-7. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 03-10, effective Aug. 1, 2003, repealed § 62-7 in its entirety.
Formerly, said section pertained to authority to designate public solid waste facility; duty to use
as enacted by Code 1982, § 29-7.
Sec. 62-8. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 03-10, effective Aug. 1, 2003, repealed § 62-8 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to removal of materials from solid waste facilities as enacted by Code 1982, § 29-8.
Sec. 62-9. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 03-10, effective Aug. 1, 2003, repealed § 62-9 in its entirety. Formerly, said section
pertained to duties of police chief pertaining to solid waste facilities; abatement of violations as enacted by Code
1982, § 29-9.
Sec. 62-10. Dumping of certain waste prohibited.
No person shall dump solid waste on any public or private land in the city.
(Code 1982, § 29-10)
Sec. 62-11. Definitions.
The following words and terms as used in sections 62-12 through 62-24 of this article
will have the meanings ascribed thereto, unless the context otherwise indicates:
Authorized collector: Employees or contractors of the city or a private collector employed
by the owner, occupant, agent or other person having custody of a building, for the purpose of
hauling solid waste to the facility or other location for waste disposal as designated by the city.
Batteries: Wet cell (lead-acid) batteries collected for recycling and alkaline batteries.
This definition will not include rechargeable batteries defined as universal waste.
Building: Any structure or vessel, whether public or private, that is adapted to or used
for: dwelling occupancy; the transaction of business; the rendering of professional services;
amusement; the display, or sale, or storage of goods, waste, merchandise, articles or equipment;
the performance of work or labor; office buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants,
warehouses, day care facilities, hotels, motels, bed and breakfast facilities, worship, garages,
bakeries; structures where domestic or other animals or fowl are kept; or sheds, barns,
outbuildings, or other structures or premises used as accessory to any such use.
Bulky waste: Any items whose large size or weight precludes or complicates their
handling by normal collection, processing or disposal methods (includes old furniture; carpeting;
appliances such as stoves, dryers, washing machines, etc., but does not include universal waste
or refrigerant containing appliances) or as further defined by the rules and regulations of public
works.
City: The City of Lewiston, Maine, a municipality organized and regulated by the laws of
the state.
Commercial waste: Solid waste generated by a commercial property or as a result of
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:4
commercial activity.
Commercial activity: Any property or service provider, which has received a license from
the City of Lewiston to conduct business and/or a structure used for commercial or business
purposes including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Hotels, motels, bed and breakfast facilities, restaurants, warehouses;
(2) Markets, bakeries, grocery stores, food vendors;
(3) Manufacturing or industrial facilities;
(4) Business offices;
(5) Any business establishment adjoining a residential structure;
(6) Trailer parks and manufactured home parks, and;
(7) Condominiums.
Construction and demolition debris: Solid waste generated through construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition of structures. This includes but is not limited to: building
materials such as plaster and lath, plumbing fixtures, insulation, asphalt, wall board, pipes,
treated wood (wood products, which have been treated with copper, chromium, arsenic and/or
creosote), asphalt shingles, roofing felt, sheetrock and metal conduits. It excludes: partially filled
containers of any kind, friable asbestos and other special waste.
ePass: A voucher, distributed by the city annually, for the purpose of disposing of one
thousand (1,000) pounds of waste material at the facility. The ePass is nontransferable and is
invalid if used by anyone other than the authorized user.
Facility: The city's solid waste and recycling facility, located on 424 River Road, which
is a division within the city's department of public works.
Inert fill: Clean soil material including soil from road ditching and sand from winter sand
cleanup. Inert fill can also include crushed clean glass and porcelain (not included in recycled
glass) as well as bricks, rocks and cured concrete (that does not contain rebar or wire mesh).
MEDEP: The Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
Multiple unit apartment building: An apartment building or complex of buildings, which
contain a total of four or more dwelling units per parcel of property or three or more dwelling
units per parcel of property, which are not owner occupied.
Occupant: The person that has the use of or occupancy of any building or a portion
thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or any vacant portion
of a building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building will have the
responsibility of an occupant of the building or portion thereof.
Owner: The actual owner of the building, whether individual, partnership or corporation,
or the agent of the building, or other person having custody of the building or to whom the rent is
paid.
Public works: The City of Lewiston's Department of Public Works.
Recyclable material includes the following:
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:5
(1) Newspaper (including inserts), magazines (glued or stapled), catalogs, telephone
books, hard & soft cover books and junk mail.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers (any color), rinsed with caps and rings removed and discarded;
paper labels are acceptable. No window glass, mirrors, light bulbs, dishes or
ceramics.
(4) Metal items, cleaned of foodstuff. Aluminum (pie plates, trays, foil), metal cans
(tin, steel, aluminum), empty aerosol containers. No cans/containers with residual
materials remaining.
(5) Mixed paper, includes manila folders, brochures, envelopes (manila, white,
colored-windows are acceptable), junk mail without plastic wrapping, cards, post
cards, calendars, multiple copy forms, aseptic containers, wrapping paper
including tube, all types of paper board boxes (including shoe boxes, cereal boxes
and dry food boxes), Asian corrugated (yellow or gray in color), milk cartons,
paper towel tubes, photography paper, frozen food boxes and egg and berry
cartons. Does not include: garbage or plastic.
(6) Recyclable plastic, includes plastic bottles & containers #1-7: soda/juice/water,
milk jugs, bleach/detergent, shampoo, food containers (cottage cheese, margarine,
yogurt). Rigid plastics: 1 & 5 gallon buckets with handles attached, milk/soda
crates, laundry baskets, small plastic trash bins, plastic toys, landscape trays,
plastic plant pots, kitty litter buckets, children size rigid pools.
Recyclable plastic does not include: plastic bags or film, foam of any kind
(including packaging), stretch wrap, hard/brittle plastic or computers.
(7) High grade paper--Ledger paper, computer paper, letterhead, lined paper and
envelopes.
(8) Any other material so designated by public works. Recyclable material will be
considered solid waste material for the purposes of this chapter.
Refrigerant containing appliance: Appliances (refrigerators, air conditioners, freezers,
etc.) which contain freon or other regulated refrigerant (as determined by state and federal
environmental regulations).
Residential properties: Any parcel of property, located in the city, upon which is situated
a single residential structure or a complex of structures containing not more than two dwelling
units, or an apartment building or complex of structures, which contain three dwelling units, per
parcel of property, one of which is occupied by the owner.
Scrap metal: All scrap metal including white goods such as appliances. Does not include:
engines, gear boxes or tanks (whether full or empty which contained chemicals or fuels) of any
kind, or refrigerant containing appliances.
Solid waste: Municipal solid waste as defined by Maine's Solid Waste Regulations
(MEDEP Reg. Ch. 400), which states "solid waste emanating from household and normal
commercial sources". This waste will include, but is not limited to garbage, trash, rubbish, paper,
plastics, metal cans, glass, crockery, cold ashes and refuse.
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:6
Special waste: Any solid waste generated by sources other than residential and
commercial establishments that exists in such an unusual quantity or in such a chemical or
physical state, or any combination thereof, that it may disrupt or impair effective waste
management or threaten public health, human safety or the environment and requires special
handling, transportation and disposal procedures. Special waste includes, but is not limited to;
ash, industrial and industrial process waste, sludge and dewatered septage, nonfriable asbestos
and asbestos containing materials and all other solid wastes designated special waste as defined
in Maine's Solid Waste Regulations.
Suitable container: For solid waste generated at a residential property, including
recyclable material, means a suitable plastic container, which is covered and watertight and
prevents the attraction of vectors (such as birds, rodents, insects, etc.). The container shall be no
larger than 36 gallons and shall be covered. The weight of the solid waste/recyclable material
placed in the container shall not exceed 30 pounds. Plastic bags, in and of themselves, shall not
be considered a suitable container, for the purposes of this definition. For solid waste generated
through commercial activities or at multiple unit apartment buildings, suitable containers may
include metal dumpsters or plastic toters, specifically designed and manufactured for the storage
of solid waste/recyclable material and which prevent the attraction of vectors (such as birds,
rodents, insects, etc.) Suitable containers, which contain recyclable material shall have a
“RECYCLING” sticker (distributed by the City) affixed to the container.
Superintendent: That person appointed by the director of public works as the city's
superintendent of the division of solid waste management.
Tenant: A person, group of individuals or family that pays rent to the owner of a
residential property or multi-unit apartment building for use of that building’s dwelling unit(s).
Use of the buildings by the tenant shall not include use for Commercial Activities, as defined in
this section.
Tires: Tires (with and without rims) from all commercial and residential vehicles.
Universal waste includes the following:
(1) Rechargeable batteries, which contain lead, cadmium and/or mercury.
Rechargeable batteries, do not include wet-cell (lead acid) batteries.
(2) Lamps, which contain mercury (include fluorescent lamps, mercury vapor lamps,
high pressure sodium lamps, and all other mercury containing lamps as defined by
MEDEP Hazardous Waste Regulations, Chapter 850).
(3) Mercury containing switches, thermostats, manometers and thermometers.
(4) Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) ballasts, which are totally enclosed and
nonleaking.
(5) Cathode ray tubes, including video display components of televisions, computer
monitors (includes flat screen monitors) and other video display devices.
(6) Computer central processing unit.
(7) Desk-top printer.
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:7
Waste material: Any waste materials, including, but not limited to, solid waste,
recyclable material, bulky waste, commercial waste, construction and demolition debris, inert
fill, scrap metal, special waste, universal waste refrigerant containing appliances, waste oil,
asphalt shingles, batteries, tires, special waste, wood and sheetrock.
Waste oil: Used motor oil delivered to the facility in clear plastic containers in order to
facilitate inspection. Waste oil does not include; synthetic motor oil, hydraulic fluid or any other
lubricants or liquids of any kind.
Wood includes all wood including demolition wood (free of metal, sheetrock, insulation,
and other solid waste), brush and tree waste (does not include stumps). Does not include treated
wood (refer to construction and demolition debris).
Yard debris: Brush (low trees, bushes & shrubs) and tree limbs less than twelve (12)
inches in diameter. Yard debris does not include stumps from trees, bushes and/or shrubs.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06; Ord. No. 12-11, 10-18-12;
Ord. No. 13-09, 10-17-13; Ord. No. 15-01, 02-19-15; Ord. No. 16-11, 12-15-16)
Sec. 62-12. Reserved.
Sec. 62-13. Municipal collection of solid waste and recyclable materials.
(a) Collection of solid waste and recyclable materials from residential properties. Public
works will provide for the collection of solid waste and recyclable material from all
residential properties receiving waste collection provided by the city, in accordance with
this chapter.
Occupants of residential properties that receive city waste collection in accordance with
section 62-4 of this chapter shall utilize suitable containers for the storage, transportation
and disposal of solid waste. This includes all solid waste placed curbside for disposal.
The weight of solid waste placed in each suitable container shall not exceed 30 pounds.
All residents who live in residential structures receiving city waste collection shall
separate recyclable material from their rubbish. Recyclable material must either be
transported to the facility or be placed in suitable containers, which have a city issued
“RECYCLING” sticker affixed to the container, for curbside collection.
Recyclable material and solid waste are to be set curbside no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the
day preceding regularly scheduled waste collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day
of waste collection as established by public works.
(b) Collection of solid waste and recycling materials from commercial properties and
multiple unit apartment buildings. Solid waste and recyclable material will not be
collected by the city from any commercial activity or property engaged in a commercial
activity, as defined in section 62-11 of this chapter.
Private vendors providing curbside solid waste and recyclable material collection service
to commercial properties and multiple unit apartment buildings not receiving this service
from the city shall schedule their collection to occur on the same day as the city-provided
service for the geographic area of the city where the property is located.
Recyclable material and solid waste are to be set curbside no earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:8
day preceding regularly scheduled trash collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. of the day
of waste collection. All solid waste and recyclable material must be removed by the end
of the scheduled day of collection. This applies to all curbside collection, whether it is
provided by the city or through a private vendor.
The city will collect solid waste and recyclable material from multiple unit apartment
buildings for only those buildings who:
(1) Received solid waste and recyclable material collection from the city on May 6,
2003; and
(2) Complete and submit an application fee to continue this service and receive
approval from the city to continue this service.
The city will provide service to these limited multiple unit apartment buildings on
a fee-for-service basis. The amount of the fee will be reviewed and adjusted
annually as needed based on the cost to provide service. Fees and fee adjustments
will be published in the fee schedule filed with the city clerk pursuant to section
62-14 of this chapter. Fees will be billed semi-annually in advance. Failure to pay
the fee and any outstanding violations/penalties, imposed by the city, on time will
result in termination of the service to that property. Multiple unit apartment
buildings, which are sold to new owners shall only be eligible to go on the
program if:
(1) The property is new to the program, yet is an existing building
with a new owner, or
(2) The property is already on the program and there is no break in
service, or
(3) The new owner already has other properties in the program and has
met all obligations of the program for all these other properties
including but not limited to paying on time and addressing solid
waste issues with those properties in a timely manner, or
(4) The new owner has previously owned, operated, or managed, or
been the primary ownership interest in any company, corporation
or other legal entity that has previously been part of the program,
then such information may be used as a basis for determination for
entering the program.
The new owner shall submit a one-time application fee and
complete an application to go on the program within 90 days of
purchasing the property.
Service will not be reinstated once it is terminated, except as noted
above.
(5) Open enrollment, during the month of June on every even
numbered year for properties, which had been terminated from the
program due to:
1. failure to pay required disposal fees and/or
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:9
2. failure to address any outstanding violations/penalties, as
required in this section and/or,
may re-apply to participate in this program. The owner of the
property, which was terminated, may submit an application and
fee. The applicant may receive the services provided in this
section if they are current on all payments and have no outstanding
violations/penalties on their properties, as imposed by the City.
(6) If a landlord provides the Finance Department a 30-day prenotification
in advance of payment due date that they wish to be
removed from a program and to private haul their trash, they may
rejoin the program beginning on the next semiannual cycle. Prenotification
of termination and applying for reinstatement in the
program will be the sole responsibility of the landlord. If prenotification
is not received, the property will be removed from the
program due to lack of payment and be subject to the open
enrollment rules reflected in section 5.
(c) Collection of solid waste from Lewiston public schools. Public works may provide
collection of solid waste and recyclable material to the Lewiston School Department from
schools that received collection service as of January 1, 1990. Public works will invoice
the Lewiston School Department for services related to solid waste collection and
disposal. The Lewiston School Department includes all Lewiston public schools and
associated administration buildings.
(d) Collection of bulky waste. No person shall place bulky waste out for collection by the
city.
The city will not be responsible for the collection of bulky waste, construction and
demolition debris, scrap metal, and wood, as defined, at any time.
Any person disposing of waste in violation of section 62-13 of this chapter shall be guilty
of an offense. Penalties for said offense are described in section 62-16 of this chapter.
(e) Collection of recyclable material by unauthorized agents. In accordance with section 62-
3 of this chapter, no person, other than authorized collectors, shall pick up recyclable
materials that have been set out at the curb for collection by the city or its contracted
agent. For purposes of this chapter, authorized collectors shall be limited to employees of
the City of Lewiston acting in the course of their employment or employees of private
firms that have been contracted by the City of Lewiston to collect recyclable material.
Individuals found in violation of this article are subject to the penalties listed in section
62-16 of this chapter.
(f) Solid waste containers. Occupants of a residential property must maintain adequate
suitable containers for the accumulation and disposal of solid waste & recyclable waste
located and/or generated at their residence. An occupant of a residential property shall be
responsible for the disposal of solid waste & recyclable waste located and/or generated at
their residence as provided in this chapter.
The owner or owner's agent of a multiple unit apartment building, shall be responsible for
waste collected from that building and must ensure that all solid waste & recyclable
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:10
waste is placed in suitable containers, as defined. The owner or owner's agent of a
multiple unit apartment building shall be responsible for the disposal of solid waste &
recyclable waste located at the multiple unit apartment building in accordance with
section 62-4 of this chapter.
(g) Waste not to accumulate except in suitable storage containers. The occupants of
buildings, owners of residential properties and/or owners of multiple unit apartment
buildings or commercial buildings shall place or cause to be placed all solid waste &
recyclable waste in suitable containers and shall not permit any accumulation or deposit
of such substances in or about the premises except in such suitable containers, per section
62-3 of this chapter.
(h) Unlawful to deposit. It is unlawful for any person or entity to throw or deposit or cause to
be deposited on property not owned or controlled by the person or entity any solid waste,
including household waste, commercial waste, industrial waste, construction or
demolition waste or hazardous waste.
(i) Owners duty to inspect and remove wastes. The owner of land and the person(s) in
possession of such land abutting a city street or public easement have an affirmative
obligation to inspect those portions of their property which have such frontage and to
promptly remove or dispose of, in a manner consistent with this chapter, any waste
material found in or along such property.
The owner of, and any person having responsibility for, property abutting the area of the
street, sidewalk, or property where waste material has been deposited shall be presumed
to have deposited same and shall be liable for violations of this article in the absence of
evidence to the contrary. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, any owner of and/or any person
having responsibility for property abutting the area of the street where any waste
materials has been deposited in violation of this chapter shall remove the waste materials
and dispose the waste material as required.
(j) Penalty. Violation of any part of this section, including failure to utilize suitable
containers as described, shall be considered a violation of this chapter, and shall be
subject to penalties as described in section 62-16 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 04-23, 1-6-05; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06; Ord.
No. 08-07, 9-11-08; Ord. No. 13-09, 10-17-13 )
Sec. 62-14. Fee schedule.
A schedule of fees for the use of the facility shall be set by the Solid Waste Policy (the "Fee
Schedule"). The schedule and any modifications of the schedule shall be filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 13-09, 10-17-13)
Sec. 62-15. Payments.
(a) All parties who deposit one or more loads per week at the facility for a period of greater
than 30 days shall be required to pay applicable disposal fees on a monthly basis. Failure
to make required payments within 30 days of the date of billing will result in the
suspension of all privileges to utilize the facility.
(b) Upon use of the facility for the first time, all new accounts will be required to make
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:11
payment at that time. If the customer continues to use the facility at least once per week
for a period of greater than 30 days, the customer will be billed on a monthly basis.
(c) Owners of multiple unit apartment buildings receiving city-provided curbside waste
collection service, as described under subsection 62-13(b) of this chapter, shall pay a
$100.00 application fee at the time of application for city service. Fees for these services
will be billed semi-annually in advance. The owner is responsible for ensuring bills are
paid in full and on time. Failure to pay the fees within 30 days of billing will result in
termination of the service.
(d) Sporadic users of the facility, or users that do not remit fees on a monthly basis, must
make payment at the time of service.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 04-13, 7-1-04; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06)
Sec. 62-16. Penalties and enforcement.
(a) Waste material generated outside city limits. No vehicle, whether commercial or private,
shall dispose of any waste material at the facility unless it is generated from within the
geographical limits of the city (as determined by reviewing the generator's driver's
license, property tax receipt, and/or building permit) or is authorized under the terms of a
contract with the city. The city reserves the right to make spot inspection of waste
material entering the facility. Vehicles bringing in waste material that is from outside the
city shall be subject to the penalties described later in this section.
(b) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, the director of code enforcement
or their duly authorized representatives to enforce the provisions of chapter 62 of this
Code and to prosecute any and all persons violating any such provisions.
Enforcement procedures as set out in chapter 50, article II of the Lewiston Code of
Ordinances shall apply to enforcement of this chapter, except that the specific penalties
listed in subsection (c) herein will apply instead of those listed in section 50-45.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter 62 to the contrary, due to the public
nuisance and threat to public health created by the presence of waste material on or near
city streets (i.e. on or near public ways) in violation of subsections 62-13(a), (b), (d), (i)
and (j), the chief of police, the director of code enforcement or their designees are
authorized to fine violators, without any prior notification, in accordance with subsection
62-16(c).
(c) Penalties. Violators of any provisions of this chapter shall for the first offense receive a
fine in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council, plus
accrued interest, attorney's fees and court costs. A second violation or any subsequent
violations occurring within six months of a previous violation shall result in a fine(s) in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council, plus accrued
interest, attorney's fees and court costs.
(d) Responsibilities not transferable. No contract or agreement between the owner or
operator and the occupant relating to the compliance with the terms of this article shall be
effective in relieving any person of the responsibility for compliance with the provisions
of this chapter as described.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 04-23, 1-6-05; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06; Ord. No. 08-06h, 8-14-08;
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:12
Ord. No. 15-01, 02-19-15)
Sec. 62-17. Special waste.
Special waste is defined in section 62-11. Solid waste brought to the facility that contains
special waste mixed with residential and commercial waste will be charged at the additional rate
of $2.50/ton for the entire load unless the special waste is separated from the other waste.
All special waste shall be subject to the hazardous and special waste handling and
exclusion plan (appendix C) and special waste characterization, testing and permitting (appendix
D) of the facility's operations and maintenance (OM) manual as approved by the MEDEP, as
well as the specific waste characterization sampling and analytical work plans developed by
public works.
No special waste shall be accepted at the facility without a proper manifest that tracks the
movement of the special waste from the point of generation to any intermediate points and
finally to its deposition in the landfill. Each manifest shall have a section for the generator, the
transporter, and the facility. The generator shall:
• Prepare a manifest before any special waste is transported.
• Design the destination of the waste.
• Identify and list each waste separately on the manifest.
• Provide a hand-written signature and date.
• Obtain the hand-written signature and date of the transporter and keep one copy.
The transporter (or generator if the generator is also the transporter) shall:
• Ensure that the manifest accompanies any special waste.
• Sign and date the manifest in the presence of the generator.
• Upon delivery to the site, indicate the destination of the special waste.
• Obtain the signature and date from the weigh station attendant.
• Keep one copy of the manifest and give the remaining copies and original to the weigh
station attendant.
The facility shall:
• Not accept special waste from a generator or transporter unless the waste is
accompanied by a manifest, properly completed by the generator and transporter.
• Upon acceptance of the load, the weigh station attendant shall sign and date the
manifest, and note any discrepancies in the manifest.
• Record the weight of the load.
• Send signed copies of the manifest to the generator and transporter.
• Retain two copies on file at the facility.
The superintendent shall have the authority to require a waste audit of any company that
brings or pays a commercial hauler to bring special waste to the facility.
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:13
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03)
Sec. 62-18. Solid wastes not accepted for disposal at the facility.
The following waste materials are not accepted for disposal at the facility:
(1) Liquids and other free-flowing material.*
(2) Junk automobiles, trucks, lawn mowers, snow mobiles or any other motor driven
vehicle.**
(3) Closed containers used for shipping or storing chemicals.
(4) Fuel tanks or devices used for containing petroleum based compounds, such as
gasoline, fuel oil, hydraulic fluid or lubricants or other chemicals.
(5) Debris or residuals from nonhazardous chemical spills or spill cleanup.*
(6) Contaminated soils or dredged soils.*
(7) Friable asbestos.*
(8) Sand blast grit and nonliquid paint wastes.*
(9) Medical wastes. Includes fecal waste and all bodily fluids (and waste materials
which have come in contact with said fluids) of any kind.***
(10) Infectious and/or hospital waste. All such waste (includes any and all body parts
and waste materials which have come in contact with said body parts) are
considered hazardous as defined by state and federal regulations, this includes,
but is not limited to all "red bag" waste.***
(11) Animal carcasses or animal parts.****
(12) High and low pH materials.*
(13) Spent filter media residue.*
(14) Hazardous waste excluding normal waste from household activities defined by
Chapter 850 of MEDEP Regulations.*
* Residential property owners are encouraged to bring these materials to the household
hazardous waste depot, located at the facility, for disposal. Others are encouraged to
contact the Maine DEP (287-2651) regarding the proper disposal of these materials.
** Generators of these wastes are encouraged to contact scrap metal salvage facilities
regarding proper disposal.
*** Generators are encouraged to contact the Maine DEP (287-2651) regarding the
proper disposal of these materials.
**** Generators are encouraged to bury small quantities at the site of origin or contact
either local veterinarian offices or the Maine DEP (287-2651) regarding the proper
disposal of these materials.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06)
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:14
Sec. 62-19. Demolition debris.
All haulers bringing construction and demolition debris to the facility for disposal must
show a copy of the contractor permit for the project from which the waste is generated to the
weigh station attendant each time construction and demolition debris is disposed of at the
facility.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03)
Sec. 62-20. Covering of loads.
All vehicles entering the facility shall cover, tie down, or otherwise secure any waste
transported to the facility in a manner reasonably calculated to keep the load secured within the
vehicle. Failure to properly secure incoming loads, as determined by facility personnel, is a
violation of this chapter and shall result in a penalty equal to twice the disposal fee for the
material.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03)
Sec. 62-21. Dump picking prohibited.
No person, resident, business or city employee shall enter the facility without
authorization or remove waste material or recyclable materials from the facility without specific
authorization from the superintendent. Violation of this may result in the immediate revocation
of the disposal privileges by the superintendent. (Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03)
Sec. 62-22. Reserved.
Sec. 62-23. Spring clean-up assistance event.
The Solid Waste Policy (ref. Spring Cleanup Assistance Event) describes a limited service to
residential property owners, by the City, for the collection of solid waste materials, which are not
typically collected curbside and for which the City charges a fee for disposal. This policy and
any modifications to this policy shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord.
No. 13-09, 10-17-13)
Sec. 62-24. ePass program.
The city issues one (1) ePass, at no cost, annually to the following:
(1) Owners of residential properties (as defined in Sec. 62-11 of this chapter) who
live in one of the dwelling units of that property, year round. The ePass will be
issued to property owners who are current on all outstanding debts to the City.
(2) Owners of multiple unit apartment buildings (as defined in Sec. 62-11 of this
chapter) who live in one of the dwelling units of that property, year round. The
ePass is issued for the dwelling unit in which they reside. The ePass will be
issued to property owners who are current on all outstanding debts to the City and
who have paid the City for curbside trash collection services in accordance with
Sec. 62-13 of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:15
The following individuals are eligible to purchase an ePass from the City:
(1) Owners of multiple unit apartment buildings (as defined in Sec. 62-11 of this
chapter) and who have paid the City for curbside trash collection services in
accordance with Sec. 62-13 of this chapter may purchase one (1) ePass per year
for every three (3) dwelling units, which they own (i.e. a five (5) unit building
would be eligible for two (2) ePasses). The owner will be eligible to purchase the
ePass(es) if they are current on all outstanding debts to the City.
(2) Tenants (as defined in Sec. 62-11 of this chapter) who reside in the City of
Lewiston.
The ePass is issued through the Treasurer’s office when the property owner pays their property
tax bill in full for the given year or when the tenant purchases the ePass. The price of the ePass
shall be established as provided in Sec. 62-14 of this chapter.
The ePass service is not transferrable and is limited to only one (1) epass per year. Individuals
eligible to receive this service included:
(1) The holder of the ePass.
(2) A member of the holder’s household (as determined by reviewing the address on
the driver’s license of the individual wishing to use this service) is eligible to use
the service described in Sec. 62-24 ePass Program.
(3) Individuals wishing to use this service will be asked to present their driver’s
license to the Scale House attendant when entering the solid waste facility, to
determine their eligibility to receive this service. Failure to present a driver’s
license or meet the eligibility requirements listed in this ordinance may disqualify
the individual from receiving the services listed in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 03-10, 8-1-03; Ord. No. 06-11, 7-27-06; Ord. No. 12-11, 10-18-12; Ord. No. 13-09, 10-17-13;
Ord. No. 16-11, 12-15-16)
Secs. 62-25--62-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
Secs. 62-31--62-55. Reserved. (Private Collectors repealed Ord. No. 16-11, 12-15-16)
ARTICLE III. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
*Cross references: Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.
Sec. 62-56. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:16
any hazardous or solid waste, sludge or septage into or on any land, water, sanitary or storm
drainage system so that the hazardous or solid waste, sludge or sewage or any constituent thereof
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air, or discharged into any waters, including
groundwater.
Generator means a person whose activity results in the generation of waste which is or
may be hazardous.
Hazardous waste means any chemical substances or materials, gas, solid or liquid,
designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the
United States Resource Recovery and Conservation Act, Public Law 94-580, and amendments to
the act or designated hazardous by the act or its amendments.
Oil means any of a class of substances typically unctuous, viscous, combustible, liquid at
60 degrees Fahrenheit and soluble in ether or alcohol but not in water.
Storage means the placement of materials in drums, tanks or other structures intended to
retain the materials for subsequent use or disposal.
Waste oil means discarded oil generated by residential, institutional, commercial,
industrial or agricultural sources or oil recovered from spills.
(Code 1982, § 29-31)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 62-57. Disposal and storage of hazardous waste.
(a) No person shall dump, dispose of, or store hazardous waste except by those methods
approved by state or federal regulations. Hazardous waste, properly packaged and labeled
identifying the waste, may be stored in quantities of 100 kilograms (220.46 pounds) or
less only upon written approval of the code enforcement officer and fire chief.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
hazardous waste by the landfill method.
(b) A generator may accumulate hazardous waste in excess of 100 kilograms (220.46
pounds) on the site of its generation for a period not to exceed 90 days upon written
approval of the code enforcement officer and fire chief subject to the following
conditions:
(1) All such waste is shipped off-site in 90 days or less.
(2) The waste is placed in containers in accordance with local, state and federal
regulations.
(3) The date upon which each period of accumulation begins is clearly marked and
visible for inspection on each container.
(4) Each container is properly labeled and marked as specified by local, state and
federal regulations.
(5) The generator complies with all the requirements for owners or operators as
outlined in local, state and federal regulations.
(Code 1982, § 29-32)
SOLID WASTE
Lewiston Code Chapter 62
CH 62:17
Sec. 62-58. Waste oil.
No person shall dump or dispose of any waste oil except that waste oil may be stored in
quantities up to 1,000 gallons. Notwithstanding the foregoing, waste oil may be stored in
quantities greater than 1,000 gallons upon written approval of the code enforcement officer and
fire chief.
(Code 1982, § 29-33)
Sec. 62-59. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council. Each day during which a violation
of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Code 1982, § 29-34; Ord. No. 08-06h, 8-14-08)
Secs. 62-60--62-69. Reserved.
Editor’s note - Ord. No. 09-02, effective 4-16-09, repealed Article IV in its entirety, repealing § § 62-70 – 62-74.
Formerly, said sections pertained to the Solid Waste Committee.
Chapters 63-65
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:1
Chapter 66
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Article I. In General
Sec. 66-1. Definitions.
Sec. 66-2. Authority to name streets.
Sec. 66-3. Procedure for numbering houses.
Sec. 66-4. Placing substances on highway; duty to remove.
Sec. 66-5. Allowing substances to accumulate on passageways.
Sec. 66-6. Driving over sidewalks.
Sec. 66-7. Construction of sidewalks by landowners.
Sec. 66-8. Alterations in sidewalks; installing posts, poles, or trees.
Sec. 66-9. Altering, widening, establishing and discontinuing streets.
Sec. 66-10. Petitions to improve accepted streets and accepted public easements.
Sec. 66-11. Draining water onto streets.
Sec. 66-12. Removal of unlawful deposits of snow and/or ice from public sidewalks,
public walkways, public streets and public easements.
Sec. 66-13. Sledding and skating regulated.
Sec. 66-14. Special street sales; parking; musicians.
Sec. 66-15. Temporary festival or special event zones.
Secs. 66-16--66-35. Reserved.
Article II. Permitted Uses
Sec. 66-36. Tables, chairs and benches on sidewalks or public ways.
Sec. 66-37. City exemption.
Sec. 66-38. Temporary signage.
Sec. 66-39. Vending, dispensing machines, drop boxes, and other merchandise devices.
Secs. 66-40--66-70. Reserved.
Article III. Obstructions
Sec. 66-71. Obstructing sidewalk.
Sec. 66-72. Cellar doors, openings regulated.
Sec. 66-73. Permission, bond required to move building.
Sec. 66-74. Auction sales regulated.
Sec. 66-75. Awnings and shades.
Sec. 66-76. Permit required; exceptions; inspection, removal.
Secs. 66-77--66-95. Reserved.
Article IV. Design and Improvements
Sec. 66-96. Administration and enforcement.
Sec. 66-97. Waiver of design or construction standards for acceptance of streets.
Sec. 66-98. Compliance to be at owner's expense; bond.
Sec. 66-99. Acceptance of public easements.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:2
Sec. 66-100. Acceptance of prescriptive or dedicated ways as accepted streets.
Sec. 66-101. Standards for construction of streets.
Sec. 66-102. Requirements for street acceptance.
Sec. 66-103. Acceptance of prescriptive or dedicated ways as accepted public
easements.
Sec. 66-104. Purpose and mission
Sec. 66-105. Appointment and membership
Sec. 66-106. Duties and responsibilities
Sec. 66-107. Organization
Sec. 66-108. Staff support
Sec. 66-109. Complete streets
Sec. 66-110. Projects
Sec. 66-111. Exceptions
Sec. 66-112. Intergovernmental Cooperation
Sec. 66-113. Design Criteria
Sec. 66-114. Community Context
Sec. 66-115. Network
Sec. 66-116. Performance measures
Sec. 66-117. Implementation
Secs. 66-118--66-125. Reserved.
Article V. Parades
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 66-126--66-135. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 66-136. Definitions.
Sec. 66-137. Required.
Sec. 66-138. Exceptions.
Sec. 66-139. Application.
Sec. 66-140. Standards for issuance.
Sec. 66-141. Notice of permit rejection.
Sec. 66-142. Alternative permit.
Sec. 66-143. Contents.
Sec. 66-144. Fee.
Sec. 66-145. Revocation.
Sec. 66-146. Compliance with permit and laws.
Secs. 66-147--66-159. Reserved.
Article VI. Outer Lisbon Street Traffic Impact Fee
Sec. 66-160. Purpose.
Sec. 66-161. Legislative findings.
Sec. 66-162. Title, authority, and applicability.
Sec. 66-163. Definitions.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:3
Sec. 66-164. Imposition of traffic impact fee.
Sec. 66-165. Computation of traffic impact fee.
Sec. 66-166. Payment of fee.
Sec. 66-167. Traffic impact fee trust fund established.
Sec. 66-168. Use of funds.
Sec. 66-169. Refund of fees.
Sec. 66-170. Credits
Sec. 66-171. Severability.
*Cross references: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74.
State law references: Municipal authority to regulate streets and sidewalks, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not
defined in this chapter but are defined in the laws of the state, then such definition shall be
deemed to apply to such words or phrases.
Accepted public easement means an easement for public use by motor vehicles and
otherwise over privately owned land as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. § 3021(2). It becomes accepted
by being laid out by the city, by receipt of a deed, pursuant to a discontinuance as provided in 23
M.R.S.A. § 3026(1), or by recognition of a prescriptive use or other dedication. It shall be
considered a public way or highway for purposes of the city's police power. However, there shall
be no city obligation to maintain and repair such easement.
Accepted street means a street or way that has been laid out or accepted by the state, the
county commissioners or the city council. The land where the accepted street is located may
either be owned in fee by a governmental unit or an easement may have been acquired. An
accepted street shall be equivalent to a town way as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. § 3021(3). It shall
also include any public way and highway.
Private way, for the limited purpose of naming streets pursuant to section 66-2, means
any private road, drive or easement used for the access of motor vehicles and pedestrians either
by virtue of prior use or by being shown on a subdivision plan when such private way has two or
more residential structures with frontage on said private way. A private way may either be
proposed or in existence. Nothing herein shall be construed as imposing upon the city any duties
or obligations, not otherwise imposed by law or assumed by official action of the city, with
respect to private ways.
Street or highway means an accepted street and/or an accepted public easement.
Unaccepted street means a street or way which has not been legally accepted or
recognized by a governmental unit.
Way means an existing means of access for motor vehicles and pedestrians by virtue of
prior use or by being shown on a recorded subdivision plan. A way may either be proposed or in
existence.
(Code 1982, § 24-14; Ord. No. 99-20, 1-13-00)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 66-2. Authority to name streets.
The several streets and private ways in the city shall continue to be called and known by
such names until they shall be altered by the city council. The council may change or alter the
name of any street, or public place or private way; and the council shall establish the names of all
streets and public places hereafter laid out and accepted by the city or by any other authority
within the city, or private ways which may come into existence by dedication or other process.
(Code 1982, § 24-1; Ord. No. 99-20, 1-13-00)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:5
Sec. 66-3. Procedure for numbering houses.
The following procedures shall be followed in the assignment of door numbers to
buildings constructed under the provisions of the building code to the end that street numbers of
buildings hereafter constructed or altered may follow a logical and consistent pattern and thus
lessen confusion and misunderstanding regarding such numbers:
(1) On approval of an application for a permit required by the building code, the
building official shall give written notice to the city engineer of the type of
construction or alteration planned on the premises described in the application.
Such notice shall contain an adequate description of the premises, the location of
the proposed construction or alteration within such premises, and the number of
units of occupancy for residential, commercial or industrial purposes which will
exist on such premises after completion of all work described in the application.
(2) The assessor shall forthwith determine the number which shall designate and
identify and be affixed to the entrance of the unit of occupancy. He shall, so far as
practicable, issue odd numbers for one side of a street and even numbers for the
other side.
(3) After the assessor assigns the door numbers and notifies the city engineer of such
assignments, the engineer shall notify the property owner as described in the
application, by mail, of the door number so assigned. Such notice shall direct the
property owner to display the assigned number within a period of seven days
following receipt of notice, and henceforth, in a prominent place on or near the
front of the building so that such can be readily seen from the street. Such notice
shall further state that violation of such order shall constitute an offense for each
day of violation. Such notice shall advise the property owner to communicate
information as to the new number or numbers to the several utilities, the post
office and others similarly interested.
(Code 1982, § 24-2)
Sec. 66-4. Placing substances on highway; duty to remove.
No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed upon any highway any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, scrap metal, crockery, cans or other substances harmful to
the feet of persons or animals or to tires or wheels of vehicles. Whoever accidentally, or by
reason of an accident, drops from his hand or vehicle any such substance upon any highway shall
forthwith make all reasonable efforts to clear such highway of the substance.
(Code 1982, § 24-3)
State law references: Maine Litter Control Act, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2261 et seq.
Sec. 66-5. Allowing substances to accumulate on passageways.
No person shall allow any dirt, sand or gravel emanating from any unsurfaced private
driveway or private walk to be washed onto the surface of any street or sidewalk. Whenever, in
the opinion of the director of public works, any such street or sidewalk shall have become
dangerous to foot or vehicular passage due to the accumulation of dirt, sand or gravel from any
source aforesaid, the director shall order the titleholder to the land upon which such walk or
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:6
driveway is situated to correct such condition and to clean the street or sidewalk of such dirt,
sand or gravel. If the titleholder refuses to comply with the directive within a reasonable time,
then the street or sidewalk shall be cleaned of the dirt, sand or gravel by the department and the
cost thereof shall be charged to the titleholder.
(Code 1982, § 24-4)
Sec. 66-6. Driving over sidewalks.
No person shall drive any horse, cart, carriage, truck, automobile, motor vehicle or other
vehicle, except children's carriages drawn by hand, upon or over the sidewalks of any street in
the city; except for the purpose of crossing such sidewalks over and upon an established
driveway; provided, however, that operators of pushcarts licensed as roving diners shall not be
prohibited from stopping, standing or parking such pushcarts on sidewalks in the course of
business and in accordance with the provisions of section 22-169.
(Code 1982, § 24-5)
Sec. 66-7. Construction of sidewalks by landowners.
Should an abutting landowner desire to construct a sidewalk, he shall lay such sidewalk
of suitable material of a permanent nature, with or without curbstones as the director of public
works may from time to time determine, the work to be done under the direction and approval of
the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 24-6)
Sec. 66-8. Alterations in sidewalks; installing posts, poles, or trees.
(a) No person shall tear or make any alteration in any sidewalk, or set up any posts, poles, or
trees on any of the sidewalks, or any part of the street, without the consent of the director
of public works.
(b) Poles associated with public utilities may only be placed within a sidewalk if such placement
maintains a minimum 60 inches of unobstructed sidewalk width. An applicant for a pole permit
may seek a waiver from this requirement upon a showing to the Public Works Director that there
exists no practicable alternative that would allow for maintaining utility services to adjacent
properties. Upon such a showing, the Director may reduce the minimum width of unobstructed
sidewalk to no less than 48 inches. Any guide wires or other appurtenances associated with
utility poles and extending over any sidewalk must provide for a minimum 7 feet of clearance
above the sidewalk. A violation of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine as established
by a policy adopted by the City Council in addition to a requirement to relocate any object
violating these standards and repairing any damage done to the sidewalk.
(Code 1982, § 24-7; Ord. No. 17-13, 10-19-17)
Sec. 66-9. Altering, widening, establishing and discontinuing streets.
(a) Whenever application in writing is made to the city council to widen or alter any street,
the council may refer such application to the director of public works, and it shall be the
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:7
duty of the director to consider such application, and after giving notice as the law
requires, the director shall proceed to examine the premises.
(b) If, in the judgment of the director [of] public works, common convenience and public
necessity require the widening or otherwise altering of such street outside the existing
right-of-way, in whole or in part, the director will consult with the department of
assessing to estimate the damage that any person may thereby sustain, and it shall be
lawful for the city to apportion the damages so estimated on such parts thereof as to what
may seem just, upon the lots or parcels of land adjacent to and bounded on such street in
such proportions as in its opinion such lots or parcels of land are benefitted or made more
valuable by such widening or otherwise altering or discontinuing of such street; and if
any damages shall be sustained by, or betterments accrue to, any person by the
discontinuing of any public or private way, the director of public works, when so
required, shall report to the council what compensations they shall receive or betterments
they shall pay, and also whether the damage is occasioned by the discontinuance of a
public or private way.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the decision or judgment of the council under this section may,
as far as relates to damages, have them assessed by a committee or jury, as is by law
provided.
(d) The director of public works shall make a report of their actions in writing to the city
council as soon as practicable after such services, as set out in this section, shall be
performed, and such report shall be accompanied by an accurate survey and plan, giving
the boundaries and measurements of such proposed widening or altering of such street;
and such report as aforesaid having been accepted and after being adopted by an order of
the council, such street shall be established and known as a public street, and the
boundaries and measurements thereof, together with the plan and survey aforesaid, so
laid out, accepted and established by the council, shall be duly recorded by the city clerk
in a book kept for that purpose.
(Code 1982, § 24-8; Ord. No. 01-9, 7-5-01)
Sec. 66-10. Petitions to improve accepted streets and accepted public easements.
With respect to accepted streets and accepted public easements on which lots have been
sold or which have been actually used for travel prior to December 31, 1985, the abutters may, in
writing, petition the city council to improve such streets or public easements by installing sewers,
sidewalks, grading, curbing, graveling, paving and in any other way making a permanent
roadway over the same, or a portion thereof. If the council is of the opinion that the petitionedfor
improvement should be undertaken, it shall cause each feeholder of land adjacent to and
bounded by such accepted street or accepted public easement to be advised of the estimated
amount of the assessment to be made against him for such improvements, which must be
deposited within six months with the city treasurer. Whenever 75 percent of the abutters in
number or 75 percent of the abutters in terms of the relationship between their estimated
assessments and the estimated total assessment for the entire project shall have made such
deposits, then the council may authorize the director of public works to proceed with the project.
When the improvements have been completed, the city shall then proceed to assess one-half of
the cost thereof on the property adjacent to and bounded by such street or public easement in the
manner and in accordance with the provisions of 23 M.R.S.A. § 3601 et seq., with the same right
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:8
of appeal as provided therein. The amount so deposited with the city treasurer shall be applied
towards the satisfaction of the assessment in each case, with any overpayment being returned to
the depositor or any balance being collected according to the terms of 23 M.R.S.A. § 3601 et seq.
(Code 1982, § 24-9)
State law references: Highway assessments generally, 23 M.R.S.A. § 3601 et seq.
Sec. 66-11. Draining water onto streets.
No person shall let out, empty, or direct on or towards the surface of any street, any cellar
drain, sink drain or other drain, so that the water shall flow therefrom onto the street.
(Code 1982, § 24-10)
Sec. 66-12. Removal of unlawful deposits of snow and/or ice from public sidewalks, public
walkways, public streets and public easements.
(a) Definition. A winter-maintained public sidewalk or public walkway is one in which it has
been identified by public policy and one in which the snow and/or ice has been removed
within 72 hours of a snow and/or ice event.
(b) Unlawful to deposit. It is unlawful for any person or entity to shovel, throw, plow or
deposit or cause to be deposited snow and/or ice on any winter-maintained public
sidewalk, public walkway or within or along the edge of the travel way of any public
street or public easement. This provision shall be construed to include snow falling from
the roof of any building upon such public sidewalk, public walkway, or within or along
the edge of the travel way of any public street or public easement.
Exception: In the event that there is insufficient space to place the snow and/or ice on the
property, it may be carefully windrowed along the travel way in such a way as to not
impede any motor vehicles. The volume of snow placed in this fashion may not exceed
0.25 cubic yards per linear foot.
(c) Owners duty to inspect and remove unlawfully deposited snow and/or ice within 72
hours. The owner of land and the person(s) in possession of such land abutting a public
street or public easement have an affirmative obligation to inspect those portions of their
property which have such frontage and to promptly remove within 72 hours any snow
and/or ice that has been shoveled, thrown, plowed or deposited on any winter-maintained
public sidewalk or public walkway and within or along the edge of the travel way of any
public street and/or public easement found along such property.
The owner of, and any person having responsibility for, property abutting the area of the
public street and/or winter-maintained public easement, public sidewalk, public walkway
or property where snow has been deposited shall be presumed to have deposited same
and shall be liable for violations of this article in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, any owner of and/or any person having responsibility for
property abutting the area of the public street and/or public easement, public sidewalk
and public walkway where any snow and/or ice has been deposited in violation of this
chapter shall remove the snow and/or ice.
(d) Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director of planning and code enforcement, the
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:9
police chief, the director of public works, or their duly authorized representatives to
enforce the provisions of section 66-12 of this Code and to prosecute any and all persons
violating any such provisions. Enforcement procedures as set out in chapter 50, article II
of the Lewiston Code of Ordinances shall apply to enforcement of this chapter, except
that the specific penalties listed in subsection (c) herein will apply instead of those listed
in section 50-45.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter 66 to the contrary, due to the public
nuisance and threat to public health created by the presence of snow and/or ice on public
sidewalks, public walkways, or in and/or at the edge of the travel way of public streets
and public easements in violation of subsections 66-12(a) and (b), the director of
planning and code enforcement, the police chief, the director of public works, or their
designees are authorized to fine violators, without any prior notification, in accordance
with subsection 66-12(d).
(e) Penalties. Violators of any provisions of this chapter shall for the first offense receive a
fine equal to twice the removal costs for the snow and/or ice. The minimum fine is
$200.00, plus accrued interest, attorney's fees and court costs. A second violation or any
subsequent violations occurring within two years of a previous violation shall result in a
fine equal to three times the removal costs for the removal of snow and/or ice. The
minimum fine is $400.00, plus accrued interest, attorney's fees and court costs. Such fees
shall be charged each time the city removes snow and/or ice deposited in violation of this
section, whether or not additional notice has been given.
(f) Responsibilities not transferable. No contract or agreement between the owner or
operator and the occupant relating to the compliance with the terms of section 66-12 shall
be effective in relieving any person of the responsibility for compliance with the
provisions of this section as described.
(Code 1982, § 24-11; Ord. No. 08-12, 1-15-09)
Sec. 66-13. Sledding and skating regulated.
(a) No person shall coast, skate or slide in the streets or on the sidewalks with handsleds,
ice/roller skates, skateboards or otherwise in any part of the city where such activity shall
endanger or incommode travelers.
(b) Anyone who violates any of the provisions of this section may have his sled, skates or
skateboard impounded by the authority of the chief of police for a period not to exceed
five days for the first offense, for a period not to exceed ten days for the second offense,
and for a period not to exceed 30 days for any subsequent offense.
(Code 1982, § 24-12)
State law references: Municipal authority to designate public streets and sidewalks whereon persons may slide
with any vehicle, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2851.
Sec. 66-14. Special street sales; parking; musicians.
All other ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding, the council may, by majority vote,
at any regular or special meeting, authorize merchants having business establishments in the city
to conduct special street sales, so-called, during limited periods of time, and to display and sell
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:10
their merchandise on the sidewalk area fronting their respective business establishments or in
other designated areas. The council may order that parking of motor vehicles in the areas of such
street sales be prohibited, and that musical groups be permitted to perform during, and in the
areas of, such street sales. The council shall designate the areas in which such street sales may be
permitted and the dates and hours during which they may be conducted.
(Code 1982, § 24-13)
Sec. 66-15. Temporary festival or special event zones.
The city council shall be authorized to create temporary festival or special event zones
within the city. These zones shall authorize individuals and organizations the ability to manage
and assign fees to street vendors, street performers, roving carts, carnivals, public parking
activity in authorized city-owned parking areas, general outdoor entertainment, and use of other
city-owned public areas with conditions specifically stated in the city council action. As the
conditions for the creation of these temporary zones may change from year to year, all actions
must be renewed annually by the city council.
(Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03)
Secs. 66-16--66-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERMITTED USES
Sec. 66-36. Tables, chairs and benches on sidewalks or public ways.
(a) Any business holding a valid city food service establishment business license issued by
the City of Lewiston is permitted to place tables, chairs, and benches on or above any city
sidewalk or public way (not used for vehicular traffic) and must comply with the
following conditions:
(1) Be situated in front of the physical boundaries of the authorized business so as not
to exceed the physical dimensions of the facility exterior as it is situated within
the structure or building unless specifically authorized to do so by the city;
(2) Be consistent and compatible in style and color, be easily cleanable, made of
metal or wood which may be painted, stained or covered with a plastic coating,
and be of sufficient weight so as not to be moved by wind gusts of 40 miles per
hour;
(3) Only be placed during operational hours and removed at the end of operational
hours each day;
(4) Be temporarily removed in any instance where the objects or devices: restrict or
prevent the city from conducting normal or emergency sidewalk maintenance
operations or under any condition in which there is a request for temporary
removal from the police department, fire department, public works department
relating to maintenance or public safety activity; or removed in conjunction with
special events;
(5) Provide adequate trash receptacles;
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:11
(6) Ensure that there is no less than six feet of passable area, clear of any
obstructions, for pedestrians;
(7) Comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code;
(8) Any damage to public property, including but not limited to grease stain, shall be
repaired by the public works department at the expense of the business at issue.
(9) The police department, fire department, or public works department may on an
annual basis prohibit any business from placing tables, chairs, and benches on
sidewalks or public ways in situations whereby such activity results in adverse
impacts to adjoining businesses, pedestrians or motorists.
(b) Any business located in the Centreville District holding a valid city food service
establishment business license issued by the City of Lewiston is permitted to place tables,
chairs, benches, and barriers not to exceed 42"in height on or above any city sidewalk or
public way (not used for vehicular traffic) and must comply with above items (1), (2), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (8), (9) and the following conditions:
(1) Notwithstanding item (3) above, tables chairs, benches, and barriers may be located
on sidewalks continuously from May 15 to October 15;
(2) Notwithstanding Appendix A, Article XII, Section 16 of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Lewiston, the business name may be placed one or more times on barriers
without a sign permit; however, no other advertising is permitted.
(3) Payment and receipt of an annual permit issued by the public works department.
(Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03; Ord. No. 11-08, 9-15-11)
Sec. 66-37. City exemption.
The City of Lewiston is exempt from all provisions restricting or prohibiting the
placement of any object or device, temporary or permanent, on or above any city sidewalk,
street, easement or public way unless explicitly stated within the City Code.
(Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03)
Sec. 66-38. Temporary signage.
Any commercial establishment is permitted to place one temporary sign per business
location on or above the sidewalk or public way (not used for vehicular traffic) that must:
(1) Not exceed, relative to the entire sign structure, eight square feet per side
consistent with the city sign ordinance, Appendix A, Article 12, section 16(C)(2)
a.2;
(2) Not display any other commercial logo or business other than the name and logo
of the authorized retail establishment and those items being sold by the
establishment;
(3) Be placed in a manner which provides for no less than five feet of passable area
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:12
for pedestrians nor in a manner which creates an obstruction interfering with
vehicular traffic site lines;
(4) Must be of sufficient weight so as not to be moved by under normal
meteorological conditions;
(5) Be temporarily removed in any instance where the objects or devices: Restrict or
prevent the city from conducting normal or emergency sidewalk maintenance
operations or under any condition in which there is a request for temporary
removal from the police department or fire department relating to public safety
activity; or removed per request or special order from the city administrator or
city council to temporarily remove items in conjunction with special events;
(6) Comply with all applicable provisions of the City Code;
(7) Shall only be placed during operational hours and must be removed at the end of
operational hours each day.
(Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03)
Sec. 66-39. Vending, dispensing machines, drop boxes, and other merchandise devices.
No person, organization or other entity may place any vending, dispensing, drop boxes
(such as those used by parcel and mail delivery services) and any other merchandise or product
device or unit on any sidewalk or public way (not used for vehicular traffic) without the specific
authorization of the city clerk's office who shall, with the prior approval of the code enforcement
office, approve the specific location for each unit; approve the units placement insuring that it is
adequately secured so as not to pose a safety risk to pedestrians or vehicles; insure that the unit
presents a reasonable physical appearance; will require annual permitting and fee for each unit in
accordance with the city fee schedule; and possess the authority to waive any fee for any unit
which does not require the public to pay for merchandise or products dropped into or contained
within the unit. All vending, dispensing and other merchandise or product units authorized under
this section must comply with all applicable provisions of the city code. The city will reserve the
right to request that the owner of any unit authorized in this section be temporarily removed.
The city code enforcement office shall have the authority to order any units removal,
after reasonable notice has been given to the owner, if the unit is not compliant with the
conditions of this section.
(Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03)
Secs. 66-40--66-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OBSTRUCTIONS
Sec. 66-71. Obstructing sidewalk.
(a) Unless otherwise permitted or authorized in this chapter, no person, organization or other
entity shall pile, deposit or place or cause or permit to be piled, deposited or placed any
rubbish, wood, coal, merchandise, dirt, impediment or obstruction of any kind, upon or
over any sidewalk; nor to occupy or obstruct any sidewalk so as to interfere with the
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:13
convenient use of the sidewalk by all pedestrians.
(b) The prohibition set out in subsection (a) of this section shall not extend to any goods and
articles or merchandise that may be exposed or exhibited for sale in front of any shop;
provided, that the articles do not extend more than one foot from the building into or
upon the sidewalk.
(Code 1982, § 24-44; Ord. No. 03-11, 8-14-03)
Sec. 66-72. Cellar doors, openings regulated.
No person shall erect, construct, maintain or keep any cellar door, or passageway into any
cellar, basement or opening of any kind, extending into, or occupying any part of any street or
sidewalk, unless such doorway, passageway, or opening be kept covered with a suitable and
substantial plank covering or grate, level with the sidewalk or street. (Code 1982, § 24-45)
Sec. 66-73. Permission, bond required to move building.
(a) The provisions of this section shall supplement the requirements of the building code
relative to the moving of buildings.
(b) No person shall haul, move or transport any building through any street in the city
without first obtaining permission to do so from both the chief of police and the director
of public works. The latter is empowered to require the posting of a bond with good and
sufficient sureties in a sum adequate to indemnify the city for any loss or damage
sustained by such moving. Any person aggrieved by a decision of either of the foregoing
officials may appeal to the city council at their next posted meeting.
(Code 1982, § 24-46)
State law references: Municipal permits required when moving heavy objects, state permits required when state
ways are used, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1703.
Sec. 66-74. Auction sales regulated.
No goods or other property shall be sold at an auction in any street or upon any sidewalk
or other public place within the city, or from a building to any person on any street, without a
permit from the council or some other person legally authorized to grant permits.
(Code 1982, § 24-47)
State law references: Local license for auctions required, 32 M.R.S.A. § 255.
Sec. 66-75. Awnings and shades.
No person shall place, establish or maintain any awning or shade before his place of business or
dwelling house over any part of any street or sidewalk unless the awning or shade is safely made,
fixed, supported and maintained so as in no way to incommode pedestrians, and so that the
lowest part of such awning or shade shall be at least eight feet in height above the sidewalk or
street. (Code 1982, § 24-48)
Sec. 66-76. Permit required; exceptions; inspection, removal.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:14
(a) No person shall obstruct with construction work or barriers or obstructions of any kind
any street or sidewalk in the city without first obtaining a permit in writing from the
director of public works and without faithfully complying with the conditions of such
permit, except that, in cases of emergency, such necessary obstruction may be made
without first obtaining such permit, provided that the director is notified thereof within a
reasonable time thereafter.
(b) Any person causing an obstruction pursuant to this section shall promptly notify the
director of public works that such obstruction has been completed, and it shall be the duty
of the director to inspect such obstruction. Whenever, in the opinion of the director, the
obstruction does not conform to the conditions of the permit issued, he shall order such
person to conform to such conditions or to remove such obstruction and charge the cost
thereof to the person responsible for the obstruction.
(Code 1982, § 24-49)
Secs. 66-77--66-95. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 66-96. Administration and enforcement.
The city shall adopt standards for the design and construction of streets and sidewalks in
the City of Lewiston through the issuance of a policy (hereinafter, the "Policy for the Design and
Construction of Streets and Sidewalks" or the "street and sidewalk policy"). Such street and
sidewalk policy shall apply to public and private streets and sidewalks, and mobile home park
roads. The administration and enforcement of the design and construction standards required by
this article and the policy for the laying out and acceptance of streets and sidewalks shall rest
with the director of public services.
The city's policy for design and construction of streets and sidewalks shall be contained
in the city's regulatory standards manual.
(Code 1982, § 24-60; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-97. Waiver of design or construction standards for acceptance of streets.
No way shall be laid out or accepted as a street unless constructed in accordance with the
conditions and specifications contained in the policy for the design and construction of streets
and sidewalks, with the following exceptions:
(1) If a way substantially meets the requirements of the policy for the design and
construction of streets and sidewalks, a waiver of some of the specifications
contained in the policy the for design and construction of streets and sidewalks
may be granted by joint agreement of the director of public services and the city
engineer after determining that such a waiver is appropriate because of prior city
actions, previous development, unique physical site constraints imposed by public
policy imperatives, including the preservation of natural resources, habitat, and
wetlands, or the promotion of urban small-lot redevelopment, or undue hardship;
and
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:15
(2) The way was existing and in use prior to December 31, 1985.
Such acceptance shall be at the discretion of the city council and under whatever
conditions it may impose, including sharing in construction and upgrading costs
and obtaining deeds and/or indemnity agreements from all abutters. Such ways
shall conform to the design or construction standards to the fullest extent
practicable.
(Code 1982, § 24-61; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-98. Compliance to be at owner's expense; bond.
Compliance with the conditions and specifications of this article, when applicable to
private property, shall be at the sole expense of the property owner, his agent, and/or the
developer of the improvements, and will render a street constructed on private land eligible for
consideration by the city council for the laying out and acceptance as a street for the use of the
city. Provided, however, that a street may be eligible for acceptance as aforesaid if the property
owner shall post a bond with the city clerk in an amount to be determined by the city council on
recommendation of the director of public services, guaranteeing compliance with the
requirements and specifications of this article and indemnifying the city against claims for
property damage and personal injury suffered upon such street prior to the performance of the
conditions of such bond. Failure to comply with the conditions of such bond within one year
from the date of the acceptance of such street constitutes a breach thereof, in which event the city
council shall fulfill the requirements of this article and recover the cost thereof in an action upon
such bond to be brought in the name of the city. The city council shall require the joint written
certification of the director of public services and the city engineer that all the specifications
have been complied with, or that a bond has been posted as provided in this section.
(Code 1982, § 24-62; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-99. Acceptance of public easements.
(a) Any way which does not meet the requirements for a waiver under the provisions of
section 66-97 may be considered for acceptance by the city as a public easement. An
accepted public easement is not an accepted street and the city has no obligation to
construct, maintain or repair such an accepted public easement or provide municipal
services. In order to be accepted as a public easement, the following is necessary:
(1) The way does not or cannot meet the requirements for a waiver under section 66-
97;
(2) A waiver of the specifications contained in the policy for design and construction
of streets and sidewalks must be granted by the joint agreement of the director of
public services and the city engineer after determining that such a waiver is
appropriate because of prior city actions, previous development, or undue
hardship;
(3) The way where the accepted public easement is to be located was existing and in
use prior to December 31, 1985;
(4) The way connects two existing accepted streets or is the sole means of access for
two or more lots, at least two of which contain residential, commercial or
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:16
industrial buildings; and
(5) A quitclaim deed is obtained from all of the abutters to the city creating a public
easement and the abutters agree to indemnify and save the city harmless from all
liability.
(Code 1982, § 24-63; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-100. Acceptance of prescriptive or dedicated ways as accepted streets.
Any way in the city for which there is no record of a laying out or acceptance by the
state, county or the city, which has been used as a public street for at least 20 years or has
otherwise been dedicated to public use, for which municipal services have been provided during
this entire period of time, and which meet all of the design, width and construction standards
contained in the policy for design and construction of streets and sidewalks, may be declared to
be an accepted street by the city council. Quitclaim deeds from abutters are not required. Such
action shall constitute evidence of an acceptance of such public streets that have previously been
dedicated to public use by prescription or otherwise.
(Code 1982, § 24-64; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-101. Standards for construction of streets.
Except as provided in section 66-97 of this article, the construction or substantial repair
of any public or private street or sidewalk, existing as of the effective date of this article shall
comply with the City of Lewiston Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and
Sidewalks. In addition, streets and sidewalks constructed to serve a subdivision must meet any
additional requirements contained in the subdivision regulations of the city.
(Code 1982, § 24-65; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-102. Requirements for street acceptance.
Except as provided in section 66-97 of this article, no private way shall be accepted as a
public street unless it meets all applicable requirements of the City of Lewiston Policy for
Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(Code 1982, § 24-66; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-103. Acceptance of prescriptive or dedicated ways as accepted public easements.
Any way in the city for which there is no record of a laying out or acceptance by the
state, county or the city, which has been used by the public for at least 20 years, or has otherwise
been dedicated to public use, but which cannot meet all of the design, width and construction
standards contained in the city's policy for design and construction of streets and sidewalks, may
be declared to be an accepted public easement by the city council provided a waiver of the
specifications contained in the city's policy for design and construction of streets and sidewalks
is granted by the joint agreement of the director of public services and the city engineer after
determining that such a waiver is appropriate because of prior city action, previous development,
or undue hardship. Quitclaim deeds from abutters are not required. Such action shall constitute
evidence of an acceptance of such public easements that have previously been dedicated to
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:17
public use by prescription or otherwise.
(Code 1982, § 24-67; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 66-104. Purpose and mission
The purpose of the Complete Streets Committee is to
(1) Promote and advise the development of public infrastructure which supports a multimodal
transportation system for all users, not strictly motor vehicles, and includes the
best design practices for enhancing safety as well as community and economic
development;
(2) Develop and recommend policies to the respective governing bodies and planning
agencies that address and support all modes of transportation in Lewiston Auburn;
(3) Advise the respective public works and engineering departments on how all modes of
travel can be accommodated in street, highway, trail, and open space projects;
(Ord. No. 17-05, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-105. Appointment and membership
(1) The Committee shall consist of nine (9) members as follows: 4 residents of the City of
Auburn, 4 residents of the City of Lewiston, and 1 representative of an organization
directly involved in issues of public health and wellness. A city councilor may be
appointed as a resident.
(2) The residents of each community shall be appointed in accordance with the standard
procedures employed by each community for such appointments. The representative of
an organization directly involved in issues of public health shall be appointed by majority
vote of the members of the full committee.
(3) The initial term for resident members shall be three (3) years, as shall the term of the
representative of a public health organization. These terms shall run from the first day of
January of the year in which the appointment is made. At the time the initial
appointments are made, the appointing authority shall assign each resident member to a
term with two member appointed to a one year term; one to a two year term; and one to a
three year term. Members shall remain in office until their successors are appointed.
(4) Vacancies shall be filled following the same process employed for the initial appointment
of members.
(5) A vacancy shall be declared if any member of the committee fails to attend three
consecutive regular meetings of the committee without being excused by the committee
chair.
(Ord. No. 17-05, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-106. Duties and responsibilities
The Complete Streets Committee shall:
(1) Follow the City’s Complete Streets Policy, oversee its implementation, and review the
policy every 2 years to recommend changes as appropriate;
(2) Serve as the primary resource representing Lewiston and Auburn in the update of
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:18
Regional and Statewide plans dealing with transportation issues involving bicycles,
pedestrians, public transportation, and other non-automobile related transportation issues;
(3) Develop and recommend policies and ordinances for passage by the City Councils in
support of alternative modes of transportation;
(4) Review and comment on existing transportation projects including regionally approved
projects, municipally initiated projects, and improvements originating from Traffic
Movement Permits associated with development projects; and
(5) Participate with appropriate city and state departments, committees, and metropolitan
planning organizations in planning coordinated multi-modal transportation systems in LA
and the surrounding region, such as rail, bus, and air.
(Ord. No. 17-05, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-107. Organization
(1) The Committee shall have the following officers: Chair, vice-chair, and secretary, each
of whom shall be selected by a majority of the members of the committee at its first
meeting in January of each year. The chair shall preside over all meetings of the board,
shall supervise the affairs of the board, and shall perform such other duties as may be
assigned to the office by the committee. The vice-chair shall assist the chair in carrying
out the latter’s duties and shall preside at meetings in the chair’s absence. The secretary
shall be responsible for preparing and distributing committee agendas and minutes and
ensuring that the legal posting requirements are met.
(2) A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting shall consist of at least six members
and at least six concurring votes shall be necessary to constitute an action on any matter.
(3) The committee shall meet at least quarterly and may meet more frequently at the call of
the chair.
(4) Unless otherwise prescribed by this Division or by bylaws established by the Committee,
the Committee shall operate in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order.
(Ord. No. 17-05, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-108. Staff support
The City Manager/Administrator of each community shall designate a planning or public works
staff member to serve as a liaison to the committee. (Ord. No. 17-05, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-109. Complete streets
The City of Lewiston will plan for, design, construct, operate, and maintain an appropriate and
integrated transportation system that will meet the needs of motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists,
wheelchair users, transit vehicles and riders, freight haulers, emergency responders, and residents
of all ages and abilities.
(1) Transportation facilities that support the concept of complete streets include, but are not
limited to, pavement markings and signs; street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalk and
pedestrian safety improvements; Americans with Disabilities Act and Title VI
compliance; transit accommodations; bicycle accommodations including intersection
detection and appropriate signage and markings; and streetscapes that appeal to and
promote pedestrian use.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:19
(2) The system’s design will be consistent with and supportive of local neighborhoods,
recognizing that transportation needs vary and must be balanced in a flexible, safe, and
cost effective manner.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-110. Projects
Those involved in the planning and design of projects within the public right-of-way will
give consideration to all users and modes of travel from the start of planning and design
work. Transportation improvements shall be viewed as opportunities to create safer, more
accessible streets for all users. This shall apply to new construction, reconstruction, and
rehabilitation. The Complete Streets Committee shall be briefed on potential future projects
of this nature during or immediately following the annual development of the city’s capital
improvement program. This will allow the Committee to provide its views regarding
complete streets policy early in the planning and design process. (Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-111. Exceptions
Exceptions to this policy may be made under the circumstances listed below:
(1) Street projects may exclude those elements of this policy that would require the
accommodation of street uses prohibited by law;
(2) Ordinary maintenance activities such as mowing, snowplowing, sweeping, spot repair,
joint or crack sealing, or pothole filling do not require that elements of this policy be
applied beyond the scope of that maintenance activity;
(3) Ordinary maintenance paving projects may only exclude the elements of this policy that
would require increasing pavement width. However, when such projects do occur, the
condition of existing facilities supporting alternate transportation modes should be
evaluated as well as the appropriateness of modifying existing pavement markings and
signage that supports such alternate modes. This exception does not apply to street
reconstruction projects;
(4) Street reconstruction projects and maintenance paving projects which involve widening
pavement may exclude elements of this policy when the accommodation of a specific use
is expected to:
(a) require more space than is physically available, or
(b) be located where both current and future demand is proven absent, or
(c) drastically increase project costs and equivalent alternatives exist within close
proximity, or
(d) have adverse impacts on environmental resources such as streams, wetlands,
floodplains, or on historic structures or sites above and beyond the impacts of
currently existing infrastructure.
(5) In order for an exception to be granted under the conditions stated above and prior to
finalizing the design and budget for the intended project, the City Engineer and Director
of Public Works must first consult with the City Planner and City Administrator. If the
City Administrator concludes that an exception to the policy is warranted, the
Administrator or the staff representative to the Complete Streets Committee shall consult
with the Committee regarding the project and the requested exception. If, after this
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:20
consultation, a difference of opinion exists between the Committee and staff regarding an
exception that has been granted, the Committee may forward its concerns to the City
Council for its consideration.
(6) The City Council may grant such other exceptions as it sees fit.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-112. Intergovernmental cooperation
The City will cooperate with the City of Auburn and with other transportation agencies
including the Maine Department of Transportation (MDOT) and Androscoggin
Transportation Resource Center (ATRC) to ensure the principles and practices of complete
streets are embedded within their planning, design, construction, and maintenance activities.
The two cities will specifically cooperate to ensure the transportation network flows
seamlessly between the two communities in accordance with local and regional road, transit,
bicycle, and pedestrian plans and mutually agreed upon design criteria.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-113. Design criteria
The City, through its Public Works Department, shall develop and adopt design criteria,
standards and guidelines based upon recognized best practices in street design, construction, and
operation. To the greatest extent possible, the City shall coordinate with the City of Auburn to
adopt the same standards with particular emphasis on pedestrian and bicycle markings and
wayfinding signage. Resources to be referenced in developing these standards shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to, the latest editions of: American Association of State Highway
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,
Guide for Planning, Designing, and Operating Pedestrian Facilities, and Guide for the
Development of Bicycle Facilities; Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Designing
Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach; National Association of City
Transportation Officials (NACTO) Urban Bikeway Design Guide; U.S. Access Board Public
Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines; Androscoggin Transportation Resource Center (ATRC)
Complete Streets, A Guide to Best Management and Design Practice; Highway Capacity Manual
and Highway Safety Manual; the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; and any
applicable policies and guidance issued by the Maine Department of Transportation.
The Cities will be permitted to consider innovative or non-traditional design options that provide
a comparable level of safety and utility for users as those listed above.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-114. Community context
Implementation of this Policy shall take into account the goal of enhancing the context and
character of the surrounding built and natural environments. Transportation facilities, including
roads, should be adapted to fit and enhance the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:21
Sec. 66-115. Network
Special attention should be given to projects which enhance the overall transportation system and
its connectivity. Specifically, high priority should be given to:
(1) Corridors providing primary access to one or more significant destinations such as a
parks or recreation areas, schools, shopping/commercial areas, public transportation, or
employment centers;
(2) Corridors serving a relatively high number of users of non-motorized transportation
modes;
(3) Corridors providing important continuity or connectivity links to existing pedestrian or
bicycle networks;
(4) Projects identified in regional or local bicycle pedestrian plans prepared by organizations
such as the ATRC and other associated groups.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-116. Performance measures
The City Administrator and/or designee shall report to the Planning Board and City Council on
an annual basis on the transportation projects undertaken within the prior year and planned
within the coming year and the extent to which each of these projects has met the Complete
Streets ordinance. (Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Sec. 66-117. Implementation
This policy will be primarily implemented through planning comprehensive complete streets
networks regionally and within each city.
Additional implementation activities will include, but not be limited to: developing project
checklists that incorporate complete streets elements in the Cities’ overall design processes;
annual review of capital improvement plans and unified planning work programs; establishing
design manuals that clearly set forth the complete streets standards; and directing the Planning
Boards to evaluate changes to the Cities’ respective land development codes that will extend the
complete streets concept into private developments through appropriate subdivision and site plan
regulations.
(Ord. No. 17-06, 7-20-17)
Secs. 66-118--66-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PARADES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 66-126--66-135. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:22
Sec. 66-136. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Parade means any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any
kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in this city.
Parade permit means a permit as required by this division.
(Code 1982, § 26-246)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 66-137. Required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade
permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police.
(Code 1982, § 26-247)
Sec. 66-138. Exceptions.
This division shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational
activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision
of the proper school authorities;
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Code 1982, § 26-256)
Sec. 66-139. Application.
(a) A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of
police on forms provided by such officer not less than ten days before the date on which
it is proposed to conduct the parade. The chief of police, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this division which is
filed less than ten days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted.
(b) The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such
parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization,
the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization,
and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade
chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:23
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will
constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(9) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly
area or areas.
(10) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other
than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police
a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade,
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
(11) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue.
(Code 1982, § 26-248)
Sec. 66-140. Standards for issuance.
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for under this division when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained,
he finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
(2) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers of this city to properly police the line of movement and the areas
contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this city;
(3) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of
ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of this city other
than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous
thereto;
(4) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the
parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or
ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
(5) The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire;
(6) The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property, to provide disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
(7) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; and
(8) The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product,
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:24
cause, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
(Code 1982, § 26-250)
Sec. 66-141. Notice of permit rejection.
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the
applicant, within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his
action.
(Code 1982, § 26-251)
Sec. 66-142. Alternative permit.
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to
authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named
by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after
notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of
police. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a
parade permit under, this division.
(Code 1982, § 26-252)
Sec. 66-143. Contents.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(1) Starting time;
(2) The streets to be traversed by the parade;
(3) The maximum length of the parade;
(4) Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this division.
(Code 1982, § 26-253)
Sec. 66-144. Fee.
There shall be no fee for a parade permit.
(Code 1982, § 26-249)
Sec. 66-145. Revocation.
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit upon application of
the standards for issuance as set forth in this division.
(Code 1982, § 26-254)
Sec. 66-146. Compliance with permit and laws.
A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:25
with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(Code 1982, § 26-255)
Secs. 66-147--66-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. OUTER LISBON STREET TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE
Sec. 66-160. Purpose.
This article imposes an impact fee on land development requiring development review
under Appendix A, Article XIII of the City of Lewiston's Zoning and Land Use Code. These fees
will be used to upgrade roads and related facilities necessitated by new development that impacts
traffic along Outer Lisbon Street, as defined herein. It also provides for the placement of impact
fee revenues into a traffic impact fee trust fund established for that purpose and for the
administration of the Outer Lisbon Street Traffic Impact Fee Ordinance, including the
expenditure of funds derived from traffic impact fees and the refunds of unexpended funds.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-161. Legislative findings.
The Lewiston City Council finds, determines and declares as follows:
(1) The city will need to upgrade and expand road infrastructure along Outer Lisbon
Street as a result of expected development in the area. To maintain adequate
levels of service along Outer Lisbon Street, the existing road system must be
expanded to accommodate future traffic increases safely and without decreasing
current levels of service. This must be done to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare;
(2) The State of Maine has authorized municipalities to adopt impact fees for various
purposes, including the construction of off-site capital improvements such as
roads and traffic control devices, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354;
(3) The imposition of impact fees is a preferred method of insuring that new
development bears a proportionate share of the cost of capital investments
necessary to accommodate such development. Appropriate locations for new
development in Lewiston and the capital improvements necessary to
accommodate such development are consistent with the city's comprehensive plan
and capital improvements program;
(4) New development generates additional traffic, necessitating the acquisition of
rights-of-way, road construction and road improvements;
(5) The impact fee has been derived from the city's determination that development
along Outer Lisbon Street will require that road capacity is expanded by widening
it to five lanes or through similar infrastructure upgrades. The city anticipates
funding ten percent of the necessary road improvements, with remaining funding
provided by state and federal sources. The city's effort to seek alternative sources
of funding will reduce the amount of the impact fee sought under this article to
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:26
five percent of the cost of impacts created by new development.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-162. Title, authority, and applicability.
(a) Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Outer Lisbon Street Traffic
Impact Fee Ordinance."
(b) Authority. The Lewiston City Council has the authority to enact this ordinance pursuant
to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4354 and its statutory and constitutional home rule powers.
(c) Applicability. This article shall apply to all development requiring a traffic movement
permit issued on or after August 9, 2005 that would require an expansion of road capacity
along Outer Lisbon Street based on the four-lane alignment that existed on August 9,
2005.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-163. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
"Capital improvement" includes transportation planning, preliminary engineering,
engineering design studies, land surveys, right-of-way acquisition, engineering, permitting and
construction of all the necessary features for any public infrastructure, including but not limited
to:
(1) Construction of new through lanes;
(2) Construction of new turn lanes;
(3) Construction of new bridges;
(4) Construction of new drainage facilities in conjunction with new roadway
construction;
(5) Purchase and installation of traffic signalization (including new and
upgraded signalization);
(6) Construction of curbs, medians, and shoulders;
(7) Relocating utilities to accommodate new roadway construction;
(8) Construction of public utilities to accommodate new development;
(9) Construction or implementation of interim measures to address increased
transportation capacity needs or demands created by new development
during the period prior to construction of permanent improvements.
Capital improvements do not include site-related improvements defined herein.
"Developer" is a person or entity commencing a land development activity which
generates or attracts traffic on Outer Lisbon Street and which requires a traffic movement permit.
"Development" is any change in land use or any construction of buildings or structures or
any change in the use of any structure along Outer Lisbon Street which requires a traffic
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:27
movement permit.
"Expansion of road capacity" means all road and intersection capacity enhancements,
including but not limited to: extensions, widening, intersection improvements, upgrading
signalization, and expansion of bridges.
"Mandatory or required rights-of-way dedications and/or roadway improvements" means
such non-compensated dedications and/or roadway improvements as required by a traffic
movement permit.
"Outer Lisbon Street" includes all land serviced by Lisbon Street, from its intersection
with Pleasant Street to the Lewiston/Lisbon town line;
"Roads" means and includes arterial streets and transportation facilities associated with
the arterial and state-aid highway network along Outer Lisbon Street and under the jurisdiction
of the city or the State of Maine.
"Site related improvements" are capital improvements and right-of-way dedications for
direct access improvements to and/or within the development in question. Direct access
improvements include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Access roads leading to the development;
(2) Driveways and roads within the development;
(3) Acceleration and deceleration lanes, and right and left turn lanes leading to
those roads and driveways; and
(4) Traffic control measurers for those roads and driveways.
"Traffic movement permit" is a permit obtained from the City of Lewiston or Maine
Department of Transportation for any development that generates 100 or more passenger car
equivalents at peak hour.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-164. Imposition of traffic impact fee.
(a) Any developer who, on or after August 9, 2005, requires a traffic movement permit along
Outer Lisbon Street is hereby required to pay a traffic impact fee in the manner and
amount set forth in this article. Preliminary determinations regarding whether a proposed
development will generate traffic along Outer Lisbon Street shall be made by the
developer and provided to the city's department of planning and code enforcement and, if
necessary, the city's traffic engineer at the developer's expense. Actual impacts shall be
determined by a traffic study prepared by a traffic engineer at the developer's expense and
approved by the city's consulting engineer, unless the developer agrees with the city's
determination.
(b) No traffic movement permit or building permit for any activity requiring payment of an
impact fee pursuant to this article shall be issued unless and until the traffic impact fee
hereby required has been paid.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:28
Sec. 66-165. Computation of traffic impact fee.
(a) Any development requiring a traffic movement permit, which, in the city's judgment,
requires the creation of a fifth travel lane shall pay a traffic impact fee equal to five
percent of the cost of upgrading Outer Lisbon Street's four-lane configuration existing as
of August 9, 2005 to five lanes (four travel lanes and an center turning lane) sufficient to
address impacts created by the development, based on a traffic engineering study and the
size and nature of the development.
(b) Planning and code enforcement staff shall apply the impact fee to the development and
shall make a final determination as to the amount of the fee to be imposed, net of any
applicable credits. Staff may request additional information from the developer if
necessary to apply the fee. The developer may submit its own calculation of costs and
any other information related to the impact of the development on Outer Lisbon Street.
Staff shall consider information submitted by the developer, but is not required to accept
information it deems to be inaccurate or unreliable.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-166. Payment of fee.
(a) The developer shall pay the traffic impact fee required by this article to the department of
planning and code enforcement prior to the issuance of a traffic movement permit or
building permit.
(b) All funds collected shall be properly identified as traffic impact fees and promptly
transferred for deposit in the traffic impact fee trust fund to be used solely for the
purposes specified in this article.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-167. Traffic impact fee trust fund established.
(a) There is hereby established a traffic impact fee trust fund, to be used to accomplish the
goals of this article, in accordance with section 66-168 of this article.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-168. Use of funds.
(a) Funds collected from traffic impact fees shall be used for the purpose of capital
improvements to, and the expansion of, transportation facilities associated with Outer
Lisbon Street.
(b) No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance.
(c) Funds shall be used exclusively for capital improvements within the traffic impact fee
area.
(d) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of
capital facilities for which traffic impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used
to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the
facilities provided are of the type described in subsection (a) of this section.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Lewiston Code Chapter 66
CH 66:29
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-169. Refund of fees.
(a) If a building permit is surrendered or expires without commencement of construction, the
developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a
condition for its issuance, except that the city shall retain three percent of the impact fee
paid to offset a portion of the costs of collection. A request for a refund shall be made in
writing to the department of planning and code enforcement not later than 15 days after
the expiration of the permit.
(b) Any funds not expended or obligated by contract by the end of the calendar quarter
immediately following 15 years from the date the fee was paid shall, upon application of
the developer, be returned to the developer, provided the developer submits an
application for refund of the fee to the city planning and code enforcement department
within 180 days of the end of the 15-year period.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Sec. 66-170. Credits
(a) A credit against the impact fee otherwise due may be given when a developer is required
to make road improvements other than an expansion from a four-lane to five-lane
configuration pursuant to a traffic movement permit. Credit shall be limited to road
improvements associated with Outer Lisbon Street intersections, pursuant to the traffic
movement permit. In no event shall credit be given for site related improvements, as
defined in this article.
(b) Credit shall be calculated in the following manner for the above referenced road
improvements as required by the aforementioned traffic movement permit: 50 percent of
the value of required road improvements as determined pursuant to section 66-165 may
be applied as credit against the impact fee. In no event shall the credit exceed the amount
of the otherwise applicable impact fee, or be applied against unrelated impact fee items.
(c) The developer shall provide documentation indicating the cost of the improvements
required for the project versus the impact fee. The city shall consider the documentation
submitted by the developer but is not required to accept any documentation which it
deems to be inaccurate or unreliable.
(d) A credit under this section will be made up to the amount of the impact fee otherwise
due, and will not result in any payment of funds to the developer in the event the credit
due under this section exceeds the impact fee assessed.
(Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05; Ord. No. 06-03, 3-23-06)
Sec. 66-171. Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion thereof. (Ord. No. 05-17, 11-17-05)
Chapters 67-69
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:1
Chapter 70
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
Article I. In General
Sec. 70-1. State laws incorporated.
Sec. 70-2. Definitions.
Sec. 70-3. Emergency or temporary regulations.
Sec. 70-4. Authority of police and fire department officials.
Sec. 70-5. Obedience to police and fire department members.
Sec. 70-6. Public employees to obey regulations.
Sec. 70-7. Duty to report accident.
Sec. 70-8. Regulations apply to emergency vehicles; duty of drivers; exceptions to
regulations.
Sec. 70-9. Pushing carts, riding animals, driving animal-drawn vehicles regulated.
Sec. 70-10. Removal of traffic ticket.
Sec. 70-11. Noisy loading and unloading prohibited.
Secs. 70-12--70-18. Reserved.
Sec. 70-19. Habitual parking violators--Statement of policy.
Sec. 70-20. Same--Definitions.
Sec. 70-21. Same--Removal and impoundment of vehicles.
Sec. 70-22. Same--Identification of habitual violators.
Sec. 70-23. Same--Procedure for removal; notice to owner.
Sec. 70-24. Same--Conditions for release of vehicle.
Sec. 70-25. Same--Procedures applicable to towing and impoundment.
Sec. 70-26. Same--Interference with enforcement.
Sec. 70-27. Same--Collection of out-of-town violations.
Sec. 70-28. Same--Procedures and prohibitions on renewal of registration.
Secs. 70-29--70-35. Reserved.
Article II. Traffic Control Devices
Sec. 70-36. Authority to install.
Sec. 70-37. Devices to be uniform; official devices.
Sec. 70-38. Obedience to devices; missing and illegible signs.
Sec. 70-39. Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings; nuisance, removal.
Sec. 70-40. Interference with devices.
Sec. 70-41. Existing signs, signals, devices confirmed.
Sec. 70-42. Location of light signals.
Sec. 70-43. Location of stop signs.
Sec. 70-44. Location of slow signs.
Sec. 70-45. Location of yield signs.
Sec. 70-46. Location of one-way streets.
Sec. 70-47. Establishment of taxicab zones.
Sec. 70-48. Establishment of bus stops.
Sec. 70-49. Authority to designate temporary one-way streets.
Sec. 70-50. Authority to place signs at places of assemblage.
Secs. 70-51--70-70. Reserved.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:2
Article III. Operation
Sec. 70-71. Processions; funeral identification.
Sec. 70-72. Driving in processions.
Sec. 70-73. Driving through processions prohibited; exception.
Sec. 70-74. Limitation on transporting mobile, modular or prefabricated homes.
Sec. 70-75. Warning devices.
Sec. 70-76. Entering through street.
Sec. 70-77. Obedience to stop signs.
Sec. 70-78. Obedience to slow signs.
Sec. 70-79. Obedience to yield signs.
Sec. 70-80. Obedience to one-way streets.
Sec. 70-81. Speed regulations generally.
Sec. 70-82. Excess speed; prima facie evidence.
Sec. 70-83. Speed limits at specific locations.
Sec. 70-84. Right-of-way.
Sec. 70-85. Entering traffic from curb.
Sec. 70-86. Entering from alley or private driveway.
Sec. 70-87. Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians.
Sec. 70-88. Obstructing traffic at intersection, crosswalk.
Sec. 70-89. Procedure for right turn.
Sec. 70-90. Procedure for left turns.
Sec. 70-91. Left turn prohibited at certain intersections.
Sec. 70-92. Turning around restricted.
Sec. 70-93. Passing.
Sec. 70-94. Backing limitation.
Sec. 70-95. Passing vehicle stopped for pedestrians.
Sec. 70-96. Duty on approach of emergency vehicles.
Sec. 70-97. Following and meeting snowplows.
Sec. 70-98. Following, parking near fire apparatus.
Sec. 70-99. Authority to establish truck routes; use required.
Sec. 70-100. Heavy loads.
Sec. 70-101. Crossing fire hose.
Sec. 70-102. Littering the streets prohibited.
Sec. 70-103. Mufflers regulated.
Sec. 70-104. Riding on motorcycles.
Sec. 70-105. No through traffic.
Sec. 70-106. Trucks and buses prohibited on certain streets.
Secs. 70-107--70-130. Reserved.
Article IV. Stopping, Standing and Parking
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 70-131. Regulations not exclusive.
Sec. 70-132. Liability of vehicle registrant.
Sec. 70-133. Exception for nonresidents.
Sec. 70-134. Alternate penalty provision, payment schedule.
Sec. 70-135. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:3
Sec. 70-136. Obstructing sidewalk.
Sec. 70-137. Fire zones.
Sec. 70-138. Parallel parking required, exception.
Sec. 70-139. Diagonal parking.
Sec. 70-140. Parking prohibited in specified places.
Sec. 70-141. Parking in alleys.
Sec. 70-142. Standing of large vehicles regulated.
Sec. 70-143. Truck loading and unloading in fire zone.
Sec. 70-144. Public utility vehicles.
Sec. 70-145. Interference with snow removal and sweeping, street paving, repairs.
Sec. 70-146. Parking to advertise, perform maintenance.
Sec. 70-147. Parking in front of theaters.
Sec. 70-148. Duty when leaving vehicle unattended.
Sec. 70-149. Abandonment of a vehicle; removal, expense.
Sec. 70-150. Authority to designate hazardous or congested places; parking restricted.
Sec. 70-151. Authority to regulate parking adjacent to school property.
Sec. 70-152. Lights on parked vehicles.
Sec. 70-153. Reserved.
Sec. 70-154. Parking prohibited on even-numbered sides of certain streets.
Sec. 70-155. Parking prohibited on odd-numbered sides of certain streets.
Sec. 70-156. Places where parking prohibited at all times, fire lanes.
Sec. 70-157. Limited daytime parking in business area.
Sec. 70-158. Parking time limited on streets.
Secs. 70-159--70-165. Reserved.
Sec. 70-166. Parking in alleys prohibited.
Sec. 70-167. Overnight parking prohibited.
Sec. 70-168. All-night parking.
Sec. 70-169. Daytime parking prohibited.
Sec. 70-170. Parking prohibited on Monday through Saturday.
Sec. 70-171. Parking prohibited between 2:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
Sec. 70-172. Restricted use of taxi zones, emergencies.
Sec. 70-173. Restricted use of bus stop zones.
Sec. 70-174. Bus and taxicab drivers regulated; time restriction.
Sec. 70-175. Other persons' use of bus stops and taxicab zones.
Sec. 70-176. Reserved parking spaces.
Sec. 70-177. Loading zones.
Sec. 70-178. Interference with snow removal.
Sec. 70-179. On-street parking by permit only.
Sec. 70-180. Student Drop Off and Pick Up Only.
Secs. 70-181--70-185. Reserved.
Division 2. Parking Meters
Sec. 70-186. Meter requirements.
Sec. 70-187. Authority to install.
Sec. 70-188. Reserved.
Sec. 70-189. Correct parking position required.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:4
Sec. 70-190. Coin required; overtime regulated.
Sec. 70-191. Failure to deposit coin.
Sec. 70-192. Reserved.
Sec. 70-193. Extension of parking time.
Sec. 70-194. Failure to deposit coin evidence of unlawful parking.
Sec. 70-195. Use of slugs.
Sec. 70-196. Tampering with meter.
Sec. 70-197. Fee schedule.
Sec. 70-198. Location, time limitations.
Secs. 70-199--70-240. Reserved.
Article V. Pedestrians
Sec. 70-241. Subject to traffic control signals.
Sec. 70-242. Authority to establish crosswalks.
Sec. 70-243. Use of crosswalks.
Sec. 70-244. Crossing at other than crosswalk.
Sec. 70-245. Crossing in business district.
Sec. 70-246. Drivers to exercise due care.
Secs. 70-247--70-265. Reserved.
Article VI. Bicycles
Sec. 70-266. Defined.
Sec. 70-267. Inspections.
Sec. 70-268. Reserved.
Sec. 70-269. Applicability of traffic laws.
Sec. 70-270. Obedience to traffic control devices.
Sec. 70-271. Parking.
Sec. 70-272. General operational regulations.
Sec. 70-273. Authority to prohibit operation on streets, sidewalks, paths; riding on
sidewalks.
Sec. 70-274. Equipment.
Sec. 70-275. Parent's, guardian's responsibility.
Sec. 70-276. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 70-277--70-299. Reserved.
Article VII. Vehicle Registration and Excise Tax Exemption
Sec. 70-300. Definitions.
Sec. 70-267. Exemption granted.
Sec. 70-268. Application.
Sec. 70-269. Effective date.
*Cross references: Attaching advertising materials to vehicles prohibited, § 6-6; racetracks, § 10-31 et seq.;
riding horses and driving vehicles on public grounds regulated, § 54-3; streets and sidewalks, ch. 66; vehicles for
hire, ch. 82.
State law references: Motor vehicles generally, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1 et seq.; municipal authority to enact traffic
ordinances, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:5
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. State laws incorporated.
All state motor vehicle laws are hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference. No
person shall violate any motor vehicle law of the state within the city.
(Code 1982, § 26-1)
Sec. 70-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning. Whenever any words, terms and phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this
section but are defined in the laws of the state regulating the operation of vehicles, then such
definition shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter.
Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle that has been left parked on any street in the city for
a period of over 24 hours.
Alley means a narrow way between buildings or giving access to the rear of buildings.
Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles,
public traffic emergency repair vehicles, ambulances and such emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the state
commissioner of transportation.
Business or residence district means the territory of the city contiguous to any way which
is built up with structures which are situated less than 150 feet apart for a distance of one-fourth
of a mile.
Commercial vehicle means any motor vehicle whose gross weight or registered weight
exceeds 6,000 pounds.
Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from
the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway; any portion of a
roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or
other markings on the surface.
Curb means the outer edge of a defined sidewalk, or either edge of the wrought or usually
traveled part of a way.
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
Handicapped means a vehicle which is registered and is being used by a person who is
permanently confined to a wheelchair or restricted to the permanent use of crutches or braces or
otherwise handicapped in such a way that his mobility is seriously restricted.
Individual parking space means a portion of the paved surface of the street, of sufficient
length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a vehicle to be parked as shall be
specified and marked off by the chief of police.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:6
Intersection means:
(1) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines,
or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which
join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which
vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in
conflict; or
(2) Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway
shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also
includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways
of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on tracks, but
not including motorized wheelchairs, snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 7821, and allterrain
vehicle as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 7851, unless the all-terrain vehicle is registered for
highway use by the secretary of state, provided that whenever an all-terrain vehicle is operated
on a public way, it shall be considered to be a "motor vehicle" within the meaning of this
provision.
Operator or driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a
motor vehicle.
Park, when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
Parking meter means a device which indicates thereon the length of time during which a
vehicle may be parked in a particular place, which shall have as a part thereof a receptacle or a
chamber for receiving and storing coins of United States money and a slot or place in which such
coin may be deposited; a timing mechanism to indicate the passage of the interval of time during
which parking is permissible and which shall have elapsed; also brief instructions as to its
operation.
Pedestrian means any person afoot.
Police officer means every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized
to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of traffic regulations.
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner,
but not by other persons.
Right-of-way means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a
roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:7
Stop, stopping or standing, when prohibited, means any stopping or standing, even
momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal.
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
Through street means every street or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing
such street and when stop signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter they shall mean standard time or
daylight saving time, as may be in current use in this city.
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances,
either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
Traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices, whether
immovable or whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, placed or erected by
authority of the council or the police chief for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 1971.
(Code 1982, § 26-2; Ord. No. 02-04, 4-18-02)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 70-3. Emergency or temporary regulations.
Whenever the chief of police and public works director, or their designees, shall deem it
advisable during an emergency, and only for such a period of time as is necessitated for public
safety or convenience, they shall have the power and authority to temporarily impose a parking
ban on any and all streets within the city. The chief of police shall notify the public through any
means reasonably available, at least four hours prior to when the ban is to take effect, in addition
to the imposition of a fine, the chief of police may cause any vehicle parked in violation of this
section to be removed and stored at the owner's expense. The chief of police, the director of the
department of public works, or their designees are empowered and authorized to temporarily
close Lisbon Street between Chestnut and Main Streets to vehicular traffic for the purpose of
removing snow.
Any vehicle of any kind or description parked upon a public street of the city at any place
or in any manner during any emergency parking ban declared under this chapter may be removed
by, or under the direction of or at the request of, any police officer of the city to an authorized
wrecker impound lot until all the requirements of this chapter are met. Such police officer may
use such force as may be necessary to enter the vehicle and cause the same to be placed in a
condition to be moved and may summon a licensed tow operator pursuant to the provisions of
article IV of this chapter for such purpose. (Code 1982, § 26-3; Ord. No. 99-2, 3-4-99; Ord. No. 12-
10, 10-4-12)
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:8
Sec. 70-4. Authority of police and fire department officials.
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency
or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct
traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. Members of the
fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Code 1982, § 26-4)
Sec. 70-5. Obedience to police and fire department members.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer or fire department member.
(Code 1982, § 26-5)
Sec. 70-6. Public employees to obey regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in
the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for
any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter or by state statute.
(Code 1982, § 26-6)
Sec. 70-7. Duty to report accident.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident reportable under state law shall give
immediate notice and make a written report within the period provided by 29 M.R.S.A. § 891.
(Code 1982, § 26-14)
Sec. 70-8. Regulations apply to emergency vehicles; duty of drivers; exceptions to
regulations.
(a) The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles
shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
(b) An operator of an emergency vehicle, except when otherwise directed by a police officer,
may do the following:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may
be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or
property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified
directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:9
(c) The exceptions enumerated in this section shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles
only when the driver of such vehicle sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and such vehicle displays proper emergency lights visible from the
front as a warning to others.
(d) The foregoing exemptions in this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any
emergency vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of
others.
(Code 1982, § 26-7)
State law references: State authorization of emergency lights on emergency vehicles, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1368.
Sec. 70-9. Pushing carts, riding animals, driving animal-drawn vehicles regulated.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every
person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter,
excepting those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
(Code 1982, § 26-8)
Cross references: Animals, ch. 14.
Sec. 70-10. Removal of traffic ticket.
No person shall remove from any vehicle a traffic law violation ticket, notice or citation
placed on or in such vehicle by a police officer, except for the purpose of answering such notice
or citation as required therein.
(Code 1982, § 26-15)
Sec. 70-11. Noisy loading and unloading prohibited.
No person shall so load or unload a vehicle with iron or other material that may strike
together without properly deadening it so that it will cause no unnecessary noise.
(Code 1982, § 26-63)
Secs. 70-12--70-18. Reserved.
Sec. 70-19. Habitual parking violators--Statement of policy.
The owner of a motor vehicle is responsible for the operation of the vehicle both by the
owner and by others to whom the owner has entrusted the vehicle; this includes the responsibility
for properly and legally parking the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Sec. 70-20. Same--Definitions.
Habitual violator shall mean the owner of a vehicle which has accumulated:
(1) More than $200.00 in unpaid penalties arising out of outstanding parking tickets
arising in the city.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:10
Outstanding parking ticket means any notice of violation of any parking ordinance of the
city where:
(1) The owner of the offending vehicle has been finally determined to be in violation
by reason of the owner's failure to timely request a hearing or otherwise to timely
contest the violation in accordance with the laws of the state or the ordinances of
the city; and
(2) The resultant fine or waiver charge established pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A §§
3001 and 3009 has not been paid.
Towing list means a list maintained by the police department containing the names of
those wreckers approved by the city to respond to requests for the towing of vehicles made by
the police department.
Wrecker means a person engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, a vehicle
wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed
from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 99-4, 3-18-99; Ord. No. 17-03, 5-4-17)
Cross references: Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.
Sec. 70-21. Same--Removal and impoundment of vehicles.
The police department is authorized, subject to the requirements of this article, by use of
a wrecker, to remove and impound the vehicle of an habitual violator wherever found on any
public way or public property, and is authorized to take whatever action is reasonably necessary
to carry out the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 99-4, 3-18-99)
Sec. 70-22. Same--Identification of habitual violators.
The police department is hereby authorized to rely upon records of the police department
and of the secretary of state, motor vehicle division, regularly kept and maintained, in
determining whether a vehicle is a vehicle of an habitual violator. Where the records of the
police department and/or secretary of state, motor vehicle division indicate that such a vehicle is
the vehicle of an habitual violator, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such records are
correct.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Sec. 70-23. Same--Procedure for removal; notice to owner.
Any police officer requesting removal of a vehicle under this article shall, at the time of
such removal, or within a reasonable time thereafter, if the police officer determines that a delay
is justifiable, notify the dispatcher of the intended storage location of the subject motor vehicle.
Such information shall be recorded by the dispatcher for use by the chief of police or his/her
designated representative. The chief of police, or his/her authorized representative, shall, within
five business days of the impoundment, notify the owner of such vehicle of such impoundment,
the storage location of such vehicle, and the prerequisites for release of the vehicle as set forth in
section 70-24. Such notification shall be given by mail requiring a return receipt. This section
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:11
shall not apply where an impounded vehicle has been released prior to the mailing of such
notice.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Sec. 70-24. Same--Conditions for release of vehicle.
The vehicle shall not be released until:
(1) The individual requesting the release presents satisfactory evidence of his or her
right to possession of the vehicle and signs a receipt therefor; and
(2) The chief of police, or his or her authorized representative, certifies that all fees
and charges described in this article, including the fees for towing and storage,
have been paid; or
(3) Upon the certification by the chief of police, or his or her authorized
representative; (a) that such person is, by reason of poverty, upon satisfactory
proof thereof, unable to pay accumulated waiver fees or fines; and (b) that such
person has accepted service of summons initiating a court proceeding to
determine his or her liability for the alleged violations.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Sec. 70-25. Same--Procedures applicable to towing and impoundment.
Once the process of towing the vehicle has been initiated by a call to the towing
contractor:
(1) If a wrecker is assigned to pick up a vehicle, and has performed a substantial step
towards recovery of the vehicle, the wrecker service will have been considered to
have performed a service and will be allowed to charge a fee not to exceed 50
percent of the normal towing fee. To effect an immediate release of the vehicle at
that point the towing fee must be paid and also to the chief of police, in
accordance with the provisions of subsection (3) below, an amount equal to all
outstanding parking ticket waiver fees or fines. Should the owner/representative
fail to compensate the towing service at that time, the towing service shall
continue to remove the vehicle from that location and transport it to the wrecker's
holding facility unless otherwise directed by the police department.
(2) Once the vehicle has actually been towed away for impoundment, then the vehicle
owner or his or her designee must, to recover the vehicle, pay; (a) to the wrecker
an amount equal to the towing charge and storage charges; and (b) to the chief of
police, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (3) below, an amount
equal to all outstanding parking ticket waiver fees or fines.
(3) Payment to the chief of police shall be made to the front desk or the records
division of the police department at offices of the police department, and such
payment shall be evidenced by a receipt issued by the department to the person
paying. No payment shall be made to or accepted by the patrol or other officer
supervising the towing process.
In all cases, the individual requesting the release must present satisfactory
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:12
evidence of his or her right to possession of the vehicle and must sign a receipt
therefor.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 05-09, 4-8-05)
Sec. 70-26. Same--Interference with enforcement.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to obstruct or attempt to prevent the
removal of a vehicle as provided in this article. The penalty for such violation will be in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council as outlined in section 1-
8 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 08-06i, 8-14-08)
Sec. 70-27. Same--Collection of out-of-town violations.
The office of the city finance director may designate an appropriate commercial collection
agency and forward to that agency for proper collection on behalf of the city any violation of
section 70-21 not otherwise collected under this article. (Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Sec. 70-28. Same--Procedures and prohibitions on renewal of registration.
(a) The police department shall periodically, but not less often than quarterly, provide to the
office of the tax collector (the "collector") a list of habitual violators, organized by
registration plate in numeric and alphabetic order, and a list of habitual violators,
organized alphabetically by last name.
(b) In the course of reregistering vehicles, the collector shall compare registration plate
numbers and letters and the name of the applicant against the habitual violator lists, and if
the registration plate sought to be reregistered or the name of the applicant appears on the
list, the collector shall telephone the police department to confirm that the status of the
registration plate or name continues to be that of a habitual violator.
(c) If the status of the registration plate or name continues to be that of a habitual violator,
the collector shall inform the registrant that unless they immediately pay the outstanding
parking violations or waiver fees, the city will not reregister the vehicle sought to be
registered.
(d) The collector is authorized to accept payment of the outstanding parking violations or
waiver fees, after having confirmed the amount with the police department, and having
done so, the collector is authorized to reregister the vehicle in question.
(Ord. No. 96-9, 9-12-96)
Secs. 70-29--70-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES*
*State law references: Municipal authority to regulate traffic by means of signal devices, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1256.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:13
Sec. 70-36. Authority to install.
(a) The police chief with the approval of the council shall place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required or
authorized under this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state
law, or to guide or warn traffic, including angle parking signs, and markings, turning
markers, and signs prohibiting left, right or u-turns, the location of which he is authorized
to determine.
(b) The police chief shall report action he proposes to take pursuant to the provisions of
subsection (a). If the council fails to approve or disapprove of such action within 30 days
of such report, the council shall be deemed to have approved of the proposed action of
the chief.
(Code 1982, § 26-9)
Sec. 70-37. Devices to be uniform; official devices.
All signs or signals required or authorized by this chapter shall, so far as practical, be
uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
(Code 1982, § 26-10)
State law references: Traffic-control signal legend, 29 M.R.S.A. § 947.
Sec. 70-38. Obedience to devices; missing and illegible signs.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
chapter. No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an
alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official sign is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a
particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
(Code 1982, § 26-11)
Sec. 70-39. Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings; nuisance, removal.
(a) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official traffic control device, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic
control device. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit
upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to
highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:14
(b) Every sign, signal or marking prohibited by this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to
remove such prohibited sign, signal or marking or cause it to be removed without notice.
(Code 1982, § 26-12)
Sec. 70-40. Interference with devices.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or
remove any official traffic control device, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any
part thereof. (Code 1982, § 26-13)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 2186.
Sec. 70-41. Existing signs, signals, devices confirmed.
All signs, signals, devices and markings in place on the adoption date of this Code are
hereby ratified and confirmed.
(Code 1982, § 26-18)
Sec. 70-42. Location of light signals.
Traffic control light signals shall be established at such street intersections as are
specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-29)
Sec. 70-43. Location of stop signs.
Stop signs shall be established on the streets specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-32)
Sec. 70-44. Location of slow signs.
Slow signs shall be established on such streets as are specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-34)
Sec. 70-45. Location of yield signs.
Yield signs shall be established on such streets as are specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-35)
Sec. 70-46. Location of one-way streets.
One-way streets shall be established as specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-38)
Sec. 70-47. Establishment of taxicab zones.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:15
A taxicab zone created by the city council shall be considered established when signs
indicating such establishment are erected and maintained at each end of such space, which signs
the chief of police is hereby authorized to erect and maintain. Such zones shall be as specified by
the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-127)
Sec. 70-48. Establishment of bus stops.
A bus stop created by the city council shall be considered established when signs
indicating such establishment are erected and maintained at each end of such space, which signs
the chief of police is hereby authorized to erect and maintain. Such zones shall be as specified by
the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-129)
Sec. 70-49. Authority to designate temporary one-way streets.
The police chief shall have the power to designate streets or parts thereof as subject only
to one-way traffic, such designation to be effective only if suitable signs are conspicuously
placed on or about the entrances to and exits from the affected areas, in the event of an
emergency requiring such one-way traffic for the avoidance of traffic congestion which would be
prejudicial to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city or property located
therein, such designation and signs to be removed at the termination of such emergency. In
addition to emergency conditions, the following occasions shall be proper ones for the
application of the above power to designate temporary one-way traffic in areas affected by such
occasions, such designation and signs to be removed after such conditions cease to exist:
(1) Church services.
(2) Parades.
(3) Athletic events.
(4) Any event, meeting or occasion attracting or likely to attract a large number of
persons.
(5) Excavations or other repairs to streets.
(Code 1982, § 26-39)
Sec. 70-50. Authority to place signs at places of assemblage.
The police chief is authorized to place temporary or permanent traffic control signs in
front of the entrances to places of assemblage or any building in which entertainments, plays,
shows, exhibitions and the like are given and for such period as the police chief in his discretion
may deem wise under the circumstances.
(Code 1982, § 26-100)
Secs. 70-51--70-70. Reserved.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:16
ARTICLE III. OPERATION*
*State law references: Operation of vehicles, 29 M.R.S.A. § 891 et seq.
Sec. 70-71. Processions; funeral identification.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display
upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other
method as may be determined and designated by the police chief.
(Code 1982, § 26-16)
Sec. 70-72. Driving in processions.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of
the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.
(Code 1982, § 26-58)
Sec. 70-73. Driving through processions prohibited; exception.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated as required in this article. This section shall not apply at intersections where traffic is
controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.
(Code 1982, § 26-59)
Sec. 70-74. Limitation on transporting mobile, modular or prefabricated homes.
No mobile home, modular or prefabricated home, except those homes licensed or
registered as campers, shall be transported within the city limits between the hours of 3:00 p.m.
and 5:30 p.m.
(Code 1982, § 26-17)
Sec. 70-75. Warning devices.
No person shall sound an automobile horn, bell or other sound device on a vehicle
anywhere in the city at any time, except when necessary for safe driving.
(Code 1982, § 26-28)
Sec. 70-76. Entering through street.
After the driver of a vehicle has stopped in obedience to a stop sign at the entrance to a
through street, such driver shall then proceed cautiously, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles
which have entered the intersection from such through street or which are approaching so closely
on such through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
(Code 1982, § 26-30)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 949.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:17
Sec. 70-77. Obedience to stop signs.
The operator of a vehicle shall bring such vehicle to a full stop, yielding the right-of-way
to all vehicles or pedestrians approaching from either direction on the intersecting street
immediately before entering or crossing an intersection at which a stop sign has been erected;
provided however, that whenever a traffic officer is stationed at such intersection, such officer
shall have the right to regulate traffic thereat.
(Code 1982, § 26-31)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 949.
Sec. 70-78. Obedience to slow signs.
The operator of a vehicle shall proceed slowly immediately before entering and while
crossing an intersection at which a slow sign has been erected; provided, however, that whenever
a traffic officer is stationed at any intersection, such officer shall have the right to regulate traffic
thereat.
(Code 1982, § 26-33)
Sec. 70-79. Obedience to yield signs.
The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way before entering or crossing an
intersection at which a yield sign has been erected; provided, however, that whenever a traffic
officer is stationed at such intersection, such officer shall have the right to regulate traffic thereat.
(Code 1982, § 26-36)
State law references: Failure to yield the right-of-way, consequences, 29 M.R.S.A. § 948.
Sec. 70-80. Obedience to one-way streets.
Upon those streets which are designated by the council as one-way streets, vehicular
traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is
prohibited, which signs the police chief is hereby authorized and directed to erect and maintain.
(Code 1982, § 26-37)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 993.
Sec. 70-81. Speed regulations generally.
Any person driving a vehicle on a street shall drive such vehicle at a careful and prudent
speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and
width of the highway, and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive any
vehicle upon a street at such a speed as to endanger any person or property.
(Code 1982, § 26-41)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1252(1); municipal authority to regulate the speed, 29
M.R.S.A. § 1256.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:18
Sec. 70-82. Excess speed; prima facie evidence.
Any speed in excess of the limits established by law shall be prima facie evidence that the
driver's speed is not reasonable and proper as defined in this article.
(Code 1982, § 26-40)
Sec. 70-83. Speed limits at specific locations.
The rates of speed and speed limits on all streets and roads within the municipality shall
be determined and defined by state statute. As authorized by the Maine Department of
Transportation, exceptions to the standard speed limits shall be maintained in the City of
Lewiston’s Traffic Schedule and may be incorporated into the Schedule based upon
administrative authority and does not require action by the municipal officers.
(Code 1982, § 26-42; Ord. No. 14-02, 03-27-14)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1252.
Sec. 70-84. Right-of-way.
All vehicles shall have the right-of-way over other vehicles, except authorized emergency
vehicles when operated on official business and the drivers thereof sound audible signals by bell,
siren or exhaust whistle, approaching at intersecting public ways, except traffic circles or rotary
intersections, from the left and shall give the right-of-way to those approaching from the right;
except that traffic officers stationed at such intersection may otherwise regulate traffic thereat,
and except at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals in operation or by
stop signs. (Code 1982, § 26-43)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 944.
Sec. 70-85. Entering traffic from curb.
The driver of a vehicle starting from a curb or roadway edge shall yield the right-of-way to all
moving traffic on the roadway; he shall not enter or attempt to enter such moving traffic until he
can do so safely. (Code 1982, § 26-44)
Sec. 70-86. Entering from alley or private driveway.
The driver of a vehicle entering a public way from a private road, alley, driveway or
building shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public way and shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on such public way or sidewalk; and before
crossing any sidewalk, or before entering such public way where no sidewalk shall exist, shall
proceed cautiously across such sidewalk or into such public way.
(Code 1982, § 26-45)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 944.
Sec. 70-87. Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians.
When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:19
crossing the roadway within any crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the
opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or
other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the driver to yield.
(Code 1982, § 26-46)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 954.
Sec. 70-88. Obstructing traffic at intersection, crosswalk.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(Code 1982, § 26-47)
State law references: Approaching stop intersection regulated, 29 M.R.S.A. § 949.
Sec. 70-89. Procedure for right turn.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an intersection or into an alley or
private road or driveway shall approach such intersection or point of turning as closely as
practicable to the righthand curb or boundary of the street, in the lane for traffic nearest to the
righthand side of the street, and in turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the righthand
curb.
(Code 1982, § 26-48)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 994.
Sec. 70-90. Procedure for left turns.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at an intersection or into an alley or a private
road or driveway shall approach such intersection or point of turning in the lane for traffic to the
right of and nearest to the centerline of the street, with the left side of the vehicle as near as
possible to, and to the right of, the centerline of the street on which he is proceeding, and in
turning shall pass beyond the center of the intersection, passing as closely as practicable to the
right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For the purpose of this section, the "center of
the intersection" shall mean the meeting point of the medial line of the streets intersecting one
another. On one-way streets, such turn shall be made from the left lane of traffic.
(Code 1982, § 26-49)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 994.
Sec. 70-91. Left turn prohibited at certain intersections.
It shall be unlawful for traffic to make a lefthand turn at such intersections as are
specified by the council.
(Code 1982, § 26-50)
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:20
Sec. 70-92. Turning around restricted.
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction in the central business district and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle
unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. This
section shall be effective where proper signs so indicate.
(Code 1982, § 26-51)
Sec. 70-93. Passing.
No driver of a vehicle shall leave the line on the right for the purpose of overtaking
another vehicle unless there is a clear way in advance on the left. When overtaking another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction, the driver of any vehicle shall pass at a safe distance to
the left thereof, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of
such overtaken vehicle. The driver of a vehicle on a street about to be overtaken and passed by
another vehicle approaching from the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and
shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. The
driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction
at any intersection of highways or streets.
(Code 1982, § 26-52)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. §§ 1151, 1152.
Sec. 70-94. Backing limitation.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made
with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Code 1982, § 26-53)
Sec. 70-95. Passing vehicle stopped for pedestrians.
Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at
an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(Code 1982, § 26-54)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 954.
Sec. 70-96. Duty on approach of emergency vehicles.
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver thereof is
giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell and emitting a flashing light, the driver
of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position
parallel to, and as close as possible to, the righthand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any
intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle
has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This section shall not operate to
relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the highway. (Code 1982, § 26-55)
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:21
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 946.
Sec. 70-97. Following and meeting snowplows.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow closer than 200 feet
to any snowplow engaged in plowing. The driver of any vehicle meeting a snowplow engaged in
plowing on a street shall turn off on another street, if practicable; otherwise, he shall come to a
complete stop at least 50 feet away from such plow and not start again until the plow has passed.
(Code 1982, § 26-56)
Sec. 70-98. Following, parking near fire apparatus.
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such
vehicle within the block where such fire apparatus has stopped in answer to the fire alarm.
(Code 1982, § 26-57)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1033.
Sec. 70-99. Authority to establish truck routes; use required.
Truck traffic routes to be identified by signs and markings erected and maintained by the
police department, as directed by the city council, may be established within the city limits;
when established and posted, all persons driving motor vehicles into the city limits for the
transportation of property through the city shall drive such vehicles over and along such
established truck traffic routes.
(Code 1982, § 26-60)
Sec. 70-100. Heavy loads.
During any part of the period between November 15 and April 15 of each year, except
when the surface of the road is solidly frozen, no driver of a vehicle, the gross weight of which
(vehicle and load combined) exceeds 3 1/2 tons, shall drive such vehicle on those streets duly
posted to that effect at each end thereof.
(Code 1982, § 26-61)
Sec. 70-101. Crossing fire hose.
No person shall drive a vehicle over any unprotected hose of the fire department when
laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
consent of the fire department official in command.
(Code 1982, § 26-62)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 996.
Sec. 70-102. Littering the streets prohibited.
(a) No person shall operate a vehicle upon any public street in such a manner that material,
refuse, feathers, junk or litter of any kind drips, sifts, leaks, drops or otherwise escapes
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:22
therefrom and lands upon the surface of any street.
(b) No person shall operate any truck or other vehicle carrying waste, feathers, trash, refuse
or loose materials of any nature whatsoever, excepting trucks hauling sand, gravel or dirt,
unless such truck or vehicle is equipped with a device suitable to prevent any of the
aforementioned materials from escaping the truck or vehicle in any way. For a violation
of this section to occur, there need not be proof that such material did escape and land on
the roadway.
(c) Any person found in violation of this provision shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) A person who disposes of less than 15 pounds or 27 cubic feet of litter as defined
above is subject to a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 nor less than $100.00 for
the first violation and a forfeiture of not more than $500.00 nor less than $200.00
for a subsequent violation.
(2) A person who disposes of more than 15 pounds or 27 cubic feet of litter but less
than 500 pounds or 100 cubic feet of litter, is subject to a forfeiture of not more
than $500.00 nor less than $200.00 for the first violation and a forfeiture of not
more than $1,000.00 nor less than $500.00 for a subsequent violation.
(Code 1982, § 26-64)
State law references: Maine Litter Control Act, 17 M.R.S.A. § 2261 et seq.
Sec. 70-103. Mufflers regulated.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle, except a fire department vehicle, on a street unless
such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent excessive noise and annoying smoke, nor use a muffler cutout on any vehicle, except a
fire department vehicle upon any street.
(Code 1982, § 26-65)
Sec. 70-104. Riding on motorcycles.
No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon the permanent and regular
seat attached thereto, or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such
motorcycle, other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator.
(Code 1982, § 26-66)
Sec. 70-105. No through traffic.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof to be for no
through traffic, as authorized by the city council, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such
street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such restricted area.
(Code 1982, § 26-67)
Sec. 70-106. Trucks and buses prohibited on certain streets.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:23
No truck which exceeds a gross weight as determined by the city council and no bus
other than a local passenger bus picking up and discharging passengers along designated routes
at specified stops shall travel over the streets or parts of streets designated as restricted to such
vehicles being so, as authorized by the city council, except when necessary to render service to
or to deliver supplies to persons residing or businesses and industries located adjacent thereto.
(Code 1982, § 26-68; Ord. No. 98-9, 10-15-98)
Secs. 70-107--70-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
*State law references: Municipal authority to lay out and regulate parking places, 23 M.R.S.A. § 2802; municipal
authority to regulate traffic by means of signal devices or other methods, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1256.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 70-131. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking or governing loading and
unloading shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles or governing
loading and unloading in specified places or at specified times.
Notwithstanding the imposition of a fine, at the discretion of the officer, the police may require
the operator to immediately move the vehicle from a location in violation to a location where
parking is permitted; or cause any vehicle parked in violation of these prohibitions to be removed
and stored at the owner’s expense, if it presents a danger to those using the public way, or would
unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic. (Code 1982, § 26-81; Ord. No. 13-13, 2-6-14)
Sec. 70-132. Liability of vehicle registrant.
The fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful
parking of such vehicle by the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
(Code 1982, § 26-82)
Sec. 70-133. Exception for nonresidents.
Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the police chief is authorized to
waive payment on any parking violation ticket issued to a nonresident when in the opinion of the
police chief such violation is due to lack of knowledge of the violated provision of this chapter;
provided, however, that this benefit shall not be extended to any violation deemed by the police
chief to be deliberate, continued or flagrant, and provided that in no event shall this benefit
extend to violation of the provision prohibiting parking in front of a hydrant area.
(Code 1982, § 26-83)
Sec. 70-134. Alternate penalty provision, payment schedule.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:24
(a) Persons violating any provision of this chapter relating to parking are subject to the
general penalty provisions of section 1-8 of this Code. They may, however, if a summons
to court has not been issued, elect, in lieu of such penalty, to pay for each violation in
accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city council.
(b) Payments for parking violations shall be made to such bureau as the city administrator
shall designate. Such payments shall in no event be construed as an enforced imposition
of a fine or penalty, but on the other hand shall be construed to be an amount which an
offender may voluntarily contribute toward the cost and expense of furnishing to the
public a less expensive alternative method of regulating and administering traffic law
violations.
(c) The fee[s] set forth in accordance with the city's policy manual as approved by the city
council will double if not paid within 15 days.
(Code 1982, § 26-84; Ord. No. 99-5, 3-18-99; Ord. No. 02-22, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 04-14, 7-1-04; Ord.
No. 08-06i, 8-14-08 Ord. No. 10-04, 3-18-10)
Sec. 70-135. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave his vehicle on any street in such a manner or
under such conditions so as to obstruct the free passage of other vehicles in either direction,
unless specifically permitted by a police officer, or so as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
(Code 1982, § 26-85)
Sec. 70-136. Obstructing sidewalk.
No person shall stop with any horse, team, cart, carriage, truck, automobile, motor
vehicle or other vehicle on or across any sidewalk in the city in such manner as to hinder or
obstruct travel over such sidewalk.
(Code 1982, § 26-86)
Sec. 70-137. Fire zones.
No vehicle shall remain backed up to a curb in the fire zone, except when actually
loading or unloading, provided the same can be done without obstructing travel, and only
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
(Code 1982, § 26-87)
Cross references: Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.
Sec. 70-138. Parallel parking required, exception.
(a) No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be
parked on any street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the
roadway.
(b) When specifically authorized by a police officer, any person may back a vehicle to the
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:25
curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials for a period not in
excess of 30 minutes. No person shall so back a vehicle to a curb unless specifically
authorized by a police officer, and no person shall in any event back a vehicle onto any
curb or sidewalk in this city.
(Code 1982, § 26-88)
Sec. 70-139. Diagonal parking.
Diagonal parking is hereby prohibited, except as otherwise provided by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-89)
Sec. 70-140. Parking prohibited in specified places.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or traffic
control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway or alleyway.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) On a crosswalk.
(6) Within 25 feet of the near corner of the curbs at an intersection, except where
otherwise designated.
(7) Within 15 feet upon the approach to any stop sign located at the side of a
roadway.
(8) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance
when properly signposted.
(9) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(10) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb of a
street.
(11) Upon any bridge.
(12) At any place where official signs or curb painting so prohibit.
(13) On or within 25 feet of any railroad tracks.
(Code 1982, § 26-104)
Sec. 70-141. Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:26
as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of
vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
(Code 1982, § 26-90)
Sec. 70-142. Standing of large vehicles regulated.
No owner, driver or person in charge of any vehicle which has a carrying capacity of
more than 6,000 pounds, or which including load is more than 25 feet in length, or which
including load is more than eight feet in width, or which including load is more than 12 feet and
six inches in height, shall permit such vehicle to stand upon any public street in the city for a
longer period than one hour at any one time.
(Code 1982, § 26-91)
Sec. 70-143. Truck loading and unloading in fire zone.
From 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on any day except on Sundays and public holidays, trucks
and drays are prohibited from loading or unloading freight, goods and merchandise at all places,
stores and buildings in the fire zone when it is reasonably feasible to perform such work off the
street or in an adjacent alley, unless such loading or unloading can be done within five minutes.
(Code 1982, § 26-92)
Sec. 70-144. Public utility vehicles.
Vehicles operated by the city or by public utility companies, used for installation, repair
and maintenance purposes, may be exempted by the police chief upon notice to the city clerk, in
each case, temporarily for the period while actually at work at a definite location, from any of the
requirements of this article, provided that during such exemption period, work will be conducted
with all reasonable dispatch, and that such precautions as the police chief may require in the
interest of public safety shall be taken. The police chief is authorized to place temporary signs
prohibiting parking in such places at the scene of work as in his discretion he deems necessary to
facilitate traffic and the work in progress. Subject to the necessary exceptions provided by this
section, this article shall nevertheless be observed insofar as practicable. Upon receipt of such
notice, the city clerk shall notify the police chief, the fire chief, and the director of public works
of such operations.
(Code 1982, § 26-93)
Sec. 70-145. Interference with snow removal and sweeping, street paving, repairs.
No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any public street or way so as to interfere with
or hinder the plowing or removal of snow, sweeping, street paving and/or street repairs by the
city. Any person parking a vehicle in violation of a no parking sign, provided such signs shall
have been posted for a period of four hours except in case of snowplowing when such signs shall
have been posted for a period of two hours, shall be in violation of this section. Notwithstanding
the imposition of a fine, the chief of police may also cause any vehicle parked in violation of this
section to be removed and stored at the owner's expense.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:27
(Code 1982, § 26-94)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1111.
Sec. 70-146. Parking to advertise, perform maintenance.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of advertising,
displaying such vehicle for sale or washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(Code 1982, § 26-95)
Cross references: Advertising, ch. 6.
Sec. 70-147. Parking in front of theaters.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. within a space of
30 feet measured by the police chief along the curbline in front of the main entrance of any
theater and marked by a sign. (Code 1982, § 26-96)
Sec. 70-148. Duty when leaving vehicle unattended.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any roadway
unattended without first effectively setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of such
vehicle. No person shall allow an animal-drawn vehicle to be unattended unless it is reasonably
fastened. No person shall leave an unattended vehicle with an ignition key in the vehicle.
(Code 1982, § 26-97)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 942.
Sec. 70-149. Abandonment of a vehicle; removal, expense.
(a) No person shall abandon any vehicle of any kind on any street of the city. The chief of
police is hereby authorized to remove and arrange for the storage of any such abandoned
vehicle from any street. The owner shall be responsible for the expense of towing and
storage of a vehicle which has been removed pursuant to this provision.
(b) Removal of a vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section or any part or accessory
from the vehicle without the written consent of the owner or person in charge of the
premises or property where the vehicle is located is a class E crime. This subsection
applies to all persons, including the owner of the vehicle.
(Code 1982, § 26-98)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. §§ 1111, 2610(7).
Sec. 70-150. Authority to designate hazardous or congested places; parking restricted.
(a) The police chief with the approval of the council is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles
would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:28
section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Code 1982, § 26-99; Ord. No. 13-13, 2-6-14)
Sec. 70-151. Authority to regulate parking adjacent to school property.
The police chief is hereby authorized to cause temporary or permanent signs to be
erected, indicating no parking adjacent to any school property, when such parking would, in his
opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. When official signs are erected
indicating no parking adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place.
(Code 1982, § 26-101)
Sec. 70-152. Lights on parked vehicles.
Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked in a place and under conditions where there is
sufficient artificial light to make such vehicle clearly visible from a distance of not less than 500
feet in each direction, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle; otherwise, lights
must be displayed during the period from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(Code 1982, § 26-102)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1071.
Sec. 70-153. Reserved.
Sec. 70-154. Parking prohibited on even-numbered sides of certain streets.
During the period commencing December 1 and terminating March 31 of the following
year, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or stand any vehicle or leave such vehicle
unattended on the even-numbered side of the public streets specified by the city council;
provided, however, that metal signs at least 18 inches by 12 inches, with red printing on white
background, be installed 150 feet apart on such streets giving notice of this restriction.
(Code 1982, § 26-105; Ord. No. 02-22, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 08-11, 1-15-09)
Sec. 70-155. Parking prohibited on odd-numbered sides of certain streets.
During the period commencing December 1 and terminating March 31 of the following
year, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, park or stand any vehicle or leave such vehicle
unattended on the odd-numbered side of the public ways or streets specified by the city council;
provided, however, that metal signs 18 inches by 12 inches, with red printing on white
background, be installed 150 feet apart on such streets giving notice of this restriction.
(Code 1982, § 26-106; Ord. No. 02-22, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 08-11, 1-15-09)
Sec. 70-156. Places where parking prohibited at all times, fire lanes.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets as specified by the city council, nor shall any person
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:29
stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time in any fire lane enumerated in this section or as specified
by ordinance:
(1) Any corner: No parking within 25 feet of any corner.
(2) Bridge: No parking on any bridge.
(3) Driveways: No person shall park a vehicle so as to block any driveway.
(Code 1982, § 26-107)
Sec. 70-157. Limited daytime parking in business area.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for more than one hour between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and legal holidays in front of any store,
shop or place of business offering services to the public; provided, that this restriction shall not
apply in those areas where parking is otherwise limited or restricted to less than one hour, or
where parking is forbidden, or within any loading zone, taxi stand or bus stop.
(Code 1982, § 26-108)
Sec. 70-158. Parking time limited on streets.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle on streets or sections of streets for longer than the period
of time specified by the city council and identified by signs erected in each block.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle on streets or sections of streets between dates or during
times specified by the city council and identified by signs erected in each block.
(Code 1982, §§ 26-109--26-115; Ord. No. 99-6, 4-1-99; Ord. No. 08-11, 1-15-09; Ord. No. 11-03, 4-14-
2011; Ord. No. 12-10, 10-4-12)
Secs. 70-159--70-165. Reserved.
Sec. 70-166. Parking in alleys prohibited.
Parking shall be prohibited in all alleys in the city.
(Code 1982, § 26-121)
Sec. 70-167. Overnight parking prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or allowed to stand on such streets as are specified by
the city council between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., during the period commencing
September 1 and ending May 31, except in cases of emergency. (Ord. No. 17-10, 10-5-17)
Sec. 70-168. All-night parking.
On such streets as are specified by the city council, vehicles may be parked, stopped or
allowed to stand between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day with the
exception of areas adjacent to fire hydrants, warehouse doors, and any loading zones which may
be appropriately designated.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:30
(Code 1982, § 26-123)
Sec. 70-169. Daytime parking prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or allowed to stand on such streets as are specified by
the city council between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in cases of emergency.
(Code 1982, § 26-124)
Sec. 70-170. Parking prohibited on Monday through Saturday.
Parking is prohibited from Monday through Saturday upon such streets as are specified
by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-125)
Sec. 70-171. Parking prohibited between 2:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
No vehicle shall be parked, stopped or allowed to stand on such streets as are specified by
the city council between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except in
cases of emergency.
(Code 1982, § 26-126)
Sec. 70-172. Restricted use of taxi zones, emergencies.
No person shall stop, park or stand any vehicle other than a taxi in a taxi zone, except in
an emergency.
(Code 1982, § 26-128)
Cross references: Taxicabs, § 82-26 et seq.
Sec. 70-173. Restricted use of bus stop zones.
No person shall stop, park or stand any vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop zone, except
in an emergency.
(Code 1982, § 26-130)
Sec. 70-174. Bus and taxicab drivers regulated; time restriction.
(a) The driver of a bus shall not stand or park such bus upon any street in any business
district at any place other than at a space which has been officially designated and
appropriately marked a bus stop, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of
any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking
regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers.
(b) The driver of a taxicab shall remain in the driver's seat, except while actually engaged in
admitting or discharging passengers or transporting their luggage, while such taxicab is in
a space which has been officially designated a taxi zone.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:31
(c) The driver of a bus or a taxicab is hereby authorized to park such vehicle in his
designated space without restriction as to time.
(Code 1982, § 26-131)
Sec. 70-175. Other persons' use of bus stops and taxicab zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus or a taxicab in any such
space which has been officially designated and appropriately marked a taxi zone or a bus stop,
except that the driver of any passenger car or light delivery vehicle may stop the same therein for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or parcels and
when such stopping does not interfere with any operator who desires to drive a bus into such
space.
(Code 1982, § 26-132)
Sec. 70-176. Reserved parking spaces.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate reserved parking spaces:
(1) Where failure to do so would create traffic congestion;
(2) When the space is to be for work in a building adjacent to such space;
(3) For the physically handicapped; or
(4) For city officers and employees.
(Code 1982, § 26-133)
Sec. 70-177. Loading zones.
(a) Designation. Loading zones shall be located at such locations as are specified by the city
council, and shall have such time limitations as are specified by the city council.
(b) Use limited. No person shall stop, stand, park or leave any vehicle upon any street where
an officially designated loading zone space is appropriately marked, except for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in the act of either loading or unloading
passengers or personal property of every nature. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause, allow, permit or suffer any such vehicle registered in his name to be stopped,
parked or left in a manner contrary to the above provisions. This section shall not be
interpreted as a limitation upon section 70-143.
(Code 1982, §§ 26-146, 26-147)
Sec. 70-178. Interference with snow removal.
No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any public street or way so as to interfere with
or hinder the removal of snow from the street or way by the city by plowing, loading, and
hauling, and any person parking a vehicle in violation of a parking ban or no parking sign placed
on any street or way because of snow plowing, loading, or hauling operations shall be guilty of
an offense. Notwithstanding the imposition of a fine, the chief of police or his or her designee
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:32
may also cause any vehicle so parked to be removed from such street in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 12-10, 10-4-12)
Sec. 70-179. On-street parking by permit only
(a) Designation. The city council may designate and establish time limitations and permit
fees for on-street parking by permit only zones.
(b) Use limited. No person shall stop, stand, park, or leave any vehicle upon any street where
an officially designated on-street parking by permit only zone has been established and
appropriately marked, except those vehicles displaying a permit issued by the City
authorizing them to utilize the zone.
(Ord. No. 18-14, 01-17-19)
Sec. 70-180. Student Drop Off and Pick Up Only.
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave any vehicle upon any street where an officially
designated Student Drop Off and Pick Up zone has been established and appropriately marked,
except in cases of emergency. (Ord. No. 19-12, 12-19-19)
Secs. 70-181--70-185. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PARKING METERS
Sec. 70-186. Meter requirements.
Each parking meter established in accordance with this division shall be so set as to
display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of the required coin of the United States
therein, for the period of time conforming to the parking limit established upon which such
parking meter is placed; and each such meter shall by its mechanism indicate the legal time a
vehicle may remain parked and shall continue in operation from the time of depositing such coin
until the expiration of the time fixed by this division as the parking limit for the part of the street
upon which such meter is placed. Each parking meter shall also be so arranged that upon the
expiration of the parking limit, it will indicate by a mechanical operation and the indicating of a
proper signal that the lawful parking period as fixed or authorized under this division has
expired.
(Code 1982, § 26-164)
Sec. 70-187. Authority to install.
The installation of parking meters is hereby authorized on the streets specified by the city
council.
(Code 1982, § 26-165)
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:33
Sec. 70-188. Reserved.
Sec. 70-189. Correct parking position required.
(a) Any vehicle parked in any parking space as provided in this division shall be parked with
the hood of such vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter alongside of such
parking space in parallel parking spaces, and with the radiator directed at the meter in
diagonal parking spaces, and in either event he shall be parked within the lines marked on
the street for such parking space, as provided in this division.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any line or mark designating the parking
space for which any parking meter is to be used, or to park such vehicle in such a way
that it shall not be within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
(Code 1982, § 26-167)
Sec. 70-190. Coin required; overtime regulated.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to a parking meter
established in accordance with this division, the owner, operator, manager or driver of such
vehicle shall upon entering the parking space immediately deposit in such parking meter such
coin of the United States as is designated for deposit therein in accordance with the terms of this
division. Upon the deposit of such coin and placing such meter in operation, the parking meter
space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time prescribed for
such parking meter space. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond
the established parking limit as shown by meter indication for such parking space, the parking
meter shall display a sign showing illegal parking, and in that event, such vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime and beyond the time fixed by the provisions and authority of this
division, and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of time fixed by the
provisions of this division in any such part of a street where any such parking meter is located
shall be a violation of this division and punished as provided in this division. It shall be unlawful
for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any such vehicle registered in his name to be
parked overtime or beyond the lawful period of time as above described.
(Code 1982, § 26-168)
Sec. 70-191. Failure to deposit coin.
All parking is prohibited in any parking space where a parking meter is installed, unless a
deposit of the coin indicated by such meter is made as provided in this division. Any vehicle
parked in violation of this section shall be deemed to be illegally parked under the provisions of
this division.
(Code 1982, § 26-169)
Sec. 70-192. Reserved.
Sec. 70-193. Extension of parking time.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person to deposit in a parking
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:34
meter a coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond
the legal parking time established for such parking meter space.
(Code 1982, § 26-171)
Sec. 70-194. Failure to deposit coin evidence of unlawful parking.
The fact that a vehicle is in a metered parking space when the time signal on the parking
meter for such space indicates no parking permitted without the deposit of a coin shall be prima
facie evidence that such vehicle has been parked in such parking space longer than the lawfully
permitted period, and the fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be prima facie evidence of
the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
(Code 1982, § 26-172)
Sec. 70-195. Use of slugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter any slug, device or
metallic substitute for a coin of the United States.
(Code 1982, § 26-173)
Sec. 70-196. Tampering with meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this
division.
(Code 1982, § 26-174)
Sec. 70-197. Fee schedule.
The amount of the fee for the use of each parking meter space shall be based upon the
length of the legal parking period for such parking space as may be designated by ordinance and
shall be as specified by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-175)
Sec. 70-198. Location, time limitations.
Parking meters shall be located at such locations as are specified by the city council, and
shall have such time limitations as are specified by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 26-176)
Secs. 70-199--70-240. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PEDESTRIANS*
*State law references: Pedestrians on ways, 29 M.R.S.A. § 904-A; pedestrians' right-of-way on sidewalks, 29
M.R.S.A. § 904-B.
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:35
Sec. 70-241. Subject to traffic control signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals, as established by law, but at all
other places pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in
this article.
(Code 1982, § 26-226)
Sec. 70-242. Authority to establish crosswalks.
The chief of the police department is hereby empowered and authorized to designate and
maintain by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks
where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such
other places as he may deem necessary.
(Code 1982, § 26-227)
Sec. 70-243. Use of crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of a crosswalk.
(Code 1982, § 26-228)
Sec. 70-244. Crossing at other than crosswalk.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk
or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
upon the roadway.
(Code 1982, § 26-229)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 955.
Sec. 70-245. Crossing in business district.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place in the business district other than by a
route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in the
crosswalk.
(Code 1982, § 26-230)
Sec. 70-246. Drivers to exercise due care.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon
observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Code 1982, § 26-231)
Secs. 70-247--70-265. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. BICYCLES*
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:36
*State law references: Bicycle regulations, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1961 et seq.
Sec. 70-266. Defined.
As used in this article, the term "bicycle" means any device propelled by human power
upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 20
inches in diameter.
(Code 1982, § 6-1)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1(1-D).
Sec. 70-267. Inspections.
Any police officer may stop any bicycle for the purpose of ascertaining whether its
equipment complies with the requirements of this article. If such bicycle is found to be in an
unsafe mechanical condition, such police officer may refuse to permit the operation of such
bicycle on any public street or any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(Code 1982, § 6-2)
Sec. 70-268. Reserved.
Sec. 70-269. Applicability of traffic laws.
Any person propelling or riding a bicycle upon any street or upon any public path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the state and the city, except as to special regulations in this article and
except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application. (Code 1982, § 6-4)
Sec. 70-270. Obedience to traffic control devices.
(a) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control
signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U turn is
permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign
except when such person dismounts from the bicycle to make such turns, in which case,
such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code 1982, § 6-5)
Sec. 70-271. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than the roadway against the curb, upon the
sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (Code 1982, § 6-6)
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:37
Sec. 70-272. General operational regulations.
(a) Any person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular
seat attached thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
(c) No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars, or feet from the
pedals, or practice acrobatics or fancy riding on any street or public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
(d) Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one
proceeding in the same direction.
(e) Any person riding a bicycle upon any roadway shall ride single file.
(f) Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle
riders shall use such paths and shall not use the roadway.
(g) Any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, rollerskates, sled or toy vehicle shall not
attach the same, or himself, to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(h) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents
the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(i) No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the conditions then existing.
(j) The operator of a bicycle, when crossing a sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians, and in entering a public street shall yield the right-of-way to all approaching
vehicles.
(Code 1982, § 6-7)
Sec. 70-273. Authority to prohibit operation on streets, sidewalks, paths; riding on
sidewalks.
The chief of police is authorized to prohibit the operation of any bicycles on any public
street, sidewalk or path where such operation would seriously conflict with current automobile or
pedestrian traffic. Persons operating any bicycle on a sidewalk shall keep to the street side and
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians. An audible signal shall be given before overtaking and
passing such pedestrians. (Code 1982, § 6-8)
Sec. 70-274. Equipment.
Any bicycle, when in use in the nighttime, or at other times when motor vehicles are
required to display headlamps by law, shall be equipped with and have lighted a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 200 feet to the front and a
red reflector to the rear which shall be visible at least 200 feet to the rear. Bicycle pedals shall
bear reflector strips and bicycle handlebars shall bear reflector tapes when in use in the nighttime
or at other times when motor vehicles are required to display headlamps by law. Every bicycle
shall be equipped with a brake which shall enable the operator to stop the bicycle within a
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:38
reasonable distance.
(Code 1982, § 6-9)
State law references: Similar provisions, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1962.
Sec. 70-275. Parent's, guardian's responsibility.
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly
permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 6-10)
Sec. 70-276. Penalty for violation of article.
Any juvenile who violates any of the provisions of this article, by the authority of the
chief of police, shall have his bicycle impounded for a period not to exceed five days for the first
offense, for a period not to exceed ten days for a second offense, and for a period not to exceed
30 days for any subsequent offenses.
(Code 1982, § 6-11)
State law references: Bicycle impoundment, 29 M.R.S.A. § 1963.
Sec. 70-277-- 70-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. VEHICLE REGISTRATION AND EXCISE TAX EXEMPTION
Sec. 70-300. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Deployed for military service is defined by Title 26, § 814, Subsection 1, Paragraph A, of
the Maine Revised Statutes, active military duty with the state military forces, as defined in Title
37-B, § 102, of the Maine Revised Statutes, or the United Stated Armed Forces, including the
National Guard and Reserves, whether pursuant to the order of the Governor or the President of
the United States, when the duty assignment is in combat theatre or in an area where armed
conflict is taking place.
Vehicle means a motor vehicle, mobile home, camper trailer, heavier-than-air aircraft or
lighter-than-air aircraft. “Vehicle” does not include any snowmobiles ad defined in Maine
Revised Statutes, Title 12, Section 13001.
(Ord. No. 17-23, 01-04-18)
Sec. 70-301. Exemption granted.
Pursuant to Title 36, § 1483-A, of the Maine Revised Statutes, the City shall exempt from the
annual excise tax imposed pursuant to Title 36, Section 1482, of the Maine Revised Statutes
vehicles owned by a Maine resident who is on active duty serving in the Armed Forces of the
United States as defined by Title 36, § 1483-A, of the Maine Revised Statutes and who is
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
Lewiston Code Chapter 70
CH 70:39
permanently stationed at a military or naval post, station or base outside of the State of Maine or
who is deployed for military service for more than 180 days. To apply for the exemption the
resident must provide documentation as required pursuant to Title 36, § 1483-A, of the Maine
Revised Statutes to the Tax Collector or his/her designee and comply with any policies or rules
imposed by the Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles or Maine Revenue Services in relation to
registration procedures or the collection of excise tax. (Ord. No. 17-23, 01-04-18)
Sec. 70-302. Application.
To apply for the exemption, the resident must present to the Tax Collector or such other
officials as the Finance Director may designate an official certification from the commander of
the residents post, station, or base, or from the commander’s designated agent, that the resident is
permanently stationed at that post, station, or base or is deployed for military service for a period
of more than 180 days. Such certifications must be renewed on an annual basis.
(Ord. No. 17-23, 01-04-18)
Sec. 70-303. Effective date.
This exemption shall be effective for excise taxes due and payable as of the month
following the effective date of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 17-23, 01-04-18)
Chapters 71-73
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:1
Chapter 74
UTILITIES*
Article I. In General
Secs. 74-1--74-25. Reserved.
Article II. Sewers and Drains
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 74-26. Definitions.
Sec. 74-27. Drainage plan approval required prior to issuance of building permit.
Sec. 74-28. Alteration of drainage areas regulated.
Secs. 74-29--74-40. Reserved.
Division 2. Public Systems
Sec. 74-41. Intent and purpose.
Sec. 74-42. Use of public sewer required.
Sec. 74-43. Permit required to connect to public sewer.
Sec. 74-44. Application for permit; agreement required.
Sec. 74-45. Notification before connection to public sewer.
Sec. 74-46. Responsibility for connection costs.
Sec. 74-47. Independent building sewers required.
Sec. 74-48. Excavations to be guarded; restoration of public property.
Sec. 74-49. Regulation of connection to public sewer generally.
Sec. 74-50. Abandonment of service.
Sec. 74-51. Drain elevation.
Sec. 74-52. Use of old building sewers.
Sec. 74-53. Construction methods and materials.
Sec. 74-54. Revocation of permits to connect.
Sec. 74-55. Disposal of unpolluted wastes.
Sec. 74-56. Harmful wastes prohibited.
Sec. 74-57. Control of wastewater, waste strength.
Sec. 74-58. Grease, oil and sand interceptors; maintenance of preliminary treatment and
flow-equalizing facilities.
Sec. 74-59. Control structures and flow-measuring devices.
Sec. 74-60. Preliminary treatment facilities generally.
Sec. 74-61. Standard tests.
Sec. 74-62. Notice and cessation of violations.
Sec. 74-63. Liability of violator.
Sec. 74-64. Reports of industrial wastewater discharges; applicant to collect, analyze
wastewater.
Sec. 74-65. Special agreement to treat industrial waste.
Sec. 74-66. Measurements and analyses of industrial wastes.
Sec. 74-67. Sewerage system use charges.
Sec. 74-68. Surcharge limits defined.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:2
Secs. 74-69--74-80. Reserved.
Division 3. Private Facilities
Sec. 74-81. Minimum standards; disclaimer of liability.
Sec. 74-82. Violator's liability.
Sec. 74-83. Notice of violation.
Sec. 74-84. Sanitary facilities required.
Sec. 74-85. Independent system for each building; exception.
Sec. 74-86. Existing systems--Use and abandonment.
Sec. 74-87. Same--Inspection and permits.
Sec. 74-88. Installation to be made apart from other utilities, exception.
Sec. 74-89. Connection to public or community system.
Secs. 74-90--74-100. Reserved.
Division 4. Sewer Assessments
Sec. 74-101. Purpose.
Sec. 74-102. Authorization to adopt policy.
Sec. 74-103. Payment on term basis.
Sec. 74-104. Payment due, interest rate.
Secs. 74-105--74-115. Reserved.
Division 5. Sewer Impact Fees
Sec. 74-116. Purpose.
Sec. 74-117. Authorization to adopt policy.
Secs. 74-118--74-199. Reserved.
Article III. Non-Storm Water Discharge
Sec. 74-200. Purpose.
Sec. 74-201. Objectives.
Sec. 74-202. Definitions.
Sec. 74-203. Applicability.
Sec. 74-204. Responsibility for administration.
Sec. 74-205. Prohibition of non-storm water discharges.
Sec. 74-206. Suspension of access to the municipality's small MS4.
Sec. 74-207. Monitoring of discharges.
Sec. 74-208. Enforcement.
Sec. 74-209. Severability.
Sec. 74-210. Basis.
Secs. 74-211--74-299. Reserved.
Article IV. Stormwater Utility
Sec. 74-300. Findings.
Sec. 74-301. Purpose.
Sec. 74-302. Authority and jurisdiction.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:3
Sec. 74-303. Definitions.
Sec. 74-304. Establishment of stormwater fund.
Sec. 74-305. Requirements for on-site stormwater management.
Sec. 74-306. Services provided.
Sec. 74-307. Service area.
Sec. 74-308. Stormwater utility service fees.
Sec. 74-309. Credits and exemptions.
Sec. 74-310. Fee collection schedule.
Sec. 74-311. Right to enforcement and violations.
Sec. 74-312. Limitation of liability.
Sec. 74-313. Severability.
Sec. 74-314. Applicability.
*Cross references: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, ch. 66; zoning and land use,
app. A.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:4
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 74-1--74-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SEWERS AND DRAINS*
*State law references: Generally, 23 M.R.S.A. § 651 et seq., 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3401 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 74-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Applicant or owner means any person requesting approval to discharge domestic or
industrial wastewaters into facilities of the city.
Authority means the Lewiston-Auburn water pollution control authority or its duly
authorized representative.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of wastewater under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20
degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both wastewater and stormwater.
Director means the director of public works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
Domestic sewer means a sewer which carries domestic wastewater and to which
stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Domestic wastewater means the wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business
buildings, institutions, and the like. It may or may not contain groundwater, surface water or
stormwater.
E.P.A. means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States government.
Excessive means amounts or concentrations of a constituent of a wastewater which in the
judgment of the city will cause damage to any sewerage facility, which will be harmful to a
wastewater treatment process, which cannot be removed in the wastewater treatment works of
the authority to the degree required to meet the limiting stream classification standards of the
Androscoggin River, which can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, and/or which
can constitute a nuisance.
Facilities means and includes structures and conduits for the purpose of collecting,
treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of domestic wastewater and/or industrial or other
wastewaters as are disposed of by means of such structures and conduits, including treatment and
disposal works, necessary intercepting, outfall and outlet sewers, and pumping stations integral
to such facilities with sewers, equipment, furnishing thereof and other appurtenances connected
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:5
therewith.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and serving of food. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and its natural
moisture content.
Industrial wastewater means the wastewater in which the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, laboratory, trade or business predominates as distinct from domestic
wastewater.
Industry means an establishment with facilities for mechanical, testing, trade or
manufacturing purposes.
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per
liter of solution.
Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers
with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 cm) in any dimension.
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights,
and is owned, maintained and controlled by public authority (the city).
Receiving waters means any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer or other body
of surface water or groundwater receiving discharge of wastewaters.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more
than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
Spill means the release, accidental or otherwise, of any material not normally released to
the facilities, which by virtue of its volume, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics
creates a hazard to the facilities, their operation or their personnel. Such characteristics shall
include, but are not limited to, volatile, explosive, toxic or otherwise unacceptable materials.
Storm drain means a pipe or conduit for conveying rainwater, groundwater, subsurface
water, condensate, cooling water or other similar discharge to a storm drain or combined sewer.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in,
water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, and are
referred to as nonfilterable residue in the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as published by the American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association and Water Environment Federation.
Wastes means substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried in water.
Wastewater means the spent water of a community and may be a combination of the
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater treatment works means any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating wastewater.
Wastewater works means all structures, equipment and processes for collecting, pumping,
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:6
treating and disposing of wastewater.
(Code 1982, § 23-1)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 74-27. Drainage plan approval required prior to issuance of building permit.
Prior to the issuance of any building permits for a lot or lots which are not serviced by a
drainage plan approved by the director of public works, such plan shall be submitted by the
developer of the lot or lots and shall be considered for approval by the director. The drainage
plan shall show both sanitary and storm sewerage and, when requested by the director, water
mains.
(Code 1982, § 23-2)
Sec. 74-28. Alteration of drainage areas regulated.
(a) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
Alteration or to alter means to dam, to ditch, to pipe, to dredge, to fill, to deposit material
or to change the contours of the earth.
Drainageway means a stream or system of streams as well as the area needed to contain
the runoff of and to such streams, as well as outfalls of culverts crossing roadways, driveways,
walkways and railways.
Stream means any freely flowing water, whether permanent or intermittent.
(b) No person shall alter the contours of any stream or drainageway, in any zone, without
first obtaining an alteration permit from the building inspector, except when such
alteration is conducted in accordance with an approved subdivision plan.
(c) Alteration permits shall be issued by the building inspector, upon recommendation of the
director of public works, when it is found that such alterations will not cause water to
intrude upon adjacent parcels, that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse will be maintained, and that the alteration will not
otherwise endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public. Permits for temporary
alterations may be granted for a period not to exceed six months provided that no
permanent alteration of the stream or drainageway shall occur.
(d) The application to the building inspector for an alteration permit shall be supported by a
plan detailing the following information:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the property on which the alteration is to take
place.
(3) The exact location on the property of the proposed alteration.
(4) Reason for the proposed alteration.
(5) Description of work to be undertaken.
(e) In granting an alteration permit, the building inspector shall impose reasonable conditions
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:7
regarding the length of time required to complete the project, the area to be serviced, and
any other conditions he finds to be necessary to protect the interest of the public, abutting
owners or the city.
(f) It will be the responsibility of the building inspector to determine if a violation has
occurred, to notify the violator and owner, and to ensure that the violation is corrected.
(g) The fee for an alteration permit, covering three visits by the building inspector, shall be
$5.00. If additional inspections are necessary, a surcharge of $2.00 per extra visit will be
charged.
(h) Violation of this section shall be an offense.
(i) The state bureau of civil emergency preparedness and the Federal Insurance
Administration shall be notified in writing of all applications to alter or relocate a stream.
In riverine situations, potentially affected adjacent communities shall also be notified.
(Code 1982, § 23-3)
Secs. 74-29--74-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PUBLIC SYSTEMS
Sec. 74-41. Intent and purpose.
This division regulates the use of the public sewerage and drainage systems and the
discharge of waters and wastes into the systems and provides for sewerage system use charges
and for penalties for violations of this division.
(Code 1982, § 23-16)
Sec. 74-42. Use of public sewer required.
(a) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located a public domestic or combined sewer of the
city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that such public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be applicable to an accessory
structure located on the same lot as a principal building containing sanitary facilities
which are available at all times to users or occupants of the accessory structure. If food is
sold, served, prepared, processed, packaged or repackaged in or from the accessory
structure, the provisions of this subsection do not apply.
(Code 1982, § 23-17)
Sec. 74-43. Permit required to connect to public sewer.
No private drain or sewer shall be entered into a public sewer or storm drain or any
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:8
appurtenances thereof without a permit from the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 23-18)
State law references: Authority to require sewer connection, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3405.
Sec. 74-44. Application for permit; agreement required.
(a) Applications for permits to connect or disconnect with any public sewer or drain must be
made to the director of public works on a form prescribed and furnished by him at his
office. It must be accompanied by a certificate from the plumbing inspector after the
system of plumbing is approved by him. The application must be signed by the owner of
the premises to be connected, or his attorney, and must state the location of premises and
the name of the licensed plumber to be employed. All applications must be made prior to
the commencement of any work thereon and be accompanied by a fee set by policy to
cover the cost of processing the application and issuing the permit and inspecting the
connection or disconnection with a public sewer or drain, such funds to be deposited
directly into the sewer or drain account and used for sewer or drain purposes only. This
fee shall be in addition to the system use charges and impact fee.
(b) Each application under this division must include an agreement on the part of the owner
to abide by all the provisions of this chapter and all the rules and regulations established
by the director of public works and to waive any claim for damages in case of revocation
as provided in section 74-54.
(c) All applicants for permits for sewer connections involving industrial wastewater, in
addition to compliance to subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall also file application
for a permit to discharge wastes to the facilities of the Lewiston-Auburn water pollution
control authority. Such application shall be made directly to such authority, on forms
provided by the authority, with a copy to the city.
(Code 1982, § 23-19)
Sec. 74-45. Notification before connection to public sewer.
The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the director of public works when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the director of public works or his representative.
(Code 1982, § 23-20)
Sec. 74-46. Responsibility for connection costs.
All present or future costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Code 1982, § 23-21)
Sec. 74-47. Independent building sewers required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:9
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
(Code 1982, § 23-22)
Sec. 74-48. Excavations to be guarded; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
(Code 1982, § 23-23)
Sec. 74-49. Regulation of connection to public sewer generally.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other rules and regulations of the director of
public works. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director of public works before
installation.
(Code 1982, § 23-24)
Sec. 74-50. Abandonment of service.
No person shall dismantle or move any building in this city having a service entrance into
a public sewer without first having sealed the area of the entrance of the service into such
building with a masonry plug. If, upon examination by the plumbing inspector, the sewer service
is found to be unserviceable, the owner shall remove such service and seal the opening at the
main. No such work shall be undertaken until a permit, as described in section 74-44, is obtained.
(Code 1982, § 23-25)
Sec. 74-51. Drain elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought from the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means so that it may be discharged to the public sewer.
(Code 1982, § 23-26)
Sec. 74-52. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they can
be shown by the applicant to meet all requirements of this division.
(Code 1982, § 23-27)
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:10
Sec. 74-53. Construction methods and materials.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench,
shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other rules and
regulations of the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 23-28)
Sec. 74-54. Revocation of permits to connect.
Permits to connect with a sewer may at any time be revoked and annulled by the director
of public works or by the plumbing inspector for violation of section 74-44, and all parties in
interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim damages on account of such revocation,
provided that such revocation shall be annulled on compliance with the provisions in this chapter
and the rules and regulations of the city council and director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 23-29)
Sec. 74-55. Disposal of unpolluted wastes.
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process water to any domestic sewer. Existing plumbing systems not meeting this
requirement will be allowed until such time as repairs or renovations of the existing
plumbing system make separation feasible.
(b) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm drains or to a
natural outlet approved by the director of public works and the health officer. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged upon approval of the
director of public works to storm drains or natural outlets.
(c) In areas where the sewer system consists of combined sewers or where connections of
downspouts, surface drains, and other connections of unpolluted water to the wastewater
system have been allowed, the city:
(1) Shall permit no new construction of combined wastewater and stormwater
drainage systems on real properties. New wastewater and stormwater drainage
service connections shall be kept separated;
(2) Wherever feasible, shall reduce or eliminate storm drain connections that permit
the discharge into existing wastewater works of waters not containing domestic or
industrial wastewaters;
(3) Shall require that joints and openings of all domestic wastewater systems shall be
made watertight to prevent excess infiltration or exfiltration;
(4) Where circumstances make compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this
section impractical according to the judgment of the director of public works, then
the director may approve a plan for discharge of such waters listed in subsections
(a) and (b) of this section in an alternate manner, taking into consideration the
existing sewer system, the effect of the plan on the environment of the area and on
the sewer system for the city.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:11
(Code 1982, § 23-30)
Sec. 74-56. Harmful wastes prohibited.
(a) No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into any sewer under the
control of the city the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if in the
opinion of the authority or city council on recommendation of the director of public
works such substances, materials, waters or wastes are in excessive amounts or
concentrations.
(b) Unless allowed under section 74-57, wastewaters and wastes considered to contain
excessive constituents or characteristics as determined by the authority and the city, and
therefore prohibited, include:
(1) Any wastewaters containing toxic or poisonous liquids, bases or solids in
excessive quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes.
(2) Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit.
(3) Any wastewaters containing caustic alkalinity, calculated as CaCO3 (calcium
carbonate) in excess of 100 mg/l, or in volumes which may be excessive.
(4) Any wastewaters having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers,
structures, equipment, processes or personnel at the wastewater works.
(5) Any wastewaters containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not,
in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit.
(6) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
(7) Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size as to be capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(8) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(9) Any wastewaters containing excessive amounts of iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
mercury, mineral acid and similar objectionable or toxic substances.
(10) Any wastewaters containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances
in excessive amounts.
(11) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes in excessive amounts or of such halflife or
concentration as may exceed limits established in applicable state or federal
regulations or by the authority or city.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:12
(12) Any wastewaters containing:
a. An average concentration of suspended solids in excess of 400 mg/l or an
average concentration of excessive dissolved solids (such as, but not
limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) of 600 mg/l.
b. Materials which cause excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
c. An average concentration of BOD in excess of 500 mg/l, or material
which causes unusual chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements.
d. Materials in such concentration as to constitute slugs.
e. Materials which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only
to such a limited degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
f. Septic tank solids except under specific license from the authority and at
locations designated by the authority.
(c) Persons who desire to discharge industrial wastewaters into facilities of the city shall
make their formal application to the authority, with a copy to the city. In forming an
opinion as to the limitations on acceptability of any wastes, the city and the authority will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flow
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the
wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
(d) Any person discharging industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly into facilities of the
city that do not comply with this division may be subject to action by the city or
authority, which action may include, but not be limited to, the withdrawal of permission
to discharge wastewaters into facilities of the city.
(e) Limits of acceptable amounts and concentrations of the constituents of wastewater to be
discharged to facilities of the city shall be the same as are established by the authority.
(f) Any spill as defined in section 74-26 shall be reported immediately to the authority.
(g) Any damages experienced by the facility as the result of a spill are considered a violation
of this division and costs for repair, replacement or other associated costs are recoverable
under section 74-63.
(Code 1982, § 23-31)
Sec. 74-57. Control of wastewater, waste strength.
If any wastewaters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, containing excessive substances or possessing excessive characteristics, as
enumerated in section 74-56, the city may:
(1) Reject the wastewaters or the wastes;
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:13
(2) Require that pretreatment of wastewaters or wastes be provided to modify them to
an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge of the wastewaters or
the wastes; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not
covered by sewerage use charges under the provisions of sections 74-67 and 74-
68.
(Code 1982, § 23-32)
Sec. 74-58. Grease, oil and sand interceptors; maintenance of preliminary treatment and
flow-equalizing facilities.
(a) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of
public works or the authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director
of public works and the authority, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(b) When preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at his expense.
(Code 1982, § 23-33)
Sec. 74-59. Control structures and flow-measuring devices.
When required by the director of public works or the authority, the owner of any property
served by a public sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure and
wastewater flow-measuring and monitoring device in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures and measuring devices, when required,
shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans
approved by the director of public works and the authority. The structure and flow-measuring
device shall be installed by the owner at his own expense and shall be maintained by him so as to
meet the standards set by the director of public works and the authority at all times.
(Code 1982, § 23-34)
Sec. 74-60. Preliminary treatment facilities generally.
The applicant shall provide such works for the preliminary treatment of the wastewater,
drainage, substances or wastes as may be required to carry out the purpose of this division by the
city and the authority, and the applicant will permit duly authorized representatives of the city or
the authority to enter the premises of the industry to sample and measure wastewaters, as needed
to check characteristics of the wastewaters, when so directed by the authority. Applications for
pretreatment facilities are to be accompanied by plans, specifications and other pertinent
information relating to these facilities; along with data showing essential characteristics of all
wastewater outlets, analyses of existing wastewater (see section 74-66), and statements as to
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:14
existing and expected average and maximum wastewater flows. All of this information must be
submitted to and approved by the city and the authority prior to initiating discharge into facilities
of the authority or the city. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and efficient operation by the owner
at his expense.
(Code 1982, § 23-35)
Sec. 74-61. Standard tests.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of the waters and wastes to
which reference is made in section 74-66 shall be determined in accordance with the Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control
structure provided for in section 74-59, or upon suitable samples taken at the control structure. If
no special structure has been required, a control structure shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole to the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is
connected.
(Code 1982, § 23-36)
Sec. 74-62. Notice and cessation of violations.
Any person found to be violating or in violation of any provision of this division shall be
served by the city council, on recommendation of the director of public works, with a written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, as determined by
the director, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in the notice, permanently cease all such violations.
(Code 1982, § 23-37)
Sec. 74-63. Liability of violator.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city
for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(Code 1982, § 23-38)
Sec. 74-64. Reports of industrial wastewater discharges; applicant to collect, analyze
wastewater.
(a) If deemed necessary by the director of public works, each applicant shall submit an
annual report on July 1 each year, or such other time as designated by the authority, to the
authority, with a copy to the city, containing information as to the minimum, average and
peak flows of industrial wastewater discharges during the previous year and at such time
or times designated by the authority, accompanied by designated analyses of wastewater
samplings taken in an acceptable manner at approved times during the flow measuring
periods.
(b) Each applicant will be responsible, at his own expense, to collect and analyze wastewater
from his property in a manner prescribed by the city.
(Code 1982, § 23-39)
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:15
Sec. 74-65. Special agreement to treat industrial waste.
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
(Code 1982, § 23-40)
Sec. 74-66. Measurements and analyses of industrial wastes.
Measurement and analyses of industrial wastes are to include, but not necessarily be
limited to, items from the following list where applicable. The analyses are to be conducted in
accordance with the methods prescribed in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water, as published by the American Public Health
Association, American Water Works Association and Water Environment Federation. If any
item is not applicable, it shall be so stated on the report of the measurements and the reason for
deletion stated.
(1) Physical parameters:
Flow
pH
Temperature
Color
Specific conductance
(2) Chemical parameters:
Total solids
Total volatile solids
Total suspended solids
Total dissolved solids
Acidity
Alkalinity
Five-day BOD
COD
Oil and grease
Chloride
Sulfate
Sulfide
Phenols
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:16
NH3 (as N)
NO3 (as N)
NO2 (as N)
Kjeldahl organic nitrogen (as N)
Ortho-phosphorous (as P)
Total phosphorous
Cr, Cu, Fe, Cd, Pb, Mn, Zn, F, As, Hg
(Code 1982, § 23-41)
Sec. 74-67. Sewerage system use charges.
(a) From time to time, the city council upon recommendation from the director of public
works and city administrator shall, after public notice and hearing, establish a schedule of
rates for sewerage system use charges. The rate schedule shall include a minimum rate
and a surcharge for high concentration wastewater.
(b) The quantity of wastewater shall be the actual quantity of water supplied as determined
from the water meter readings made by the water division of the department of public
works, except that the director of public works upon approval of the city administrator
shall adjust the amount of wastewater where it can be determined that the amount of
wastewater is greater than or less than the amount of water supplied by the water
division.
(c) Where domestic wastewater is discharged by a person to a public sewer and water is
supplied from sources other than the water department, the quantity of wastewater
discharged shall be determined as the average quantity of wastewater discharged by five
similar persons. Upon request by the person, the sewer department of the department of
public works will install a water meter in the water supply system of the person for the
purpose of determining the quantity of wastewater discharged.
(d) The surcharge for high concentration wastewater shall be determined as provided for in
section 74-68.
(e) Billing for sewerage system use charges may be made quarterly.
(f) Where sewerage system use charges are not paid within a reasonable time, the lien
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3406 shall become applicable to the unpaid balance.
(g) The sewerage system use charges established in this division shall be collected from the
owners, occupants and users of the premises within the city at the owner's cost.
(Code 1982, § 23-42)
Sec. 74-68. Surcharge limits defined.
(a) Where the strength or characteristics of wastewater accepted into the public sewers
exceeds the standards set forth in this section, and subject to the conditions set forth in
section 74-57, a surcharge shall be added to the normal sewerage use charge. For the
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:17
purpose of fixing surcharge rates, the characteristics indicating surchargeable wastewater
strength are:
Suspended solids in excess of 300 mg/l.
Biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 250 mg/l.
(b) The city may adjust these surchargeable characteristics and the surcharge levels
whenever necessary.
(c) This section does not interfere with the right of an industry to make a special agreement
or arrangement with the city (section 74-65).
(Code 1982, § 23-43)
Secs. 74-69--74-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. PRIVATE FACILITIES
Sec. 74-81. Minimum standards; disclaimer of liability.
The provisions of this division are to be considered minimal, and compliance therewith
shall not constitute or be construed to be grounds for any action against or liability on the part of
the city or any of its employees for any subsequent failure of any part or of the whole of any
sewage disposal system except as may be provided for by law.
(Code 1982, § 23-61)
Sec. 74-82. Violator's liability.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city
for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the city by reason of such violation.
(Code 1982, § 23-62)
Sec. 74-83. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating or in violation of any provision of this division shall be
served by the city, by its health officer, with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit, as determined by the plumbing inspector, for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all such violations.
(Code 1982, § 23-63)
Sec. 74-84. Sanitary facilities required.
(a) Every building intended for human habitation, use or occupancy shall have sanitary
facilities for disposing of human excreta and liquid conveyed material, including
bathroom, kitchen and laundry wastes, approved by the plumbing inspector as provided
for in this division.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be applicable to an accessory
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:18
structure located on the same lot as a principal building containing sanitary facilities
which are available at all times to users or occupants of the accessory structure. If food is
sold, served, prepared, processed, packaged or repackaged in or from the accessory
structure, the provisions of this subsection do not apply.
(Code 1982, § 23-64)
Sec. 74-85. Independent system for each building; exception.
(a) The sewer or drain and plumbing system of each new building and of new work installed
in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any other
building except as provided for in this division; and every building shall have an
independent connection with a public or community sewerage system when available, or
a private sewage disposal system.
(b) When one building stands or is to be constructed in the rear of another building on an
interior lot and no sewer or drain is available or can be constructed to the rear building,
the sewer or drain of the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole will be considered as an independent connection.
(Code 1982, § 23-65)
Sec. 74-86. Existing systems--Use and abandonment.
The sewer or drain of a new building may be connected to an existing sewer or drain or
sewage disposal system if, on examination and test, the existing sewer or drain or sewage
disposal system is found to be adequate and in suitable condition for further use as provided for
in this division. Any sewer or drain or sewage disposal system found not adequate or suitable
shall be altered to meet the requirements of this division or shall be abandoned. Every abandoned
sewer or drain shall be plugged with concrete for at least one foot of its length or, if the sewer or
drain extends into a building, it shall be stopped by capping the sewer or drain with a cap
properly leaded in place. Every abandoned septic tank or cesspool shall be drained and then
filled with gravel or earth or other suitable material.
(Code 1982, § 23-76)
Sec. 74-87. Same--Inspection and permits.
The determination of the adequacy and condition of any existing sewer or drain
connected to a public or community sewerage system shall be made by the director of public
works and he shall issue a permit to make use of such existing sewer or drain only when the
provisions of this division have been complied with. If such existing sewer or drain or sewage
disposal system is private, the determination of its adequacy and condition shall be made by the
plumbing inspector and he shall issue a permit to make use of such existing sewer or drain or
sewage disposal system only when the provisions of this division have been complied with.
(Code 1982, § 23-77)
Sec. 74-88. Installation to be made apart from other utilities, exception.
The sewer or drain shall be installed in a trench not used in common with any other
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:19
utility except that when the sewer or drain is installed in a trench excavated through bedrock, the
director of public works may, at his discretion, permit joint use of the trench with other utilities
in accordance with such rules and regulations as he may prescribe.
(Code 1982, § 23-78)
Sec. 74-89. Connection to public or community system.
If a public or community sewage disposal system is extended to the point where it
becomes feasible to connect a sewer or drain already connected to a private sewage disposal
system, such sewer or drain shall be connected without delay to the public or community system
if the health officer declares that the operation or failure of the private sewage disposal system
constitutes a nuisance or health hazard. The owner of the private sewage disposal system shall, at
his own expense, connect his sewer or drain to the public or community system. No effluent
from any septic tank or cesspool shall be allowed to enter a public or community sewage
disposal system without prior approval from the director of public works.
(Code 1982, § 23-79)
Secs. 74-90--74-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. SEWER ASSESSMENTS
Sec. 74-101. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to provide a means for property abutters to pay a sewer
assessment on a term basis whenever a sanitary sewer project is undertaken. The abutter may
choose to pay the assessment on a lump sum basis or on a term basis.
(Code 1982, § 23-101)
Sec. 74-102. Authorization to adopt policy.
The city council shall adopt a sanitary sewer assessment policy to carry out the purpose
of this division, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3442.
(Code 1982, § 23-102)
Sec. 74-103. Payment on term basis.
The abutter opting for payment under this division on a term basis shall comply with the
policy prescribed by the city council, and further execute an agreement to be recorded in the
county registry of deeds.
(Code 1982, § 23-103)
Sec. 74-104. Payment due, interest rate.
The city council shall annually file with the collector a list of installment payments due
the city, which shall be collected at the rate determined by the city council.
(Code 1982, § 23-104)
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:20
Secs. 74-105--74-115. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. SEWER IMPACT FEES*
*State law references: Authority to establish schedule of charges for sewage disposal, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3406.
Sec. 74-116. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to provide a means for sanitary sewer users to pay a fee to
offset the effect additional sewer connections and use will have on the existing sanitary sewer
system and a means for sanitary sewer users to pay their fair share of the existing sewer system
and improvements thereto, including sewer mains, pumping stations and the wastewater
treatment plant. The fees shall be used to offset the effect of new or changed connections to the
existing sanitary sewer system as may be provided by the capital improvement program, section
6.05 of the Charter. Such fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or a
sewer connection permit. Such fees may be applicable to both new structures and/or uses and
existing structures and/or uses.
(Code 1982, § 23-125)
Sec. 74-117. Authorization to adopt policy.
The city council shall adopt a sewer impact fee policy to carry out the purpose of this
division.
(Code 1982, § 23-126)
Secs. 74-118--74-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE
Sec. 74-200. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the City of Lewiston through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the
municipality's storm drainage system as required by federal and state law. This article establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's storm drainage system in
order to comply with requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and state law.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-201. Objectives.
The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prohibit unpermitted or unallowed non-storm water discharges to the storm
drainage system; and
(2) To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection,
monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:21
article.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-202. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq., also known as the "Clean Water Act"), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Discharge. "Discharge" means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying,
dumping, disposing or other addition of pollutants to "waters of the state", "direct
discharge" or "point source" means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other
floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
Enforcement authority. The person(s) or department authorized under section 74-
204 of this article shall administer and enforce this article.
Exempt person or discharge. Means any person who is subject to a multi-sector
general permit for industrial activities, a general permit for construction activity, a
general permit for the discharge of stormwater from the Maine Department of
Transportation and the Maine Turnpike Authority Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems, or a general permit for the discharge of stormwater from state or federally
owned authority municipal separate storm sewer system facilities; and any non-storm
water discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge license or
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection ("DEP").
Illicit discharge. Any direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in this article.
The term does not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES storm water
discharge permit or a surface water discharge permit, or resulting from fire fighting
activities exempted pursuant to this article.
Industrial activity. Activity or activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
Municipality. The City of Lewiston, Maine.
Municipal separate storm sewer system, or MS4. "Municipal separate storm sewer
system" or "MS4" means conveyances for storm water, including, but not limited to,
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and
combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire
district, state agency or federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to
surface waters of the state.
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water discharge
permit. This means a permit issued by the EPA or by the DEP that authorizes the
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:22
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
Non-storm water discharge. Means any discharge to an MS4 that is not composed
entirely of storm water.
Person. Means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal
corporation, state agency or federal agency or other legal entity which creates, initiates,
originates or maintains a discharge of storm water or a non-storm water discharge.
Pollutant. Means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage,
refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of
any kind.
Premises. Means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within
the municipality from which discharges into the storm drainage system are or may be
created, initiated, originated or maintained.
Regulated small MS4. "Regulated small MS4" means any small MS4 regulated by
the State of Maine "General permit for the discharge of stormwater from small municipal
separate storm sewer systems", dated June 3, 2003 ("general permit"), including all those
located partially or entirely within an urbanized area (UA) and those additional small
MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the general permit have been
designated by the DEP as regulated small MS4s.
Small municipal separate storm sewer system, or small MS4, means any MS4 that
is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including municipally
owned or operated storm sewer systems, state or federally-owned systems, such as
colleges, universities, prisons, Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike
Authority road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
Storm drainage system. The municipality's regulated small MS4 and areas outside
the UA that drain into the regulated MS4 and all premises.
Storm water. Any storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage; "Stormwater" has the same meaning as "storm water".
Urbanized area ("UA"). "Urbanized area" or "UA" means the areas of the State of
Maine so defined by the latest decennial census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-203. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all persons discharging storm water and/or non-storm water
discharges from any premises into the storm drainage system.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-204. Responsibility for administration.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:23
The city administrator or his/her designee is the enforcement authority who shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-205. Prohibition of non-storm water discharges.
(a) General prohibition. Except as allowed or exempted herein, no person shall create,
initiate, originate or maintain a non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system.
Such non-storm water discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the fact that the
municipality may have approved the connections, drains or conveyances by which a
person discharges un-allowed non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system.
(b) Allowed non-storm water discharges. The creation, initiation, origination or maintenance
of the following non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system is allowed:
(1) Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters;
uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20));
uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated flows from foundation
drains; air conditioning and compressor condensate; irrigation water; flows from
uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
uncontaminated flows from footing drains; lawn watering runoff; flows from
riparian habitats and wetlands; residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred, unless all spilled material has
been removed and detergents are not used); hydrant flushing and fire fighting
activity runoff; water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
and individual residential car washing;
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the enforcement authority as being necessary
to protect public health and safety; and
(3) Dye testing, with verbal notification to the enforcement authority prior to the time
of the test.
(c) Exempt person or discharge. This article shall not apply to an exempt person or
discharge, except that the enforcement authority may request from exempt persons and
persons with exempt discharges copies of permits, notices of intent, licenses and orders
from the EPA or DEP that authorize the discharge(s).
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-206. Suspension of access to the municipality's small MS4.
The enforcement authority may, without prior notice, physically suspend discharge access to the
storm drainage system to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened non-storm water discharge(s) to the storm drainage system which present or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the storm drainage system, or which may cause the municipality to violate the
terms of its environmental permits. Such suspension may include, but is not limited to, blocking
pipes, constructing dams or taking other measures, on public ways or public property, to
physically block the discharge to prevent or minimize non-storm water discharges to the storm
drainage system. If the person fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:24
the enforcement authority may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the storm drainage system, or to minimize danger to persons, provided, however, that
in taking such steps the enforcement authority may only enter upon the premises that is the
source of the actual or threatened non-storm water discharge to the storm drainage system with
the consent of the premises' owner, occupant or agent. (Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-207. Monitoring of discharges.
In order to determine compliance with this article, the enforcement authority may enter
upon and inspect premises subject to this article at reasonable hours with the consent of the
premises' owner, occupant or agent; to inspect the premises and connections thereon to the storm
drainage system; and to conduct monitoring sampling and testing of the discharge to the storm
drainage system.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-208. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this article. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a
person has violated this article, the enforcement authority may enforce this article in accordance
with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person
has violated this article, the enforcement authority may order compliance with this
article by written notice of violation to that person indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without
limitation:
a. The elimination of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage
system;
b. The cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
article;
c. At the person's expense, the abatement or remediation (in accordance with
best management practices in DEP rules and regulations) of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system and the restoration of any
affected property; and/or
d. The payment of fines, of the municipality's remediation costs and of the
municipality's reasonable administrative costs and attorneys' fees and
costs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement
or restoration must be completed.
(2) Penalties/fines/injunctive relief. Any person who violates this article shall be
subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible
for the municipality's attorney's fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violations continues shall constitute a separate
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:25
violation. Moreover, any person who violates this article also shall be responsible
for any and all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to
attorneys' fees and costs, incurred by the municipality for violation of federal and
state environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to that person's
violation of this article; this responsibility shall be in addition to any penalties,
fines or injunctive relief imposed under this section.
(3) Consent agreement. The enforcement authority may, with the approval of the
municipal officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to
address timely abatement of the violation(s) of this article for the purposes of
eliminating violations of this article and of recovering fines, costs and fees
without court action.
(4) Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation or
suspension notice may appeal the determination of the enforcement authority to
the board of appeals in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances. The notice
of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation.
The board of appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The board of appeals may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision of the enforcement authority. A suspension under
section 74-206 of this article remains in place unless or until lifted by the board of
appeals or by a reviewing court. A party aggrieved by the decision of the board of
appeals may appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of
the date of the board of appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure.
(5) Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal,
within 45 days of the decision of the municipal board of appeals upholding the
decision of the enforcement authority, then the enforcement authority may
recommend to the municipal officers that the town attorney file an enforcement
action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure.
(6) Ultimate responsibility of discharger. The standards set forth herein are minimum
standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized
discharge of pollutants into waters of the U.S. caused by said person. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the municipality, or any agent or employee
thereof for any damages that result from any person's reliance on this article or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-209. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses,
sentences, or paragraphs or application of this article.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:26
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Sec. 74-210. Basis.
The City of Lewiston enacts this article pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 (Municipal
Home Rule Ordinance Authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the "Wastewater Discharge Law"), 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the "Clean Water Act"), and 40 CFR Part 122 (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's regulations governing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
("NPDES")). The Maine Department of Environmental Protection, through its promulgation of
the "general permit for the discharge of stormwater from small municipal separate storm sewer
systems", dated June 3, 2003, has listed the City of Lewiston as having a regulated small
municipal separate storm sewer system ("small MS4"); under this general permit, listing as a
regulated small MS4 necessitates enactment of this article as part of the municipality's storm
water management program.
(Ord. No. 05-14, 9-8-05)
Secs. 74-211--74-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STORMWATER UTILITY
Sec. 74-300. Findings.
Whereas the city council finds that water quality in the watersheds within and
surrounding the city, including but not limited to watersheds associated with the Androscoggin
River, No Name Pond, Garcelon Bog, Jepson Brook, Hart Brook, No Name Brook, Stetson
Brook, Gully Brook, Goff Brook, Moody Brook and Salmon Brook, along with their tributaries
are potentially threatened by pollutants associated with existing land use and future development;
and
Whereas the city council finds that poor water quality in the watershed can threaten
public health, safety, and welfare; and
Whereas the existing stormwater management system is deteriorating and may be
inadequate to meet existing and future needs, and flooding concerns may arise; and
Whereas requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") demand a
comprehensive approach to municipal stormwater management, and the city wishes to take a
proactive approach to these requirements; and
The city council makes the following additional findings:
• The stormwater management needs of the city have been identified in a needs analysis
entitled (Stormwater/CSO Utility Feasibility Study Preliminary Results) dated
April 11, 2002, by Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc. and an analysis entitled "Clean
Water Act Master Plan" dated December 12, 2000, by Metcalf & Eddy
("stormwater studies") that indicate more effective stormwater management in the
city would contribute to the health, safety and welfare of the residents. Further,
this analysis reveals that stormwater facilities and activities associated with
stormwater management provide services and benefits to all properties, property
owners, residents and citizens of the city.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:27
• Given the scope of stormwater management needs identified by the stormwater studies,
it is appropriate and necessary to authorize the formation of a stormwater utility
unit, as a program comprised of personnel from the city's department of public
services and department of public works and with dedicated funding components,
charged with the responsibility to establish, operate, maintain, control, and
enhance the stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities of
the city.
• In order to establish, operate, and maintain the stormwater infrastructure of the city,
ensure the future usefulness of the existing system through additions and
improvements, and provide other services associated with stormwater and
watershed management, sufficient and stable funding is required for the operation,
maintenance and improvement of the stormwater management programs, services,
systems, and facilities of the city.
• A stormwater utility service fee schedule that efficiently takes into account impervious
surface area, and uses intensity and nature of land use as the most appropriate and
equitable method of allocating the cost of stormwater management programs,
services, systems, and facilities of the city and between and among rural and
urbanized areas of the city and residential dwelling units, non-residential
properties and other developed lands for governing assessments and collections of
the utility.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-301. Purpose.
Stormwater runoff is one (1) of the largest contributors to water quality violations in
urban and urbanizing areas of Maine. According to the US EPA, polluted stormwater runoff is a
leading cause of impairment to the nearly forty (40) percent of surveyed U.S. water bodies which
do not meet water quality standards (U.S. EPA, 1995). When polluted stormwater runoff is
discharged directly into surface water bodies, several adverse effects can occur: public health can
be threatened from contaminated drinking water sources, food sources, and recreational waters;
aquatic habitats can be damaged or destroyed; and aesthetic values of waterways can decline.
Management of stormwater is critical to ensuring the integrity of valuable surface water
resources. An effective approach to managing stormwater and related impacts is creation of a
utility that delivers stormwater management services to a community.
Therefore, the city hereby establishes a stormwater management utility for the following
purposes:
• To determine the necessary level of municipal stormwater management services for the
city;
• To maintain and improve the drainage facilities of the city, to ensure that they perform
to design capacity while using best management practices to meet local, state, and
federal water quality standards;
• To mitigate the damaging effects of uncontrolled and unmanaged stormwater runoff;
• To support and promote sound stormwater management practices that mitigate nonpoint
source pollution, reduce flooding, and enhance area drainage within the city
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:28
and;
• To support the goals and objectives of the city ordinances addressing stormwater
management in other sections of this Code of Ordinances and to comply with
applicable law, including the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Regulations.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-302. Authority and jurisdiction.
(a) Under the authority of the Maine Constitution, Article VIII, and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §
3001, the city hereby establishes the Lewiston Stormwater Utility ("utility") as a program
comprised of personnel of the department of public services and department of public
works to provide stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities of
the city. The city administrator will appoint a superintendent of stormwater management
and a director of field operations to carry out the responsibilities of the utility.
(b) The utility or its designee is authorized to assess and collect service fees from all persons
owning land within the municipality that benefit from the services provided by the utility,
including all persons that own land from which stormwater runoff discharges directly or
indirectly to the stormwater management systems and facilities managed by the utility.
(c) The utility will assume all responsibility for providing stormwater management
programs, services, systems, and facilities of the city, including maintaining and
improving stormwater infrastructure; providing engineering services for stormwater
management; regulating, in accordance with local, state and federal regulations,
stormwater discharges from each parcel contributing to the stormwater management
systems and facilities; and collecting utility fees. The superintendent of stormwater
management, or his/her designated representative, is authorized to make
recommendations for stormwater management plans during any required review process
for new and/or existing development.
(d) The boundaries and jurisdiction of the stormwater utility shall encompass all portions of
the City of Lewiston.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-303. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Maine's Stormwater Management Law and Regulations (38
M.R.S.A. § 420D; 06-096 CMR Ch. 500 (Oct. 30, 2005), are incorporated herein by reference.
Additional terms used in this article are defined as follows:
Credit: Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater
service fee to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an
effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or other
service or activity that reduces the stormwater management utility's cost of providing
services.
Customers of the stormwater utility: Customers of the stormwater utility shall
include all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:29
acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public
stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private
stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and
entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater
management program.
Developed land: Developed land shall mean property altered from its natural state
by removal of vegetation, construction, or installation of improvements such as buildings,
structures, or other impervious surfaces, or by other alteration of the property that results
in a meaningful change in the hydrology of the property during and following rainfall
events (agricultural and forestry operations that do not create impervious surface area
excepted).
Ephemeral stream: A channel that flows only during wet weather following a
precipitation event and typically flows no more than a few days after the storm.
Equivalent residential unit (ERU): A measure used to standardize the utility
service fees for residential properties, or classes of residential properties, and based on
the average amount of impervious area of a base residential parcel. The ERU shall also be
used as the basis for standardizing and determining the equivalent size of non-residential
properties and other developed lands. The staff of the utility, together with consulting
engineers, shall undertake an analysis to identify the amount of square feet of impervious
surface area of an ERU and this will be identified as part of the stormwater service fee
schedule policy.
Exemption: Exemption shall mean not applying to, or removing the application of
the stormwater management utility service fee from, a property. No permanent exemption
shall be granted based on taxable or non-taxable status or economic status of the property
owner.
Hydrologic response: The hydrologic response of a property is the manner
whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property.
Impervious surfaces: Impervious surfaces are those areas that prevent or impede
the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to
development. Impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks,
walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel surfaces,
awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces that prevent or impede
the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development.
Intermittent stream: A stream or river that flows during both wet and dry weather
only during the wettest part of the year and exhibits no flow during dry weather during at
least a portion of the year, and is depicted as a thin solid line on United States Geological
Survey (USGS) quadrangle maps.
Other developed lands: Other developed lands shall mean, but not be limited to,
mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures,
industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with
impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools
and universities, colleges, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent
centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water and wastewater
treatment plants, and lands in other uses which alter the hydrology of the property from
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:30
that which would exist in a natural state.
Perennial stream: A stream or river that flows during both wet and dry weather
throughout the year and over multiple years in duration, and that is depicted as a bold line
on USGS quadrangle maps.
Pollution: The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any natural waters of the City of Lewiston, or the discharge of
any liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive or other substance into any such waters as will or
is likely to create a nuisance, or render such water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to
the public health, safety and welfare or to other beneficial uses.
Residential dwelling unit: Residential dwelling unit shall mean developed land
containing one or more structures and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a
bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy for dwelling purposes. Dwelling
units may include single-family houses, single duplex units under common ownership,
manufactured homes, condominiums, townhouses, and mobile homes located on one or
more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a residential
dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses
such as barns, garages, carports, or small storage buildings such as tool sheds or
woodsheds.
Stormwater: Precipitation as it falls to the earth, surface runoff and drainage, and
paths taken by such water.
Stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities: Stormwater
management programs, services, systems, and facilities are those administrative,
engineering, operational, regulatory, and capital improvement activities and functions
performed by the City of Lewiston in connection with managing the stormwater
management systems and facilities of the city, plus all other activities and functions
necessary to support the provision of such programs and services.
Stormwater management systems and facilities: Those natural and man-made
channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds,
drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes, city and state
roads including the Maine Turnpike and other physical works, properties, and
improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of
stormwater runoff and its discharge to and impact upon receiving waters.
Stormwater service fees: Stormwater service fees shall mean the periodic service
fee imposed pursuant to this article for the purpose of funding costs related to stormwater
management programs, services, systems, and facilities.
Stormwater service fee schedule policy: The policy approved by the city council
identifying the specific fee structure and formulas upon which stormwater service fees
and credits will be based.
Undeveloped land: Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified
to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an
unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no
pavement, asphalt, or compacted dirt or gravel surfaces or structures which create an
impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:31
collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur
naturally.
Lewiston Stormwater Utility: The program within the City of Lewiston staffed by
the public services department and public works department, responsible for providing
the stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06; Ord. No. 06-14, 11-2-06)
Sec. 74-304. Establishment of stormwater fund.
(a) The city administrator shall establish a dedicated stormwater fund in the city budget and
an accounting system for the purpose of managing all funds collected for the purposes
and responsibilities of the utility. All revenues and receipts of the utility shall be placed in
the stormwater fund, which shall be separate from all other funds, and only the expenses
of stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities of the city shall be
paid by the fund.
(b) The utility and the stormwater fund may also accept loans, state, federal and private
grants, and allocations of funds from the city's general fund or special purpose funds.
(c) Stormwater service fees will be set at a rate that covers the costs necessary to carry out
the stormwater management programs, services, systems and facilities approved by the
city as necessary to carry out the functions of the utility. Expenditure of funds from the
stormwater fund is limited to the following:
• Operating expenses;
• Non-operating expenses, such as equipment and supplies;
• Payment on principal and interest on debt obligations;
• Capital investments including stormwater best management practices (BMPs) and
components (e.g., purchase of plants and other amenities to support stormwater
management alternatives utilizing vegetation);
• Reserve expenses; and
• Others costs as deemed necessary by the city council.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-305. Requirements for on-site stormwater management.
All property owners and developers of property within the city shall provide, manage,
maintain and operate their stormwater systems to meet all requirements of the Maine Stormwater
Management Law, and regulations and all other applicable stormwater management
requirements now specified or later specified in this Code of Ordinances, including, but not
limited to, the non-stormwater discharge ordinance (section 74-200 et seq.), the private
stormwater elimination policy, and applicable development performance standards contained in
the Code of Ordinances. The city council hereby adopts and incorporates the requirements of the
private stormwater elimination policy, subject to revision and amendment by the council upon
recommendation of the superintendent of stormwater.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:32
Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to
abatement action, in addition to the enforcement actions described in subsection 74-311(a). In
the event that a public nuisance is found to exist by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, and the
property owner fails to abate said nuisance within a reasonable time as allowed by the court, the
city may take all legally authorized actions necessary to enforce the court's judgment, including
entering upon the property and causing such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed,
with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against
the property. From the date of filing such action, the city shall have lien rights that may be
perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. The
city shall have the right, pursuant to this article, for its designated officer and employees to enter
upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to
the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in
order to ensure compliance. Failure to comply with the standards identified herein will also
subject the property owner to enforcement action, as described in section 74-311, herein.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-306. Services provided.
(a) For the purposes of operating, maintaining and improving the stormwater management
system and facilities, the city owns or has legal access to portions of the system that:
• Are located within public streets, easements, and rights-of-way of the jurisdiction;
and/or
• Are subject to access provisions established by city for the purpose of operating,
maintaining, and/or improving stormwater systems and facilities.
(b) Stormwater systems located on private property or on public property for which no
access provisions have been made shall be considered the legal responsibility of the
property owner.
(c) The utility may provide some or all of the following services in exchange for collecting a
service fee:
• Administer the stormwater management program for the city;
• Perform necessary studies and analysis of the service area or potential service area(s);
• Acquire, construct, operate, maintain, manage, protect, and enhance the stormwater
infrastructure, including betterments and connections to the public drainage
system; mapping of natural and man-made features affecting stormwater
management;
• Detect and eliminate illicit discharges to the stormwater management system;
• Periodically inspect properties to determine contribution to municipal stormwater load;
• Inventory stormwater management facilities;
• Maintain an up-to-date database of residential and non-residential properties in the
service area, billing class codes for each parcel, runoff contributions of each
property to the stormwater system for non-residential properties, and charges and
payments for each account;
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:33
• Determine compliance with applicable local, state and federal regulations, the
stormwater discharges from each parcel contributing to the stormwater system;
• Perform inspections of stormwater management structures and facilities, both during
and after development/construction;
• Perform master planning and engineering for watershed management and capital
improvements;
• Recommend and provide advice to update and/or revise local comprehensive plans with
respect to stormwater management;
• Obtain federal and state permits necessary to conduct its duties;
• Obtain and administer grants and loans from public and private sources as authorized by
the city council;
• Receive and track service fees collected by the city;
• Review development plans and provide comment to the planning and code enforcement
department of the city;
• Make recommendations regarding acquisition of property, easements and rights-of-way
in critical areas serving as buffers, retention or infiltrating areas, or providing
means to gain access to properties to perform utility duties.
• Educate and inform the public about the impacts of stormwater runoff and the
components of a stormwater management plan; and
• Perform any and all other necessary functions in connection with stormwater
management programs, services, systems, and facilities of the city.
(d) The utility will be responsible for addressing all applicable state and federal quantity and
water quality standards for stormwater. This includes the responsibility for addressing all
applicable state and federal stormwater permits required for the city, including National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) municipal separate storm sewer
systems (MS4) permits and other Phase I and Phase II industrial stormwater permits for
applicable municipal activities, and carrying out applicable actions under all local
stormwater ordinances. Whereas the City of Lewiston is regulated under Phase II of the
NPDES permit program, the utility will assume responsibility for meeting federal
NPDES permit requirements for MS4s, including compliance with the six federally
mandated minimum control measures:
(1) Public education and outreach
(2) Public participation/involvement
(3) Illicit discharge detection and elimination
(4) Construction site runoff control
(5) Post-construction runoff control
(6) Pollution prevention/good housekeeping
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:34
Sec. 74-307. Service area.
The service area of the utility will include all areas within the municipal boundaries of
the City of Lewiston.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-308. Stormwater utility service fees.
(a) The city may determine and modify from time to time the service fees of the utility in
order that the funds generated correspond to the cost of stormwater management
programs, services, systems, and facilities of the city. In general, funding for the
stormwater utility shall be equitably derived based on methods that establish a link
between the fees and degree of impact imposed on the stormwater management system
and facilities.
(b) To the extent that other funding methods are employed by the city to manage stormwater
both within and outside the service area, stormwater service fees shall support and be
consistent with plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of
regulatory requirements, impacts fees, special assessments, and other fees. Fees collected
to fund stormwater management activities of the utility can also be supplemented by
other revenues available to the city, most notably state, federal, and private grants or
loans.
(c) After adoption of the ordinance, the utility, guided by the city administrator and with the
assistance of those consultants deemed necessary by the utility and city administrator,
shall undertake an analysis of the cost of stormwater management programs, services,
systems, and facilities of the city for the purpose of setting an annual rate schedule for
properties served by the utility. The recommendations of the utility (and/or city
administrator) shall be submitted for approval by the city council. The fee schedule
approved by the city council shall be designated as the stormwater service fee schedule
and be made part of the city's policy manual. No bills will be issued to customers prior to
city council approval of the stormwater service fee schedule.
(d) Rate studies shall be conducted periodically by the utility to determine all changes and
future updates to the stormwater utility use fee schedule policy. Any revision to the
stormwater service fee schedule policy will be approved by the city council prior to
implementation.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-309. Credits and exemptions.
(a) Credits against service charges are an appropriate means of adjusting payments to the
utility and will only be granted to those properties that go beyond the requirements of
state and local laws and regulations. Credits against service charges may be granted on a
sliding scale for properties providing on-site or off-site stormwater management
measures that reduces the impact of the property on the cost of providing stormwater
management services, provided that such systems are adequately maintained and exceed
performance standards specified under Maine's Stormwater Management Law and
regulations as well as any additional stormwater management performance standards
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:35
imposed by this Code of Ordinances. A fee credit schedule and a manual for the
stormwater utility shall be developed by the utility's staff and consultants specifying the
necessary performance standards for stormwater systems to qualify for a credit. The scale
for credits shall reflect the extent to which the subject properties reduce the peak rate of
runoff from the property, or avoid other costs incurred by the stormwater management
utility in the delivery of services, and shall be determined by the director, department of
public services. The fee credit schedule shall be submitted to and approved by the city
council as part of the stormwater service fee schedule policy and be made part of the
city's policy manual.
(b) Credits may be provided for the following:
(1) Properties upon which a permanent and/or perpetual conservation or other
protective easement has been provided may receive service fee credits, as
established by the city council, provided such easement:
a. Reduces or compensates for the impact that the subject property, or an
unrelated property, has on public or private stormwater systems or water
quality of receiving waters;
b. Improves the function of public stormwater systems or the water quality of
receiving waters; or
c. Provides other substantial benefits as identified by the city council.
(2) Creation of freshwater wetlands (assuming the created wetland is not part of a
mitigation project associated with a permitted impact to a natural wetland);
(3) Stormwater management practices (e.g., on-site detention and retention facilities);
and
(4) Peak flow reduction (may be same as c).
(c) Exemptions from stormwater service fees are not allowed, except as provided in this
section. Exemptions shall be allowed for:
•All city and state-owned or maintained roads and rights-of-way, including the Maine
Turnpike, because these roads are part of the stormwater management systems
and facilities.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06; Ord. No. 06-14, 11-2-06)
Sec. 74-310. Fee collection schedule.
Stormwater service fees shall be collected quarterly. To minimize administrative costs,
notification and collection of stormwater utility fees shall be coordinated, to the extent possible
with the collection of water and sewer service charges. A customer shall have 30 days from
receipt of a service fee bill to make payment. Interest, at a rate determined by the city council as
part of the stormwater utility use fee schedule shall be charged on delinquent accounts after 30
days.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-311. Right to enforcement and violations.
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:36
(a) The city administrator, or his authorized designee is the enforcement authority who shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or to fail to comply with the stormwater
management requirements of section 74-305. Whenever the enforcement authority
believes that a person has violated section 74-305, the enforcement authority may enforce
this article in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 and section 1-8 of the Code of
Ordinances.
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person
has violated this section 74-305, the enforcement authority may order compliance
with this article by written notice of violation to that person indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it including, without
limitation: the cessation of discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
article; at the person's expense, the abatement or remediation of conditions; and/or
the payment of fines, of the city's remediation costs and of the city's reasonable
administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs. If abatement of a violation
and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed.
(2) Penalties/fines/injunctive relief. Any person who violates section 74-305 shall be
subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible
for the city's attorneys' fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. §
4452 and section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day such violations
continue shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any person who violates
section 74-305 also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages
and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys' fees and costs, incurred by the
city for violation of federal and state environmental laws and regulations caused
by or related to that person's violation of section; this responsibility shall be in
addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this section.
(3) Consent agreement. The enforcement authority may enter into a written consent
agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violation(s) of this
article for the purposes of eliminating violations of section 74-305 and of
recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
(4) Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation or
suspension notice may appeal the determination of the enforcement authority to
the board of appeals in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances, App. A,
Art. IX. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the
notice of violation. The board of appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the
appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The board
of appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the enforcement
authority. A party aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal
that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of the board
of appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(5) Enforcement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal,
within 45 days of the decision of the board of appeals upholding the decision of
the enforcement authority, then the enforcement authority may initiate an
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:37
enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(c) Delinquent fees.
(1) Any person that fails to pay the service fee when due shall be responsible for the
amount of the unpaid service fee, interest on the unpaid amount at a rate
determined by the city council as part of the stormwater utility use fee schedule, a
minimum penalty of $200.00, and attorneys' fees and other costs of collection.
Delinquent amounts may be collected by a civil action against the person.
(2) A customer of the utility may request review of the amount of the service fee
imposed on such customer by written request to the superintendent of stormwater
within 30 days of the date the customer receives a service fee bill. The
superintendent shall review the service fee and issue a determination, in writing,
within 30 days. A customer may appeal the superintendent's decision to the city
council within 30 days of the date of the superintendent's decision. Aggrieved
persons may appeal a decision of the council to a court of competent jurisdiction
within 30 days of the date of the council decision.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-312. Limitation of liability.
Floods from stormwater may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of the storm
drainage facilities constructed, operated, or maintained by funds made available under this
chapter. This chapter shall not be interpreted to mean that property subject to the fees and
charges established herein will always (or at any time) be free from stormwater flooding or flood
damage, or that stormwater systems capable of handling all storm events can be cost-effectively
constructed, operated or maintained. Therefore the following limitations on liability are set forth:
(1) It is the express intent of the city that this stormwater utility ordinance will protect
the public heath, safety and welfare of properties and persons in general.
However, this ordinance does not create any special duty or relationship with any
individual person or specific property either within or outside the jurisdiction of
the stormwater utility.
(2) The city shall not be held liable for flood damage or assessing and removing
pollution sources, and reserves the right to assert all available immunities and
defenses in any action seeking monetary compensation from the city, or its
officers, agents or employees for alleged damages arising from alleged failure or
breach of duties or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created.
(3) The issuance of any permit, plan approval or inspection shall not constitute a
warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action seeking
the imposition of monetary damages against the city or its officers, employees or
agents.
(4) Operation of stormwater systems located on private property or public property
not owned by the City of Lewiston and for which there has been no public
dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance and/or
improvements of the system, shall be the legal responsibility of the property
UTILITIES
Lewiston Code Chapter 74
CH 74:38
owner, except as may be affected by the laws of the State of Maine and the United
States of America.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-313. Severability.
Each section of this ordinance is severable from all other sections. If any part of this
ordinance is deemed invalid by a court or competent jurisdiction, remaining portions of the
ordinance shall not be affected and shall continue in full force. Whenever this ordinance conflicts
with any other ordinance of the city, State of Maine, or federal government, the stricter standard
shall apply, except as limited by state or federal law.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Sec. 74-314. Applicability.
This ordinance and the fees, obligations and requirements identified herein shall apply to
all use of and benefit from the city's stormwater management systems and facilities, occurring on
or after July 1, 2006. All persons owning land within the municipality that benefit from the
services provided by the utility shall be subject to service fees for their use of the stormwater
management systems and facilities occurring on or after July 1, 2006.
(Ord. No. 06-10, 7-27-06)
Chapters 75-77
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:1
Chapter 78
VEGETATION*
Article I. In General
Secs. 78-1--78-25. Reserved.
Article II. Dutch Elm Disease
Sec. 78-26. Right of entry to inspect for.
Sec. 78-27. Order to correct dangerous conditions.
Sec. 78-28. Service of order.
Sec. 78-29. Compliance with order; failure to comply.
Sec. 78-30. Appeal from order.
Sec. 78-31. Cost of remedying conditions, assessment.
Sec. 78-32. Disclaimer of liability; negligence.
Secs. 78-33—78-39. Reserved
Article III. Community Forest
Sec. 78-40. Findings.
Sec. 78-41. Purpose.
Sec. 78-42. Authority.
Sec. 78-43. Definitions.
Sec. 78-44. Management.
Sec. 78-45. Harvest revenues.
Sec. 78-46. Administration
Sec. 78-47. Municipal arborist.
Sec. 78-48. Duties of the municipal arborist.
Sec. 78-49. Request to the municipal arborist; written permits required; appeals.
Sec. 78-50. Notice by municipal arborist of proposed tree work; appeals.
Sec. 78-51. Notice of tree work by utilities.
Sec. 78-52. Lewiston-Auburn community forest board.
Sec. 78-53. Penalty.
*Cross references: Environment, ch. 34.
State law references: Cutting and removal of trees, 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3283, 3291; preservation along public ways
and water, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3281 et seq.
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 78-1--78-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DUTCH ELM DISEASE*
*State law references: Municipal authority to determine the presence of the Dutch elm disease and control such
disease on public or private grounds, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5725.
Sec. 78-26. Right of entry to inspect for.
The director of public works may enter private grounds to inspect and determine the necessary
control measures and sanitation measures to prevent the infection and spread of the Dutch elm
disease on elm trees located thereon and to determine the presence of the Dutch elm disease.
(Code 1982, § 27-16)
Sec. 78-27. Order to correct dangerous conditions.
When the director of public works shall find it necessary to order the removal of trees on private
property, or of sanitation work to correct a condition not complying to standards of the elm tree
program as set forth by the state forestry service, he shall serve a written order to correct the
dangerous condition upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for its
existence. (Code 1982, § 27-17)
Sec. 78-28. Service of order.
The order required by section 78-27 shall be served in one of the following ways:
(1) By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible.
(2) By leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion upon the
premises.
(3) By affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of the premises in
violation.
(4) By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner of the
premises, by registered mail.
(5) By publishing a copy of the order in a local newspaper once a week for three
successive weeks.
(Code 1982, § 27-18)
Sec. 78-29. Compliance with order; failure to comply.
(a) The order required in this article shall set forth a time limit for compliance dependent
upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In cases of extreme danger to other trees,
the director of public works shall have the authority to require compliance immediately upon
service of the order.
(b) When a person to whom an order under this article is directed shall fail to comply within
the time specified therein, the director of public works shall remedy the condition or contract
with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the order is
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:3
directed. The person remedying a condition under a contract made under this article shall be
authorized to enter premises for that purpose. (Code 1982, § 27-19)
Sec. 78-30. Appeal from order.
A person to whom an order is directed in accordance with this article shall have the right, within
24 hours of the service of such order, to appeal to the city council, who shall review such order at
its next regular meeting and file its decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked or modified, it
shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom directed. No person to whom an
order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within five days after a decision on such
appeal shall have been determined. (Code 1982, § 27-20)
Sec. 78-31. Cost of remedying conditions, assessment.
If the cost of remedying a condition under this article is not paid within 30 days after receipt of a
statement therefor from the director of public works, such cost shall be levied against the
property upon which such hazard exists, as a special assessment. Such special assessment shall
be certified by the director to the city treasurer and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon
such property, shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof
unless paid before, and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes against such
property. (Code 1982, § 27-21)
Sec. 78-32. Disclaimer of liability; negligence.
The city shall be liable for no damages under this article except those occasioned by negligence.
(Code 1982, § 27-22)
ARTICLE III. COMMUNITY FOREST
Sec. 78-40. Findings.
The City Council finds that the community forest is important in advancing the economic
and ecological health of the community and in protecting and enhancing its historic and
esthetic characteristics. The City Council also finds that public trees beautify our streets
and neighborhoods and also serve important environmental and economic purposes in
that they release oxygen into the air, absorb carbon dioxide, reduce stormwater runoff,
and reduce energy costs by providing shade in warm weather and protection from cold
winter winds. (Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-41. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote these values and to provide for the public
health and safety by regulating the planting, maintenance, removal, and harvesting of
trees and shrubs which are part of the community forest. (Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:4
Sec. 78-42. Authority.
The City has authority to enact this ordinance under its home rule powers provided in 30-
A M.R.S.A. §§ 2003 and 2004. (Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-43. Definitions.
(a.) Board: The Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board as described in
§ 78-52 of this ordinance.
(b.) Community forest: includes all trees growing on public property as well as all
trees growing within the limits of any public way located within the Urban
Compact Zone.
(c.) Forest management plan: A written document, prepared by a Maine licensed
professional forester, which, considering landowner objectives, establishes
direction and goals for the management of a specific forest land area. A plan
normally provides a description of the woodlot including maps, timber inventory
data, wildlife habitat, recreation potential, historic features, and special attributes.
It will specify silvicultural practices and activities necessary to harvest products,
improve forest health, and minimize adverse environmental impacts. The forest
management plan serves as the basis for specific harvest plans.
(d.) Pruning: systematic trimming or cutting branches throughout a tree or plant to
enhance its health.
(e.) Public tree: any tree or other woody vegetation which is located within the limits
of any public way situated within the Urban Compact Zone.
(f.) Shrub: any woody vegetation likely to grow to a mature height of fifteen (15)
feet or less.
(g.) Topping: the severe cutting back of tree limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches
in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree as to reduce the height of the
tree by removing or substantially diminishing the normal canopy and disfiguring
the tree.
(h.) Trimming: includes pruning
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-44. Management.
The broad objectives stated in § 78-40 "Findings" and § 78-41 "Purpose" will be
achieved by the active management of the community forest, using best known practices
and, within the guidelines of a forest management plan, to promote public safety, forest
health, species diversity, and environmental benefit to the community. Harvesting trees
may be part of the overall management objectives of this plan.
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:5
Sec. 78-45. Harvest revenues.
If and when revenues generated from any timber harvests exceed the expense of
conducting that harvest, the surplus revenues will be distributed as outlined below:
(a.) 80% to municipal general fund
(b.) 20% to designated account established for the purpose of protecting and
enhancing the community forest
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-46. Administration.
The Municipal Arborist shall administer the management plan in coordination with such
other municipal agencies/departments that now or may in the future share in the
responsibility of caring for and maintaining the community forest.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-47. Municipal arborist.
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall appoint the Municipal Arborist
who shall have a degree in forestry, arboriculture, or urban forestry from an accredited
college or university or have equivalent field experience. The Municipal Arborist shall at
all times during his or her employment hold a valid arborist’s license issued by the State
of Maine. (Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-48. Duties of the municipal arborist.
(a.) The Municipal Arborist shall have responsibility for planting, maintaining,
preserving, and removing trees and plants which are part of the community forest
in order to promote public safety and to protect and preserve the symmetry,
health, and beauty of the community forest and the places where public trees and
shrubs are located. The Municipal Arborist shall maintain a list that includes trees
and shrubs which are suitable for planting as well as those which are unsuitable in
general or under specific circumstances. This list shall be made readily available
to members of the public.
(b.) The Municipal Arborist may order the trimming or removal of trees or shrubs
which are located within the public right of way to lessen the danger of travel or
to suppress tree pests or insects as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3283. The
Municipal Arborist may also order the trimming or removal of trees or shrubs
located on private property outside the right of way for similar reasons by
notifying the owner of the property in writing of the required action. In the event
that a property owner does not initiate the requested action within 10 business
days of receiving notice to do so, the Municipal Arborist may cause such action to
be taken at the city's expense. The property owner may appeal the decision of the
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:6
Municipal Arborist in the manner provided by § 78-49(e) and the Municipal
Arborist shall take no action during the pendency of such appeal.
(c.) The Municipal Arborist shall develop rules and regulations as well as standards of
practice governing the planting, placement, maintenance, removal, fertilization,
pruning, and bracing of trees in public rights of way and other public sites. These
rules shall be reviewed by the Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest Board which
may recommend changes and additions for the Municipal Arborist and the City
Council to consider. Once adopted by the City Council, the rules and regulations
shall have the force of law and violators of any such rules and regulations shall be
subject to the penalties established by this ordinance. Copies of such rules and
regulations shall be available from the City Clerk and from the Municipal
Arborist and shall be posted on the city’s website. The Municipal Arborist shall
be responsible for initiating proceedings to enforce such rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-49. Requests to the municipal arborist; written permits required; appeals.
(a.) No person shall plant, prune, remove, or otherwise disturb, above or below
ground, any public tree without first filing an application with and obtaining a
permit from the Municipal Arborist. Any permit granted shall contain a definite
date of expiration and may contain conditions attached thereto by the Municipal
Arborist. Any violation of this article or the terms of the permit shall be grounds
for revocation of the permit, after notice and hearing. In emergency situations,
such as storm damage to trees requiring immediate pruning or removal, the work
may be performed without permits; however, the Municipal Arborist shall be
notified as soon as possible.
(b.) It is the intent of this article to preserve public trees. The Municipal Arborist may
issue a permit to cut down, remove, or destroy a public tree under one or more of
the following circumstances:
(1) The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling too close to existing or
proposed structures, interferes with existing utility services, creates unsafe
vision clearance or other traffic hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to
people or property.
(2) The tree is located in an area where a structure or other improvements will
be placed in accordance with plans approved under the Land Use
Ordinance.
(c.) Requests for Tree Removal, Pruning, or Trimming
Persons owning or occupying property abutting a public way or their
representatives may request the Municipal Arborist to remove or top trees located
within the limits of the public way or, alternatively, for a permit authorizing them
to do the work on their own. If the Municipal Arborist concludes that the request
is not urgent, he may decline to do the work and issue a written permit allowing
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:7
the property owner or his or her representative to undertake the work on their own
and at their own expense. The permit may specify conditions and shall establish
an expiration date. Failure to comply with the conditions specified in the permit
will subject the property owner and his or her representatives to the penalties
established by this ordinance. In lieu of initiating enforcement proceedings when
the conditions imposed by the permit are violated, the Municipal Arborist may
cause any necessary corrective work to be done at the expense of the property
owner or his or her representatives.
(d.) Requests to Plant Trees or Shrubs
Persons owning land abutting a public way or their representatives may request
the Municipal Arborist to issue a written permit to plant trees or shrubs within the
limits of the public way. The Municipal Arborist shall issue a permit if he or she
determines that the proposed planting will not be harmful to public health or
safety, will not damage or encroach upon existing public trees, shrubs, or utility
lines, will not damage the public street, sidewalk, or public or private utilities
located in the right of way, and that suitable arrangements have been made to
provide for future maintenance of the proposed tree or shrub. The Municipal
Arborist may specify reasonable conditions in the permit which the property
owner or his or her representatives must follow in carrying out the work. Failure
to comply with the conditions in the permit will subject the property owner to the
penalties established by this ordinance. In lieu of initiating proceedings to
enforce the conditions stated in the permit, the Municipal Arborist may cause any
necessary corrective work to be done at the expense of the abutting owner.
(e.) Appeals
Any person who is denied permission by the Municipal Arborist to act under this
section or who disagrees with a restriction or condition imposed on the action to
be taken may appeal the same by filing a notice of appeal to the Board within ten
(10) days from the date the action appealed from was taken. The notice of appeal
shall contain the name and address of the person filing the appeal, the date and
nature of the action from which the appeal is being taken, and a brief description
of the basis for the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Municipal
Arborist who shall promptly forward it, as well as a response to the appeal, to the
Chair and Secretary of the Board. The Board shall hear and decide the appeal
within thirty (30) days from the date that the appeal was taken. A majority of the
members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for purposes of hearing an
appeal. The Board shall develop procedures governing the processing of such
appeals. Such procedures to be made available to the public.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-50. Notice by municipal arborist of proposed tree work; appeals.
(a.) Except in the case of an emergency, the Municipal Arborist shall notify any
abutting property owner at least ten (10) days before removing, topping, or
spraying any public tree. In the case of an abutting property owner who does not
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:8
occupy the property, notice may be given to any occupant of suitable age and
discretion. Notice may be given by mail, by telephone, by electronic
transmission, by leaving written notice attached to the person’s door, or in person.
The notice shall describe the work to be done, when it is scheduled to begin, the
process by which an appeal may be taken, and how to contact the Municipal
Arborist. With respect to pruning and trimming public trees, no formal notice is
required, but the Municipal Arborist shall make a good faith effort when feasible
to advise abutting property owners of the work to be done and to provide them
with an opportunity to express any objections they may have.
(b.) Within ten (10) days of the date when notice of the Municipal Arborist’s intention
to remove, top, or spray a tree is given, an abutting owner or his or her
representative may give notice to the Municipal Arborist that he or she is
appealing the decision to the Board. Such notice of appeal may be given in
person, by telephone, mail, or electronic communication. The procedure with
respect to appeals under this section shall be the same as that for appeals under §
78-49(e) of this ordinance except that the proposed action shall be held in
abeyance until the appeal has been heard and the Board has rendered a decision.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-51. Notice of tree work by utilities.
(a.) At least thirty (30) days before initiating any trimming, cutting, or removal of
public trees, a utility company must notify the Municipal Arborist who may
request the City Council to hold a public hearing to discuss the request.
(b.) At least thirty (30) days before initiating any trimming, cutting, or removal of
public trees, a utility company shall publish notice of its proposal on its website
and in at least one newspaper which has daily circulation in the area in which the
work is to be done. The notice shall describe the work which is proposed, the
streets on which the work is scheduled to be carried out, and the dates on which
the work is to be done. The notice shall be published in a display advertisement
format which is easily readable and sufficiently prominent so that it is likely to
come to the attention of persons whose property will be affected by the proposed
tree work. The published notice shall also advise the members of the public of
their right pursuant to state law to be added to a list of persons who must be
consulted by the utility company before it trims, cuts, or removes trees in which
they have a legal interest.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-52. Lewiston-Auburn community forest board.
(a.) Statement of purpose. The existence of the Lewiston-Auburn Community Forest
Board is formally recognized. The Board shall develop and implement a
community forest program which promotes the economic, environmental, and
esthetic values of the community forest.
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:9
(b.) Members. The Board shall consist of nine members appointed by the respective
mayors.
(c.) Qualifications of members. Members must be residents of Lewiston or Auburn,
or own property in either city, and be interested in developing and preserving a
healthy community forest. There shall be a minimum of four members from each
city although five members shall constitute a quorum and may act regardless of
whether there are vacant positions on the Board. When members of the Board are
acting as a Board of Appeals, a quorum shall require the participation of at least
two (2) members from each city.
(d.) Ex officio members. There shall be six (6) ex officio members of the Board
consisting of the Director (or Superintendent) of the Parks Department in Auburn
and the Public Works Director in Lewiston, a member of each city’s Planning
Board or planning staff to be chosen by the respective Mayors, and the Municipal
Arborist from each city. The Board may adopt a by-law regarding the election of
associate members of the Board who may participate in the affairs of the Board,
but they will not be eligible to vote except in the absence of a regular member of
the Board.
(e.) Members’ terms of office. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years
and may be reappointed by their respective mayors. Members currently serving
may complete their current terms of office and may be reappointed for additional
three-year terms. Terms of office will continue to be staggered to provide for
continuity in the Board’s program and activities.
(f.) Vacancies. When vacancies occur, the Board shall take appropriate steps to
recruit applicants to fill the vacant positions. Members appointed to fill vacant
positions on the Board shall serve out the terms of the persons they are replacing.
(g.) Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
(h.) Duties and responsibilities. The Board shall:
(1) Develop a plan for and provide advice to city staff and agencies regarding
the management of the community forest including the anticipated impact
of proposed development;
(2) Raise community awareness regarding the importance of the community
forest;
(3) Raise funds to establish a community forest trust fund;
(4) Hear appeals filed pursuant to this ordinance;
(5) Adopt by-laws to govern the internal affairs of the Board; and
(6) Perform such other functions as are permitted by this ordinance.
VEGETATION
Lewiston Code Chapter 78
CH 78:10
(i.) Administration. The Board shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair, Secretary, and
Treasurer. Except for the Chair, the officers shall serve for renewable one-year
terms. The Chair shall be elected for a renewable two-year term. The Board may
allow the duties of the Secretary and Treasurer to be performed by the same
person.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Sec. 78-53. Penalty.
(a.) Any violator of any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty
payable to the city. Each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(b.) Should any public tree be destroyed, the person causing the destruction shall also
make restitution to the city or to the abutting landowner in an amount equal to the
cost of removing the destroyed tree plus its replacement value. Replacement
value shall be calculated as follows:
(1) For a tree up to and including 2 inches in diameter measured at a distance
of 4.5 feet from the ground, the replacement value shall be $200.
(2) The replacement value of a tree in excess of 2 inches in diameter as
measured at a distance of 4.5 feet from the ground shall be calculated by
using the following formula: restitution = $200 + (d2 x $40) not to exceed
$2,500 where d equals the diameter of the trunk as measured in inches.
(c.) The court may also order the violator to reimburse the city for the cost of any
action which was necessary to correct violations of the ordinance. If the city is
the prevailing party in an enforcement action, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs.
(Ord. No. 12-07, 7-19-12)
Chapters 79-81
RESERVED
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:1
Chapter 82
VEHICLES FOR HIRE*
Article I. In General
Sec. 82-1. Definitions.
Secs. 82-2--82-25. Reserved.
Article II. Taxicabs
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 82-26. Condition; doors required.
Sec. 82-27. Markings.
Sec. 82-28. Display of cards required.
Sec. 82-29. Record of daily trips.
Sec. 82-30. Number of passengers.
Sec. 82-31. Inspection; costs.
Sec. 82-32. Receipts for fare charged.
Sec. 82-33. Consent of passenger required before adding others.
Sec. 82-34. Rates and zones; publishing requirement.
Sec. 82-35. Insurance, cancellation.
Secs. 82-36--82-45. Reserved.
Division 2. Licenses
Sec. 82-46. Required.
Sec. 82-47. Application.
Sec. 82-48. Standards for denial.
Sec. 82-49. Inspection prerequisite to issuance.
Sec. 82-50. Expiration and application dates.
Sec. 82-51. Nontransferable.
Sec. 82-52. Surrender of license when relinquishing ownership.
Sec. 82-53. City clerk's power to suspend.
Sec. 82-54. Right to appeal from suspension or denial; procedure.
Sec. 82-55. City council's power to revoke.
Sec. 82-56. Effect on operator after suspension or revocation.
Sec. 82-57. Notification of address change required.
Secs. 82-58--82-80. Reserved.
Article III. Buses
Sec. 82-81. Applicability.
Sec. 82-82. Stopping on crosswalks or at intersections.
Sec. 82-83. Entering and leaving bus.
Sec. 82-84. Procedure for taking on and letting off passengers.
Sec. 82-85. Stopping restricted to designated areas, exception.
*Cross references: Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70.
State law references: Municipal authority to regulate rates of fare, routes and standing places of vehicles for hire, 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3009(1)(F); insurance for vehicles for hire, 29 M.R.S.A. § 831.
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 82-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Disqualifying criminal conviction means and includes any conviction for any criminal
offense which is, or any juvenile offense which, if committed by an adult is, punishable by
imprisonment for any period of time, whether or not the sentence was imposed or served, but
shall not include any conviction which is shown to have been set aside on appeal or collaterally,
or for which a pardon, certificate of rehabilitation, or the equivalence under the law of the
sentencing jurisdiction has been granted, or which is not rationally related to the purpose of
licensing under this chapter.
Motor buses means motor vehicles designed and constructed for the general
transportation of passengers for hire and possessing a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of 15
or more passengers.
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used for the conveyance of passengers for hire; provided,
however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to motor vehicles owned by
undertakers and used for funeral services nor to motor vehicles for hire while being used for
services at funerals or weddings, nor to motor buses as defined in this section.
(Code 1982, § 28-1)
Cross references: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 82-2--82-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TAXICABS*
*Cross references: Restricted use of taxi zones, § 70-172.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 82-26. Condition; doors required.
Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a clean and
serviceable condition and in adequate repair. Each such taxicab shall have two doors affording
direct entrance and exit to and from the passenger compartment. Clean and adequate repair shall
mean and include without limitation, the following:
(1) No visible tears in carpeting;
(2) No dents larger than six inches in diameter;
(3) No tears in seat upholstery;
(4) No loose trash or large amounts of dirt or sand in the interior passenger area,
whether or not the area is currently occupied by a passenger;
(5) No missing trim or body work;
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:3
(6) No cracks in windshield or windows;
(7) Seat belts for all passenger seats visible and in working order;
(8) No missing hubcaps;
(9) No visible primer paint; and
(10) No rust greater than one inch in diameter.
(Code 1982, § 28-13; Ord. No. 00-3, 3-16-00)
Sec. 82-27. Markings.
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside letters not less than two inches, nor more than six
inches in height, the name of the owner and, in addition, may bear an identifying design
approved by the city clerk and the business telephone number of the owner; no other legend than
the name of the owner, the approved design and the telephone number may be used on the door.
Any name, legend or design proposed for use elsewhere on the taxicab shall be submitted to and
approved by the city clerk before being so used.
Any vehicle that is no longer in service as a licensed taxicab shall have any markings
distinguishing the vehicle as a taxicab removed.
(Code 1982, § 28-14; Ord. No. 07-05, 6-14-07)
Sec. 82-28. Display of cards required.
(a) All licensed taxicabs shall have cards of such size and form as may be required by the
city clerk which shall show:
(1) The license number assigned to the vehicle by the city clerk and a statement to the
effect that in cases of complaint, the city clerk shall be notified, giving the number
of the taxicab license.
(2) The driver's identification card and number.
(b) The cards required by this section shall be displayed on the interior of the vehicle in clear
view of the passenger and so placed or secured in the frame in which enclosed that they
may not be easily tampered with or destroyed.
(Code 1982, § 28-16)
Sec. 82-29. Record of daily trips.
The owner of a licensed taxicab shall keep daily records of all trips made by such vehicle
upon such form and in such manner as shall be approved by the city clerk, which record upon
demand shall be open to inspection by the city clerk or any police officer.
(Code 1982, § 28-17)
Sec. 82-30. Number of passengers.
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab than the seating capacity of
the cab. (Code 1982, § 28-18)
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:4
Sec. 82-31. Inspection; costs.
(a) The city clerk shall have the power to designate such person and place of inspection as
the city clerk may deem proper to determine whether taxicabs are being maintained in
adequate repair.
(b) Whenever an inspection is made by a person designated by the city clerk, the cost of such
inspection shall be paid by the owner of the taxicab.
(Code 1982, § 28-15)
Sec. 82-32. Receipts for fare charged.
Every driver, when requested by the passenger, shall give a receipt showing the owner's
name, date and amount of fare charged, and shall sign such receipt.
(Code 1982, § 28-19)
Sec. 82-33. Consent of passenger required before adding others.
No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employing his
taxicab without the consent of the first passenger.
(Code 1982, § 28-20)
Sec. 82-34. Rates and zones; publishing requirement.
(a) The city clerk, finance director, and purchasing agent shall have the power to approve
uniform schedules of rates and zones submitted by the taxicab operators subject to the
approval of the council, which schedules of rates and zones shall be kept on file in the
office of the city clerk.
(b) In cases of dispute or disagreement between the taxicab operators in the matter of rates
and zones, the city clerk shall submit the matter to the council, who shall have the power
to fix and determine schedules of fares and define the limits of the zones for such fares,
after notice and hearing.
(c) Before any schedule of rates and zones, and any changes therein, shall become effective,
the city clerk shall cause the same to be published in the daily newspapers published in
the city at least one week before the same shall come into effect.
(Code 1982, § 28-21)
Sec. 82-35. Insurance, cancellation.
Should an insurance policy of any licensed taxi business in the city be canceled before its
expiration date, the issuing company shall mail a 30-day written notice to the City of Lewiston.
This notice should be sent to the chief of police and city clerk.
(Ord. No. 00-3, 3-16-00)
Secs. 82-36--82-45. Reserved.
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:5
DIVISION 2. LICENSES
Sec. 82-46. Required.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a taxicab upon the streets of the city
unless the taxicab and driver are licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Code 1982, § 28-27)
Sec. 82-47. Application.
(a) Applications for licenses required under this division shall be filed in accordance with
chapter 22. In addition to the requirements of that chapter:
(1) Taxicab business licenses:
a. Every application shall be signed and verified by each of the principal
officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and in all other
cases by all persons having actual ownership interests in the applicant. If
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the name and
address and the date and place of birth of each of the principal officers of
the applicant and of every person having management authority in the
business of the applicant. In all other cases, the application shall state the
name and address and the date and place of birth of every person having
an actual ownership interest or having management authority in the
business of the applicant.
b. A record of any disqualifying criminal conviction or a statement that no
such conviction exists shall be provided.
c. The make, type, year, serial number and license plate number of each
vehicle for which a taxicab business license is sought and the address of
the garage or other terminal at which the vehicle will be stationed when
not in service shall be stated.
d. A detailed description of the graphic design, insignia, working and
coloring which will appear upon the vehicle, if licensed, shall be included.
e. The application shall contain an appropriate form of statement over the
signature of each person signing the application, giving all persons and
governmental agencies having information relevant to the above items
permission to release the same to the clerk.
(2) Taxicab drivers' licenses. The taxicab driver's license shall:
a. State the age of the applicant;
b. Contain a complete statement of the applicant's health and physical
condition;
c. Contain a complete record of the applicant with respect to any
disqualifying criminal conviction or a statement that no such conviction
exists;
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:6
d. Contain a record of convictions for reckless driving, driving to endanger,
operating or attempting to operate under the influence during the year
preceding the application; and
e. State whether any driver's license held by the applicant is presently
revoked or has been revoked during the three years preceding the
application and the reasons for such revocation or revocations.
(b) The application shall contain an appropriate form of statement over the signature of the
applicant giving all persons and governmental agencies having information relevant to
the items required under this section permission to release such information to the clerk
and shall be accompanied by two photographs of the applicant of such size as the clerk
may specify.
(Code 1982, § 28-28)
Sec. 82-48. Standards for denial.
In addition to those standards set forth in chapter 22, a license under this division shall be
denied to the following persons:
(1) Taxicab business licenses.
a. A corporation which is not licensed to do business in the state;
b. An applicant other than the registered owner of the vehicle;
c. A corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person having actual
ownership interest therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction;
d. An applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any person
having an actual ownership interest or management authority therein has a
disqualifying criminal conviction;
e. Any applicant whose taxicab business license has been revoked within the
three years preceding the application; and
f. Any applicant, if any person whose taxicab license has been revoked
within the three years preceding the application, and who was a principal
of any corporation whose taxicab business license has been revoked within
the three years preceding the application, is or will be substantially
involved in the ownership or management of the business.
The clerk shall make and keep a written record of every decision to deny
an application for a taxicab business license in the manner required by 1
M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq.
(2) Taxicab driver's licenses.
a. An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years;
b. An applicant who is unable to safely operate a taxicab or who presents a
danger to the health, safety or general welfare to the public;
c. An applicant who has been convicted of (a) any class A, class B or class C
crime; or (b) a crime committed under the laws of the United States of
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:7
America or of any other state or territory thereof, which is punishable
(whether or not such punishment was actually imposed) by a sentence at
least as harsh as that which is authorized for the commission of a class C
crime under Maine law; provided that such conviction was for an offense
which is rationally related to the purpose of licensing taxicab drivers;
d. An applicant who has been given a disqualifying criminal conviction at
any time during the five years immediately preceding application; or who
has been imprisoned at any time during such period for a disqualifying
criminal conviction; provided that such conviction was for an offense
which rationally related to the purpose of licensing taxicab drivers;
e. An applicant who has been convicted at any time during the three years
immediately preceding application of reckless driving; driving to
endanger; operating under the influence; operating after suspension of
driver's license; attempting to operate under the influence; or an equivalent
offense in any other jurisdiction; or whose privilege to operate a motor
vehicle in any jurisdiction has been revoked at any time during such
period for any reason;
f. Any applicant whose taxicab driver's license has been suspended,
withdrawn or revoked within the three years preceding the application. If
the drivers license was suspended, withdrawn or revoked due to
nonpayment of state mandated child support or due to lack of personal
vehicle insurance coverage, this standard for denial is not applicable;
g. Any applicant who does not possess a current and valid Maine driver's
license;
h. Any applicant who has outstanding warrants of arrest in Maine or any
other jurisdiction; and
i. Any applicant who is a convicted sex offender and who is required to
register as a sex offender within the state.
The clerk shall make and keep a written record of every decision to deny
an application for a taxicab driver's license in the manner required by 1
M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq.
(Code 1982, § 28-29; Ord. No. 04-03, 3-18-04; Ord. No. 06-01, 3-9-06; Ord. No. 07-05, 6-14-07; Ord.
No. 07-06, 7-5-07; Ord. No. 07-07, 9-13-07)
Sec. 82-49. Inspection prerequisite to issuance.
(a) Before a taxicab license shall be granted, all taxicabs shall be thoroughly inspected in
regard to mechanical condition and general appearance.
(b) Every person operating a taxicab shall present such taxicab for inspection whenever the
city clerk may require it.
(Code 1982, § 28-30)
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:8
Sec. 82-50. Expiration and application dates.
Licenses for taxicabs shall expire on the last day of February following the date of issuance.
(Code 1982, § 28-35)
Sec. 82-51. Nontransferable.
No taxicab license provided for in this division shall be assigned or transferred without
first obtaining the consent and approval of the city clerk. (Code 1982, § 28-36)
Sec. 82-52. Surrender of license when relinquishing ownership.
Any licensee who shall cease to be the owner of a taxicab shall at once surrender his license to
the city clerk. (Code 1982, § 28-37)
Sec. 82-53. City clerk's power to suspend.
(a) Business or driver's license. In addition to the grounds for suspension or revocation of
licenses set forth in chapter 22, either a taxicab business license or a taxicab driver's
license may be suspended or revoked upon a determination that the licensee:
(1) Knowingly took a longer route to his destination than was necessary, unless so
requested by the passenger;
(2) Knowingly conveyed any passenger to a place other than that which the passenger
specified;
(3) Transported any person other than the passenger first engaging the taxicab
without the express consent of such passenger;
(4) Drove a taxicab when not clean and neat in appearance;
(5) Refused to transport any orderly person upon request unless, in the case of a
single taxicab business, the taxicab is engaged, or in the case of a taxicab business
operating more than one taxicab, all taxicabs operated by such business and then
in service are engaged. If no taxicab is available at the time when a request for
taxicab service is telephoned to a dispatch service, the dispatch service shall
arrange with the caller for transportation by the next available taxicab using such
dispatch service unless the caller expressly declines to make such arrangement;
(6) Charged more than the maximum fare specified in this article;
(7) Failed to notify the clerk of any change of any material fact set forth in the
application for such license; or
(8) Removed from a taxicab or obscured or caused to be removed from a taxicab or
obscured the notice required by section 82-28.
(b) Taxicab drivers' licenses only. In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this
section, a taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked upon the determination
that the driver:
(1) Engaged in any loud argument, fight or other disturbance; harassed, threatened or
assaulted another person; intentionally damaged, destroyed or threatened to
damage or destroy any property; or in any other manner engaged in conduct
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:9
detrimental to the orderly and efficient transportation of passengers;
(2) Is unable to safely operate a taxicab or presents a danger to the health, safety or
general welfare to the public;
(3) Has been convicted or adjudicated of a disqualifying criminal conviction at any
time since such license was last issued or renewed; or
(4) Has been convicted at any time since such license was last issued or renewed of
reckless driving; driving to endanger; operating under the influence; attempting to
operate under the influence; or an equivalent offense in any other jurisdiction; or
whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any jurisdiction has been revoked.
Maximum suspensions of taxicab driver's licenses shall be as follows: Five days for the first
violation, 14 days for the second violation, 30 days for the third violation within a one-year
period. Fourth violations shall result in revocation of the taxi driver's license and may be the
basis for further action with respect to the taxicab business license.
(c) Taxicab business licenses. In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section,
taxicab business licenses shall be subject to suspension or revocation where it is
determined that there have been repeated violations by the driver or drivers thereof which
resulted in four or more suspensions for similar conduct by the same driver, or eight or
more suspensions by employees of the same person holding more than one taxicab
business license for similar conduct, establishing a pattern of conduct by the holder of the
taxicab business licenses.
(d) Either license. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a taxicab
business or driver's license may be suspended or revoked if a licensee used, or allowed
another to use, a taxicab in connection with, or to promote or solicit for, any unlawful
business or activity.
(Code 1982, § 28-38; Ord. No. 06-01, 3-9-06)
Sec. 82-54. Right to appeal from suspension or denial; procedure.
Any applicant or licensee under this division aggrieved by an order of suspension or
denial shall have the right to appeal, provided such applicant or licensee submits an application
to the board of appeals a request for a hearing. The board of appeals shall have the power to
temporarily suspend, revoke or deny a taxicab driver's license when operation by the license
holder presents a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. After such hearing,
the board of appeals may affirm, modify or vacate the order of suspension appealed from.
(Code 1982, § 28-39; Ord. No. 00-14, 7-6-00; Ord. No. 04-03, 3-18-04; Ord. No. 05-25, 2-16-06; Ord.
No. 18-01, 03-08-18)
Sec. 82-55. City council's power to revoke.
The city council may, after notice and hearing, revoke the taxicab license of any person upon
complaint filed by the city clerk. (Code 1982, § 28-40)
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Lewiston Code Chapter 82
CH 82:10
Sec. 82-56. Effect on operator after suspension or revocation.
The person whose taxicab license has been suspended or revoked shall forthwith cease to
operate taxicabs, and the city clerk shall order that any taxicab which is being operated by any
person whose license has been suspended or revoked be removed from service forthwith.
(Code 1982, § 28-41)
Sec. 82-57. Notification of address change required.
When a licensed taxicab owner changes his business address or his residence address, or the
place at which a taxicab owned by him is garaged, he shall, within 24 hours of such change,
notify the city clerk. (Code 1982, § 28-42)
Secs. 82-58--82-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUSES
Sec. 82-81. Applicability.
The provisions of this article are hereby established for the due regulation of the motor buses
used for the conveyance of passengers in the streets of the city and shall be observed by the
officers, agents and servants of the corporation or companies owning and operating such buses.
(Code 1982, § 28-68)
Sec. 82-82. Stopping on crosswalks or at intersections.
(a) No bus shall be allowed to stop on a crosswalk, nor in front of an intersecting street,
except to avoid collision or to prevent damage or injury to persons in the street.
(b) When the driver of any bus is required to stop at the intersection of two streets to receive
or land passengers, the bus shall be stopped so as to leave the entrance slightly over the
further crossing.
(Code 1982, §§ 28-69, 28-70)
Sec. 82-83. Entering and leaving bus.
Drivers shall not allow any person to enter or leave the bus while in motion.
(Code 1982, § 28-71)
Sec. 82-84. Procedure for taking on and letting off passengers.
All motor buses shall, except in an emergency, pull over to the righthand curb of the street when
taking on or discharging passengers.
(Code 1982, § 28-72)
Sec. 82-85. Stopping restricted to designated areas, exception.
No motor bus shall, except in an emergency, stop to pick up or discharge passengers except in a regularly
designated bus stop. (Code 1982, § 28-73)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
Lewiston Code A I:1
Sec. 1. Title.
This Code shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning and Land Use Code of the
City of Lewiston, Maine," and will be referred to herein as the Code.
Sec. 2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Code is to regulate in the City of Lewiston the location and use of
real estate for industrial, commercial, residential and other purposes; the construction, height,
number of stories, area and bulk of all structures, the size and open spaces of real estate;
population density and setback of structures along public ways. This Code is an integral part of a
comprehensive plan for municipal development, the purpose of which is to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Lewiston and, among other things, is
designed to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality, to promote
traffic safety, to provide safety from fire and other elements, to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent overcrowding of real estate, to promote a wholesome living environment, to prevent
housing developments in unsanitary areas, to provide an adequate water system, to promote the
coordinated development of unbuilt areas, to encourage the formation and preservation of
neighborhoods, to provide an allotment of land area in new developments sufficient for all
requirements of community life, to encourage the provision of employment opportunities for the
residents of the city, and to provide for adequate public services. To achieve said purposes, this
Code divides the city into districts and imposes other regulations as hereafter designated, defined
and described.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:1
Sec. 1. Meaning of words.
All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual meanings. Words used
in the present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular shall include the plural.
The word "lot" shall include "parcel" and "plot." The word "shall" is used to indicate the
mandatory and the word "may" is used to indicate the permissive. The words "occupied" or
"used" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged, or designed
to be used or occupied."
Sec. 2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this
Code, have the meaning herein indicated:
Abutting property means any lot which is physically contiguous with the lot in question
even if only at a point and any lot which is located across a public or private street or way from
the lot in question in such a manner so that the extension of the side lot lines of the subject lot
would touch the lot or enclose the lot.
Accessory use or structure means a subordinate use of a building, other structure or land,
or a subordinate building or other structure:
(1) Whose use is customary in connection with the principal building, other structure
or use of land;
(2) Whose use is clearly incidental to the use of the principal building, other structure
or use of land;
(3) Which is located on the same lot with the principal building, other structure or use
of land or on a lot abutting such lot if in the same ownership or part of the same
establishment, even if located in another district, or off-street parking in
accordance with Article XII, Section 17(e)(2) of this Code. However, if the
accessory use of structure is proposed to be located on a lot which is in another
district and across a public or private street from the principal building, the use or
structure must be permitted in that district in order to be allowed. Furthermore,
accessory structures to be located on a lot across a public or private street may not
be utilized for a home occupation and the sale of either lot in common ownership
separating the accessory structure from the principal structure will create an
illegal nonconformance which shall either be removed or brought into
conformance with all provisions of the Code; and
(4) Which does not constitute, in effect, conversion of the principal use of the
premises to one not permitted.
Addition means as applied to a building or structure, means any construction which
increases the floor area or the height of any portion of the building or structure.
Adjacent grade means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Adjoining property means any lot which is physically contiguous with the lot in question
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:2
even if only at a point.
Adult business establishment means a business which:
(1) Keeps for public patronage, or permits or allows the operation of, any adult
amusement device as defined in Chapter 22, Article I, section 22-2 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Lewiston; or
(2) Offers live entertainment, customarily exhibits motion pictures, or displays any
other visual representation described or advertised as being "X-Rated" or "For
Adults Only", and which excludes persons from any portion of the premises by
reason of immaturity of age or by use of such, or similar phrases; or
(3) Offers as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, other
periodicals, video recordings, marital aides, and devices characterized by their
emphasis on specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined in
Chapter 22, Article I, section 22-2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lewiston, "adult amusement devices"; or
(4) Has an adult oriented live entertainment license pursuant to Chapter 10, Article
IV of the aforementioned Code; or
As used in this definition, "customarily" shall mean more often than an average of
one (1) calendar week during any calendar month of operation, and "substantial
portion" shall mean greater than thirty (30) percent of the books, magazines, other
periodicals, video recordings, marital aides, and devices carried as stock-in-trade.
Agriculture means the cultivation of the soil, production of crops, including crops in
commercial greenhouses, and raising and keeping of livestock, including animal husbandry,
orchards, truck gardens, plant nurseries, poultry and other nondomestic animals, bees, the use of
manure and fertilizers, the processing of agricultural products.
Allowed use means a use which is a permitted use or a conditional use, for which a
conditional use permit has been granted, in the district in which it is located.
Alteration means as applied to a building or structure, means any change or modification
in construction, exit facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment which does not include an
addition to the building or structure. Ordinary repairs shall not be considered alterations.
Amendment means the addition of new material to this Code or the correction,
modification or alteration of this Code by the city council in the manner prescribed by this Code
for its amendment.
Aquifer means a geologic formation composed primarily of rock or sand and gravel
which stores and yields significant quantities of groundwater to wells, springs, or streams.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the flood plain having a one (1) percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance
Study cited in Article XIV of this Code.
Art & craft studio means a business or commercial establishment which provides
working space for artists or craftspeople including facilities for classes or demonstrations.
Activities may include the accessory sales of supplies or materials necessary for these activities.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:3
Arterial street is a public street shown on the most recent functional classification of the
Maine Department of Transportation as a major or minor arterial, providing longer through travel
between major trip generators (larger cities, recreational areas, etc.).
Automobile dealer (new) means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of
new automobiles together with accessory repair, service and parts facilities which are incidental
to the sales operation. Sales of used vehicles are permitted as an accessory use.
Automobile dealer (used) means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of
used automobiles together with accessory repair and service facilities which are incidental to the
sales operation.
Automobile graveyard means a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for
three (3) or more unserviceable, unregistered and/or uninspected, discarded, worn-out or junked
motor vehicles.
Automobile repair garages means facilities for major maintenance and repair of
passenger vehicles, motorcycles, pickup trucks and similar vehicles, including those uses listed
under NAICS 8111-811198. The type of work normally provided by repair garages includes
engine overhauls, transmission repairs, glass replacement, body work, painting and similar work
not involving routine maintenance. Repair garages shall include muffler shops, brake shops,
body shops, paint shops, and tune-up centers.
Automotive services, except repair means the uses listed under NAICS 8111-811198,
which include car washes, detailing, automotive diagnostic centers, lubricating services, road
services, rustproofing and other service uses similar to those listed.
Auxiliary business establishment means a business establishment primarily engaged in
performing management, support services, and other general administrative functions related to
business offices, located in a central facility, for other establishments such as, but not limited to,
computer operation facilities, corporate offices and clearinghouses.
Awning (or canopy) means a roof-like cover that provides shelter or ornamentation.
Awnings and canopies are said to be made of nonpermanent materials when constructed of cloth
and small-diameter tubing, such as those commonly found projecting from buildings for the
purpose of shielding doorways or windows from the elements.
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equalled or
exceeded in any given year, commonly called the one hundred (100) year flood.
Basement means a story (or portion of a story) of a building or structure having one-half
or more of its clear height below grade or having its floor subgrade below ground level on all
sides.
Bed and breakfast establishment means an accessory use to a single-family dwelling
involving the renting of rooms to transient guests who are staying for a limited duration and the
serving of breakfast to houseguests. A bed and breakfast establishment with four (4) or fewer
rooms available for lodging shall be considered a home occupation if criteria (1) through (7) for
home occupations are met. A bed and breakfast establishment may have five (5) or six (6) rooms
available for lodging and shall also be considered a home occupation if approved pursuant to
Article XIII and:
(1) Criteria (2) through (7) for home occupations are met;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:4
(2) The lot on which it is located has frontage on one (1) of the following streets:
College Street;
East Avenue;
Lisbon Street;
Main Street;
Russell Street;
Sabattus Street;
Webster Street; and
(3) Any meeting facilities are limited to twelve (12) non-guests.
(4) Special outdoor functions such as weddings are limited to daylight hours only
with no more than two (2) functions per month and a total of eight (8) functions
per year. (Note: meeting facilities and special outdoor functions are limited to bed
and breakfast establishments with five (5) or six (6) rooms available for lodging.)
Notwithstanding the provisions of criterion (5) for home occupations, the
applicant shall submit plans and evidence to the reviewing authority that, due to
the presence of physical buffers, as further described in Article XIII, and the
location of outdoor functions on the property, noise associated with outdoor
functions is not expected to be greater off the lot than that associated with normal
residential activities.
A bed and breakfast establishment with seven (7) or eight (8) sleeping rooms for
the public shall be considered as a tourist home for the purposes of this Code. A
bed and breakfast establishment with more than eight (8) rooms shall be
considered a hotel.
Board of appeals means the Lewiston Board of Appeals shall constitute the board of
appeals within the meaning of this Code.
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and
is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces,
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Buffer means a portion of a lot along a property boundary reserved for the purpose of
mitigating the impacts of the use of the parcel on adjacent parcels. Within this portion of the lot,
improvements consisting of landscaping, fencing, earth mounding or other similar devices shall
be installed and maintained.
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended
for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. For floodplain purposes,
see Structures.
Building and construction contractors means a business or commercial establishment that
may include an office, warehousing or equipment storage of a contracting firm.
Business and professional office means the uses listed under NAICS 52 through 56 and
62 which include financial, real estate, and insurance offices, tradesman’s offices, social
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:5
services, doctor’s offices, legal offices, engineering offices, architectural offices, surveying
services, research, development and testing services, and management services and other office
uses similar to those listed.
Campground means a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located and
maintained for occupancy by tents, camper trailers or other recreational vehicles as temporary
living quarters for recreational, educational or vacation purposes.
Canopy. See "awning."
Cemetery means land used for the internment of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Certificate of compliance means a document signed by the director of planning and code
enforcement or his designee stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of
this Code.
Changeable message sign (or display) means a sign capable of displaying words,
symbols figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or
automatic means.
Church means a building, together with its contiguous accessory buildings and uses,
where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
sustain public worship.
Civic and social organization means a not-for-profit organization of a charitable,
philanthropic, social or fraternal nature organized under the laws of the State of Maine.
Clear-cut means any timber harvesting on a forested site greater than one (1) acre in size
which over a ten-year period results in an average residual basal area of trees over six (6) inches
in diameter of less than thirty (30) square feet per acre, unless one (1) or both of the following
conditions exist:
(1) If, after harvesting, the average residual basal area of trees over one (1) inch in
diameter measured at four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above the ground is thirty (30)
square feet per acre or more, a clear-cut does not occur until the average residual
basal area of trees six (6) inches or larger measured at four and one-half (4 1/2)
feet above the ground is less than ten (10) square feet per acre; or
(2) After harvesting, the site has a well-distributed stand of trees at least five (5) feet
in height, that meets the regeneration standards applicable under 12 M.R.S.A., ch.
805, § 8869, subsection 1.
Code enforcement officer means a person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451
(including exception in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce
all applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances, including Lewiston’s
Zoning and Land Use Code.
Collector street is a public street shown on the most recent functional classification of the
Maine Department of Transportation as a collector street which collects traffic from local roads
and also connects smaller cities and towns with each other and to the arterials.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:6
Commercial parking facilities means a facility for the short or long term parking of
passenger vehicles which is not accessory to another use.
Commercial solid waste disposal facilities means a facility for the disposal of solid
wastes which is operated as a business or commercial enterprise and not by a unit of local or
state government. This definition shall include landfills, incinerators and similar facilities.
Cogeneration facilities which involve the production of electricity are also included.
Community garden means the use of a lot(s) or a portion thereof for the purpose of
growing vegetables, flowers and/or other cultivated plants which are intended for consumption
and/or use primarily by the surrounding neighborhood as regulated under Article XII, section 4.
Comprehensive plan means a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, maps
and all pertinent data relative to the past, present and future trends of the municipality as defined
by the laws of the State of Maine.
Conditions (requirements) means three (3) broad categories of conditions are recognized:
(1) General conditions defined in a land use control ordinance which must be met by
all applicants seeking a required permit under this Code;
(2) Special conditions defined in a land use control ordinance which must be met, in
addition to the general conditions, by applicants seeking a conditional use permit
under this Code;
(3) Those conditions which may be imposed by a board of appeals or planning board
in granting approval of an application to protect abutting and nearby property
owners from any adverse effects which would otherwise flow from the grant of
the requested approval and to ensure consistency with the comprehensive plan.
Conditional use means a use which would not be appropriate without restriction but is
acceptable if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood and similar
criteria.
Congregate care and assisted living facilities means a residential facility that is primarily
engaged in providing residential and personal care services for the elderly and/or other persons
who are unable to or do not desire to live independently. The care typically includes room,
board, supervision, and assistance in daily living, such as housekeeping, community spaces,
common dinning areas, transportation and specialized services such as medical support and
physical therapy.
Contaminant means any substance whose concentration in surface or groundwater
exceeds the background level or the current public health drinking water standards for Maine or
standards for aquatic toxicity, whichever are most stringent. Background levels can be
established by pre-development groundwater analysis. The drinking water and aquatic toxicity
standards referenced above may be obtained from current manuals, including but not limited to:
State of Maine Rules of the Department of Human Services relating to Drinking Water;
"Drinking Water and Health" published by the National Academy of Sciences; "Suggested No-
Adverse Response Levels" as determined by the EPA; "Ambient Water Quality Criteria"
manuals, published by the EPA, or equivalent criteria.
Contributing structure means a structure located within a designated local historic district
and identified as contributing to the historical, architectural or geographical significance of said
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:7
district.
Cultivation or Cultivate: the planting, propagation, growing, harvesting, drying, curing,
grading, trimming or other processing of marijuana for use or sale.
Cultural facilities means facilities dedicated to recognized public or philanthropic
purposes and intellectual endeavor, such as a library, museum, auditorium or performing or
visual arts center.
Day care center means a building, structure or other place in which a person, or
combination of persons, maintains or otherwise carries out a regular program, for consideration,
for any part of the day providing protection and child care for more than twelve (12) children
under thirteen (13) years of age, who are unattended by parents or guardians for any part of the
day.
Designated historic district means a geographically definable area possessing a
significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by
past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development and designated in accordance with
the requirements of this Code as appropriate for historic preservation. Such historic districts may
also comprise individual elements separated geographically, but linked by association or history.
Designated historic structure means any improvement, building or structure of particular
historical, architectural or geographic significance to the community and designated in
accordance with the requirements of this Code as appropriate for historical preservation.
Developer means any person, corporation, municipality or other governmental agency or
authority or any combination of these entities engaged in any planning or land development
activity or activities aimed at using, reusing or rehabilitating air space, land, water or other
natural resources.
Development means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to the construction of buildings or other
structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other
structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; or
storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials, public
or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Discharge means the accidental or intentional injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of materials upon or into any land or waters.
Dissolve means a mode of message transition on a changeable message sign
accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears
to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the
second message.
Distribution facilities means facilities for the storage and distribution of products via
trucks or similar vehicles including related office facilities.
Dormitories means a residence hall providing sleeping rooms, bathrooms, study and
recreation rooms and a common kitchen for individuals or for groups affiliated with an
educational institution or a sports organization by contract or otherwise owned and operated by a
sponsoring institution with full-time live-in resident supervisor assistant to provide support
services and oversight of occupants.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:8
Drinking place (alcoholic beverages) means a business or commercial establishment
which customarily excludes persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from admission to its
premises, including, but not limited to, uses for which a special amusement permit is required
pursuant to Chapter 10, Article III of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston, class A
lounges, dance halls and establishments serving alcoholic beverages other than restaurants as
defined herein. Drinking places shall not include retail stores where alcoholic beverages are sold
for consumption off premises.
Drive-in restaurant means an eating establishment which meets one (1) or both of the
following criteria:
(1) The establishment has no provisions for the consumption of food within the
building and is designed so that customers eat in their cars or take the food from
the premises for consumption, or
(2) The establishment has facilities allowing the customer to purchase food or
beverages without leaving his vehicle.
Driveway means an access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other
structure. An entrance means an access serving all other uses.
Dwelling means any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used for
residential purposes.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling. A structure having a length to width ratio of less
than four (4) to one (1), and a minimum horizontal dimension at its narrowest
point of at least sixteen (16) feet and containing only one (1) dwelling unit
occupied by not more than one (1) family. If a dwelling otherwise meets these
criteria, a single-family detached dwelling is deemed to include a dwelling
occupied by a group of individuals housed within a "community living
arrangement" which is a housing facility for eight (8) or fewer persons with
disabilities that is approved, certified or licensed by the State of Maine. A
community living arrangement may include a group home, foster home or
intermediate care facility. A single-family detached dwelling shall not include
mobile homes as defined herein, but shall include any other manufactured housing
meeting these criteria.
(2) Single-family attached dwelling. A building containing single-family dwelling
units each with two (2) or more vertical fire separation walls, or one (1) vertical
fire separation wall in the case of a dwelling unit at the end of a group of attached
units; which have no dwelling units above or below them; and which have no
common hallways. If a dwelling otherwise meets these criteria, a single-family
detached dwelling is deemed to include a dwelling occupied by a group of
individuals housed within a "community living arrangement" which is a housing
facility for eight (8) or fewer persons with disabilities that is approved, certified or
licensed by the State of Maine. A community living arrangement may include a
group home, foster home or intermediate care facility.
(3) Two-family dwelling. A building containing two (2) dwelling units, such building
being designed for residential use and occupancy by two (2) families living
independently of each other.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:9
(4) Multifamily dwelling. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, such
buildings being designed for residential use and occupancy by three (3) or more
families living independently of one another, with the number of families not
exceeding the number of dwelling units and which is not a single-family attached
dwelling.
Dwelling unit means a room or group of rooms, containing at least three hundred (300)
square feet of living area, designed and equipped exclusively for use as living quarters for one
(1) family, including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. The term shall not
include hotel or motel rooms or suites, individual lodging house units that do not have kitchen
facilities, fraternity rooms, sorority rooms, club or institutional group rooms, or similar
accommodations.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building (a) built, in the case of a building in
Zones A or AE, to have the top of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns, posts, piers, or "stilts;" and (b) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one (1) foot above the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of Zones A or AE, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article XIV, Section 6(l).
Elevation certificate means an official form (FEMA Form 81-31) that (a) is used to verify
compliance with the flood plain management regulations of the national flood insurance
program; and, (b) is required as a condition for purchasing flood insurance.
Equipment dealer means a business or commercial enterprise involving the retail sales
and service of trucks and construction, wood harvesting, or similar wheeled or tracked vehicles
designed primarily for nonhighway use.
Equipment repair garage means a business or commercial enterprise involving the major
repair of trucks and construction, wood harvesting, or similar off-road equipment but not
including the retail sales of these vehicles.
Equivalent dwelling unit means a measure of the density of use of a residential structure
equal to one (1) dwelling unit having three (3) or more bedrooms or sleeping rooms, or one (1)
and a third dwelling units having two (2) bedrooms or sleeping rooms or two (2) dwelling units
having one (1) bedroom or sleeping room.
Essential services means the construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical or
communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil,
water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems;
and associated storage tanks; and municipal storm drainage systems. Such systems may include
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, channels, cables, fire alarms and police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or
buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Fade means a mode of message transition on a changeable message sign accomplished
by varying the light intensity, where the text message gradually reduces the intensity to the point
of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of
legibility.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:10
Family means one person or two or more family members and, for purposes of this Code,
may also include up to three (3) additional persons residing with them.
Family day care home means child care for three (3) to twelve (12) children under
thirteen (13) years of age (not related by blood or marriage to, or legal wards of the operator, or
foster children living in the private family residence (i.e. dwelling unit) serving as the day care
home) who are unattended by parents or guardians for any part of the day. A family day care
home shall be operated by a person who is domiciled and a resident within the private family
residence, and who is the holder of all necessary licenses and permits from the State of Maine
and/or the City of Lewiston.
Family members mean persons who are within the following degrees of relationship: a
first, second, or third degree relation (parent, child, stepchild, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew,
grandchildren, grandparent, great grandparent or great grandchild); spouse or domestic partner or
former spouse or former domestic partner; or, parents of the same child. For purposes of this
definition, the term "domestic partners" means two unmarried adults who are domiciled together
under long-term arrangements that evidence a commitment to remain responsible indefinitely for
each other's welfare.
Farm housing means dwelling units located on an active farm which are accessory to the
agricultural use and are occupied by employees of the farm or members of the farm household.
Any farm housing shall be located on the same parcel as the agricultural use.
Farm stand means a temporary structure containing less than five hundred (500) square
feet of floor area for the sales of agricultural products between May first and December first.
Fence means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of
materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Flood or flooding means:
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any
source.
(2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in subsection (1)a. of this definition.
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:11
Flood insurance study. See "Flood Elevation Study."
Flood plain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
Flood plain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and flood plain management regulations.
Flood plain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance,
grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodway. See "Regulatory Floodway."
Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state, and local flood plain maps.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes
or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floor area ratio means the ratio of the sum of the floor area of all stories of a building or
group of buildings (excluding basements) on one (1) lot to the total lot area.
Food and/or Beverage Facility means a facility wherein food and/or beverage is
produced, sold on a wholesale or retail basis, distributed, and/or consumed on the premises as
may be permitted by State of Maine law. This may include, but not be limited to, a
microbrewery, coffee roaster and/or other facilities producing crafted alcoholic or non-alcoholic
beverages and/or artisan food.
Forest management means timber cruising and other forest evaluation activities,
management planning activities, insect and disease control, pruning and other stand
improvement, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar associated activities.
Forest management plan means a site specific document signed by a forester registered
in the state which outlines proposed activities to ensure compliance with performance standards
and regeneration requirements established pursuant to 12 M.R.S.A., ch. 805, subchapter III-A,
and describes how other natural resources are being protected.
Frame means a complete, static display screen on a changeable message sign.
Frame effect means a visual effect used on a changeable message sign to change from
one message to another.
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
purposes of flood plain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown
factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed, that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected
size flood and floodway conditions.
Frontage means the linear distance between the sidelines of a lot, measured along a
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:12
continuous lot line that borders upon an accepted public street or public easement, or upon a
private road within a commercial, industrial or residential development that has been reviewed
and approved, pursuant to Article XIII of this Code, since January 9, 1988 or previously
approved by the planning board. The lot frontage requirement cannot be met by accumulation of
noncontiguous frontage segments. In the case of a lot situated on a T-turn or a curve of a way,
the measurement of frontage may include the entire length of the property line along such way.
Frontage for a single-family dwelling may also be obtained pursuant to Article XII, Section 10 of
this Code.
For developed lots of record as of the adoption date of this Code which (i) have frontage
on opposing streets and (ii) are themselves comprised of lots shown in whole or in part on
recorded subdivision plans, if, but for the frontage could be so divided into two (2) or
more lots, each of which will meet currently applicable space and bulk requirements,
frontage for the developed parcel shall be deemed to be that closest to the principal
structure on the developed parcel.
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Gasoline service stations means buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail and where
routine servicing and minor repairs may be made. Uses permissible at a gasoline service station
do not include the operation of a commercial parking facility, major engine repairs or the sales,
leasing or renting of vehicles or equipment.
Grade means with reference to a building or structure, it means the average elevation of
the ground adjoining the building or structure on all sides.
Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two
(2) buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, mechanical rooms, loading space for
motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet.
Groundwater means all of the water found beneath the surface of the ground. For
purposes of aquifer protection, this term refers to the subsurface water present in aquifers and
recharge areas.
Group care facility means a boarding care facility for more than eight (8) individuals
wherein children under eighteen (18) years of age or adults over sixteen (16) years of age and not
legally related to the operator are provided personal care, supervision and social or rehabilitative
services. Uses within the meaning of this definition must be licensed by the State of Maine and
may include, but are not limited to, group homes, half-way homes and congregate homes but do
not include foster family homes.
Hazardous material means a product or waste, or combination of substances that,
because of quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, poses a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, or welfare or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, used, disposed of or otherwise managed. This term
includes petroleum and any materials or substances designated as hazardous by the United States
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:13
Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
Height of building means vertical measurement from the lowest point of the finished
grade on the foundation to the highest point of the building or structure, excluding incidental
protrusions such as chimneys and antennae.
Height equivalent means a horizontal distance equal to the height of a building or
structure.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
(1) Designated as historic and on the local register as provided under article XV;
(2) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
national register;
(3) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior to qualify as a
registered historic district.
(4) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
(5) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either;
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Sectary of the Interior,
or
2. Directly by the secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Home occupation means an occupation conducted in a dwelling unit or a structure
accessory thereto, provided that all of the following criteria are met:
(1) No person other than a member of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation; and
(2) The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental
and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more
than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and
accessory structures used in the home occupation shall be used in the conduct of
the home occupation; and
(3) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or
any visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one (1)
sign, except as hereinafter permitted; and
(4) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volumes than
would normally be expected in the neighborhood, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:14
other than in a required yard; and
(5) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates
noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses off the lot, if the home occupation is conducted in a detached onefamily
dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in any other form of
dwelling. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in a radio or television receiver
off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises; and
(6) There shall be no stock in trade regularly maintained or any new commodity sold
on the premises; and
(7) The following are specifically excluded as home occupations: Convalescent or
nursing home, tourist home, animal hospital, restaurants, doctors' offices, dentists'
offices, real estate offices, registered caregivers, beauty shops and barber shops,
except those that are owner-occupied, one (1) chair, appointment-only shops that
meet all the other home occupation criteria.
Hospital means an institution providing health services primarily for in-patients and
medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including, as an integral part of the institution,
such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities and staff offices.
Hotel, inn or motel means a commercial building or group of buildings built primarily to
accommodate for a fee travelers and other transient guests, who are staying for a limited
duration, with sleeping and associated rooms. A hotel, inn or motel may include suites or rooms,
cooking and similar facilities within the rooms to accommodate guests, restaurant facilities
where food is prepared and meals served to its guests and other customers, and associated
facilities for the convenience and servicing of guests. A hotel, inn or motel room or suite of
rooms, as distinguished from a dwelling unit, each shall contain less than a total of six hundred
(600) square feet of living area, provided that the area may be larger if, in the sole opinion of the
planning board, the facility will function or is functioning as a hotel or motel and not as a
residential dwelling unit.
Household pets means animals for use by the residents of the premises only. Household
pets shall not be construed to include farm animals such as: Horses, sheep, pigs, chickens, geese,
pigeons. The term "household pets" is distinct from "kennel"; see the latter.
Impacted property means a lot which has frontage on the same street(s) as the lot in
question and lies, in whole or in part, within five hundred (500) feet of any property line of the
subject lot.
Impervious surface ratio means the ratio of the total area of a parcel covered by
impervious surfaces including buildings, parking lots, roads, drives, accessways, sidewalks, and
other paved surfaces, paved drainage ways and any other surfaces covered by materials which
substantially impede the percolation of rainwater into the soil to the total lot area.
Individual private campsite means an area of land which is not associated with a
campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one (1) group not to exceed
ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements which may include, but not be limited
to gravel pads, parking areas, fire places, or tent platforms.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:15
Industrial use means the use of real estate, buildings or structures, or any portion thereof,
for assembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations,
including the processing of raw materials.
In-law apartment means an accessory apartment contained within or attached to a singlefamily
dwelling which meets the standards of section 11 of Article XII.
Intensification means any construction, reconstruction, use of a building, structure or
other land use activity, which results in an increase in the volume of traffic, the amount of
required off-street parking, the hours of operation, the size of the use, noise, dust, odor, vibration,
glare, smoke, litter, the need for municipal or other facilities serving the site, or the effect on the
soils on the site.
Junkyard means a yard, field, or other area used as a place of storage for:
(1) Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances
and furniture;
(2) Discarded, scrap or junked lumber;
(3) Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste
and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material; and
(4) Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills.
Kennels means a business involving the raising or boarding of dogs.
Level of service means a measure of the operational performance of a street or
intersection as determined in accordance with the procedures of the Institute of Traffic Engineers
(ITE).
Light industrial uses means industrial activity involving the manufacturing, packaging,
assembly, or distribution of finished products from previously prepared material, including, by
way of example only, the following: bakeries, bottling, printing and publishing, pharmaceuticals,
machine shops, precision instruments, watchmakers, musical instruments, toys and sporting
goods, pottery and ceramics using only previously pulverized clay, wood products, jewelry,
assembly of electrical components, canteen services, tool and die shops, and the packaging of
foods. Light industrial uses do not include the processing of raw materials or salvaging
operations.
Loading space means an on-the-property space for the standing, loading or unloading of
vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
Locally established datum means for purposes of this Code, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where mean sea level data is too far
from a specific site to be practically used.
Lodging house means a dwelling unit occupied by more than one family; or a building or
group of attached or detached buildings containing three (3) or more lodging units for occupancy
for weekly or longer periods of time with or without board, and with or without common kitchen
or living facilities. A boarding house shall be considered a type of lodging house. The term
"lodging house" shall not include any use that falls within the definition of a bed and breakfast
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:16
establishment; a dormitory; a hotel, inn or motel; a shelter; or a tourist home.
Lot means a contiguous parcel of land in single ownership comprised of one (1) or more
parcels described in deeds, plats or other legal documents recorded in the Androscoggin County
Registry of Deeds.
Lot, corner means a parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets.
Lot coverage ratio means the ratio of that area of the lot covered by buildings or
structures divided by the total lot area.
Lot, depth of means the mean distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite line,
measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. In a corner lot, the depth is the
longer dimension thus measured.
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line means a line dividing one (1) lot from another, or from a street or other public
space.
Lot of record means a lot shown on or described in a subdivision plan or deed on file in
the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds on the date of adoption or subsequent amendment
of this Code.
Lot or ground coverage means the percentage of lot area covered or occupied by
principal and accessory structures.
Lot size means the area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot.
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured along a
straight line, either parallel to the front lot line if the front line is a straight line or tangent to the
mid point of the curvilinear setback line if the front lot line is curvilinear, both measured at the
minimum required front setback line.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of Article XII of this Code.
Lumber and building material dealer means a commercial business involving the retail or
wholesale sales of lumber, construction materials, hardware, paint and similar materials in which
a portion of the inventory is stored outside or in semi-enclosed structures.
Manufacture or Manufacturing: the production, blending, infusing, compounding or
other preparation of marijuana concentrate and marijuana products, including, but not limited to,
marijuana extraction or preparation by means of chemical synthesis.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means for the purposes of article XII, section 4,
and article XIV, a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Manufactured housing unit/also known as a manufactured home means structures,
transportable in one (1) or two (2) sections, which were constructed in a manufacturing facility
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:17
and are transported to a building site and designed to be used as dwellings when connected to the
required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein, including both mobile homes and modular homes, but excluding travel
trailers. For the purposes of article XII, section 4, and article XIV, the term manufactured home
also includes park mobile homes, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
Marijuana means the leaves, stems, flowers and seeds of a marijuana plant, whether
growing or not.
Marijuana Business: any business involved in the cultivation, processing, testing, sale, or
manufacturing of marijuana products for adult or medical use to include: Facilities for Marijuana
Cultivation, Marijuana Manufacturing, Marijuana Testing as well as Registered Dispensaries and
Marijuana Stores, or Registered Caregivers licensed under this Ordinance.
Marijuana Cultivation Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to purchase
marijuana plants and seeds from other cultivation facilities; to cultivate, prepare and package
adult use marijuana; to sell adult use marijuana to Manufacturing Facilities, to Adult Use
Marijuana Stores and to other cultivation facilities; and to sell marijuana plants and seeds to
other cultivation facilities and immature marijuana plants and seedlings to Marijuana Stores;
cultivate, prepare and package medical marijuana at a location that is not the residence of the
Registered Caregiver or Qualifying Patient
Marijuana Nursery Cultivation Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to
cultivate adult marijuana with not more than 1,000 SF of plant canopy pursuant to MRS 28-B
Section501.
Marijuana Manufacturing Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to purchase
marijuana from a cultivation facility or another products manufacturing facility; to manufacture,
label and package adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana products; and to sell adult use
marijuana and adult use marijuana products to marijuana stores and to other products
manufacturing facilities; or, a registered tier 1 or tier 2 manufacturing facility or a person
authorized to engage in marijuana extraction under section MRS 22 Section 2423-F.
Marijuana Store: a facility licensed under this ordinance where qualified individuals may
purchase marijuana, immature marijuana plants and seedlings from a Cultivation Facility,
purchase marijuana and marijuana products from a Manufacturing Facility and sell marijuana,
marijuana products, immature marijuana plants and seedlings to consumers.
Marijuana Testing Facility: a facility licensed under this ordinance to: develop, research
and test adult use marijuana, adult use marijuana products and other substances; or authorized in
accordance with MRS 22 Section 2423-A, subsection 10, to analyze contaminants in and the
potency and cannabinoid profile of medical marijuana samples and is accredited pursuant to
standard ISO/IEC 17025 of the International Organization for Standardization by a 3rd-party
accrediting body or is certified, registered or accredited by an organization approved by the State
of Maine.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:18
Mean sea level means, for the purpose of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map
are referenced.
Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, delivery,
transfer or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of
marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered patient’s medical diagnosis or symptoms for which
a medical provider has provided the qualifying patient a written certification.
Microbrewery means a limited-production brewery, typically producing specialty beers
and often selling its products only locally or regionally.
Mineral exploration means hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining
the nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which
include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction means any operation within any twelve (12) month period which
removes more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock,
peat, or other like material from its natural location, and transports the removed material away
from the extraction site.
Minor development/improvement means all development that is not new construction or a
substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is
less than fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited
to: accessory structures as provided for in Article XIV, Section 6(j), mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that
do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
Mixed residential development means a residential development involving a mixture of
detached single-family dwellings, single-family attached dwellings with less than eight (8)
common walls, two-family dwellings or multifamily dwellings with less than five (5) dwelling
units per structure. Mixed residential developments may contain a mixture of the listed building
types; but, multifamily dwellings shall not constitute more than sixty (60) percent of the total
number of dwelling units in the development.
Mixed single-family residential development means a planned residential development
involving a mixture of single-family detached dwellings and attached single-family dwellings.
Mixed-use structure means a building containing one (1) or more dwelling units and
nonresidential space. Said nonresidential space must be permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
Mobile home means a factory-fabricated structure meeting the standards of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development which is built on a permanent chassis, is
designed to be used as a dwelling unit and was constructed after June 15, 1976. Mobile homes
built before June 15, 1976, are considered to be older mobile homes and are prohibited, unless
they meet safety and design standards put forth by the state manufactured housing board and
those contained in the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston.
Mobile home lot means a parcel of land within a mobile home park for the placement of a
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:19
single manufactured housing unit and the exclusive use of its occupants.
Mobile home park means a contiguous parcel of under land unified ownership with a
minimum area of five (5) acres designed and/or used to accommodate a minimum of three (3)
manufactured housing units on mobile home lots which are to be rented or leased, but not sold.
The management and maintenance of a mobile home park shall be deemed to be the
responsibility of a single owner or operator, with improved lots and/or services being available
under a leasing arrangement.
Mobile home park cluster development means a mobile home park where the lot area of
the individual mobile home lots may be reduced to a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square
feet in accordance with the provisions of this Code provided that the density of the park
conforms with the minimum net lot area of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet per unit
by providing permanent open space as part of the development.
Mobile home park road is a private road used for access of motor vehicles to homes
located in a mobile home park and used solely for vehicular movement within the park.
Modular home means those units which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in
compliance with 10 M.R.S.A. Chapter 951, and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning
structures, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent
chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings and must be placed on permanent foundations.
Multi-family development means a residential development that includes three (3) or
more freestanding, multi-family dwellings on single or multiple contiguous lots in common
ownership; or a single building containing twelve (12) or more dwelling units.
Municipal buildings and facilities means facilities owned and operated by the City of
Lewiston for the conduct of the city's business including, but not limited to, municipal office
buildings, schools, police and fire stations, public works garages and facilities, public safety
facilities, solid waste disposal facilities, sewerage systems, sewage disposal facilities and similar
uses.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means the national vertical datum, whose
standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called (1929 Mean Sea
Level (MSL)).
Neighborhood stores means a retail store that occupies less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet of total floor space and within which no alcoholic beverages are consumed.
Net lot area means the total acreage of a lot less the area required for access and less the
area which is not suitable for development because of sustained slopes in excess of twenty-five
(25) percent, water bodies, one hundred (100) year flood plains, and wetlands. "Access" as used
herein includes all land within street right-of-way boundaries, but does not include land used for
individual driveways or for parking areas.
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date of flood plain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Nonconforming lot means a lot of record which is defined as a lot in a plan or deed filed
in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds, which, at the effective date of the adoption or
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:20
amendment of this Code, was in lawful existence, but which does not comply with one (1) or
more of the space and bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming structure means a structure which, at the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of this Code, was in lawful existence, but which does not comply with one (1) or
more of the space and bulk requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming use means a use of a premise, parcel of land or structure which, at the
effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Code, was in lawful existence, but which
does not comply with the applicable use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonintensive outdoor recreation means outdoor recreational uses that involve minimal
structural development or regrading of the terrain but which, if properly designed, neither cause
nor are subject to serious damage from flooding or soil erosion. Examples of nonintensive
recreational uses include, but are not limited to, golf courses, tennis courts, playing fields, ice
skating rinks, and boat docks.
Normal high water line means that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes
in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of
wetlands adjacent to rivers and great ponds, the normal high water line is the upland edge of the
wetland, and not the edge of the open water.
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) is the standard used by Federal
statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the purpose of collecting,
analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the U.S. business economy. Reference is
made to the NAICS throughout this Code to assist with defining permitted and conditional uses.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means the national datum whose standard was
established in 1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) for all new Flood Insurance Rate Maps, NAVD is based upon vertical datum
used by other North American countries such as Canada and Mexico and was established to
replace NGVD because of constant movement of the earths crust, glacial rebound, and
subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
Nursery School means a house or other place in which a person or combination of persons
maintains or otherwise carries out for consideration during the day a regular program which
provides care for three (3) or more children, who are between the ages of thirty-three (33) months
and under eight (8) years of age, provided that:
1. No session conducted for the children is longer than three and one half (3 ½) hours in
length;
2. No more than two (2) sessions are conducted per day;
3. Each child in attendance at the nursery school attends only one session per day;
4. No hot meal is served to the children.
5. Nursery schools in the Neighborhood Conservation “A” (NCA), Low Density
Residential (LDR), Suburban Residential (SR) and Medium Density Residential
(MDR) Districts shall be limited to no more than 12 children per session.
6. Nursery schools in the Neighborhood Conservation “A” (NCA), Low Density
Residential (LDR), Suburban Residential (SR) and Medium Density Residential
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:21
(MDR) Districts shall be limited to properties containing a minimum of one (1) acre in
size.
7. Nursery schools in the Neighborhood Conservation “A” (NCA), Low Density
Residential (LDR), Suburban Residential (SR) and Medium Density Residential
(MDR) Districts shall be accessory to a single family residence.
Nursing or convalescent home means a state licensed residential care facility in which
nursing care and medical services are performed under the general direction of persons licensed
to practice medicine in the State of Maine for the accommodation of convalescent or other
persons who are not in need of hospital care, but who do require, on a twenty-four (24) hour
basis, nursing care and related medical services. This definition shall include skilled nursing
facilities, intermediate care facilities and nursing homes.
Official map means a map, prepared and adopted by the planning board and approved by
the city council, which shows the lines of ways, public property and subdivisions.
Official zoning map means a map prepared by the City of Lewiston Planning Board and
adopted by the city council outlining each district established or modified by the municipality.
The map is filed in the office of the city clerk.
Off-street parking space means a paved or gravel surfaced area not in a street or alley
which is permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one (1) automobile.
One hundred-year flood. See "base flood."
Open space means that portion of a lot which is characterized by natural scenic beauty or
openness and which is dedicated to being preserved or kept open in order to enhance urban or
rural areas as important physical, social, recreation, conservation, aesthetic or economic assets.
Open space ratio means the ratio of the total area of a parcel maintained in lawns,
gardens, planters, or other natural vegetation to the total lot area.
Owner means the owner of record of a property and his duly authorized agent or attorney,
a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and a person having a vested or contingent interest in the property
in question.
Penthouse means an enclosed structure, other than a roof structure, located on the roof,
extending not more than twelve (12) feet above and used primarily for living or recreational
accommodations.
Performance guaranteed means a cash, property or other bond satisfactory to the City of
Lewiston to ensure the actual carrying out of every duty, act, requirement or condition, the
performance of which was the basis for issuing the permit or approval.
Permanent foundation means a foundation that includes all of the following:
(1) A full, poured concrete or masonry foundation;
(2) A poured concrete frost wall or a mortared masonry frost wall, with or without a
concrete floor;
(3) A reinforced, floating concrete pad for which the municipality may require an
engineer's certification if it is to be placed on soil with high frost susceptibility;
and
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:22
(4) Any foundation which, pursuant to Chapter 7 of the Revised Code of Ordinances
of the City of Lewiston is permitted for other types of single-family dwellings.
Permitted use means a use or structure permitted in a given location as a matter of right
under the provisions of this Code subject only to those general conditions which are to be met by
all applicants seeking a required permit under this Code.
Personal service means a service exemplified by the types of services listed under
NAICS 812, including but not limited to laundry and cleaning services, photography studios,
shoe repair shops, funeral homes, mortuaries, beauty salons, barber shops, day spas, and similar
services to the general public. This definition does not include tattoo parlors.
Petroleum means oil, gasoline, petroleum products and by-products, and all other
hydrocarbons which are liquid under normal atmospheric conditions.
Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the
normal high water line or within a wetland means
Temporary. Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months
in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent. Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in
any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Pitched, shingled roof means a roof with a pitch of two (2) or more vertical units for
every twelve (12) horizontal units of measurement and which is covered with asphalt or
fiberglass composition shingles or other materials, but specifically excluding corrugated metal
roofing materials.
Places of assembly, amusement, recreation, entertainment, or culture means facilities
designed to accommodate the public for amusement, entertainment, recreation or social activities
including halls, auditoria, sports arenas, gymnasiums, skating and hockey rinks, stadia, golf
courses, racetrack operations (excluding motorized vehicle racing), meeting rooms, theaters, and
similar facilities but not including movie theaters.
Premises means one (1) or more parcels of land which are in the same ownership and
contiguous.
Principal building means the building occupied by the chief or principal use on the
premises. When a garage is attached to the principal dwelling in a substantial manner as by a
roof or common wall, it shall be considered as a part of the principal dwelling for the purpose of
computing yard requirements.
Private industrial/commercial developments means industrial or commercial
developments where lots within the development may gain their required frontage on private
roads, as long as the development meets the standards under Article XIII, section 10.
Private road is any road, not maintained or accepted by the Lewiston City Council, that
conforms to the applicable public street or public court standards of this policy.
Public court is a way providing direct access within identifiable neighborhoods and to
abutting land accepted by the Lewiston City Council as a public street, used for the access of
motor vehicles for up to ten (10) single family dwellings with frontage on said public court.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:23
Public indoor amenity space means malls, courts, arcades or other spaces available for
public use within a building.
Public sewerage means a sewer system operated by the City of Lewiston or other
governmental authority.
Public street is a way providing direct access within identifiable neighborhoods and to
abutting land, and where through traffic is usually discouraged, carrying less than 1,000 ADT
and which has been accepted by the Lewiston City Council as a public street, or has been
constructed or accepted by the state or federal government as a public street or road.
Recharge area means an area composed of permeable materials which allows
precipitation and surface water to filter into the ground and replenish groundwater in aquifers.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
a. Built on a single chassis;
b. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, not including slideouts;
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recreational vehicle dealer means a business or commercial enterprise involving the
retail sales and service of new or used recreational vehicles including motor homes, camper
trailers, boats, snowmobiles and similar vehicles.
Recycling and reprocessing facility means a commercial enterprise involving the
handling, storing and processing of waste materials including but not limited to automobiles,
scrap metal, paper, rags, chemicals, oils, solvents and similar materials but not involving the onsite
disposal of these materials.
Registered caregiver means a person or an assistant of that person that provides care for a
qualifying patient and who is registered by the State of Maine pursuant to MRS 22 Section
2425-A.
Registered dispensary means an entity that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures,
delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and
educational materials to qualifying patients and the caregivers of those patients as that term is
defined in MRS22 Section 2422(6), as may be amended.
Regulatory floodway means (1) the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot, and (2) when not
designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map is considered to be the channel of a
river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the
flood plain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the flood plain.
Repair means the replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose
of its maintenance, but not including an addition, change or modification in construction, exit
facilities or permanent fixtures or equipment.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:24
Residential zoning districts means those zoning districts in which residential uses are
predominate uses allowed. This shall include the following districts: Rural-Agricultural (RA),
Low Density Residential (LDR), Suburban Residential (SR), Medium Density Residential
(MDR), Neighborhood Conservation "A" (NCA), and Neighborhood Conservation "B" (NCB).
Restaurant means a business or commercial establishment which serves food to the
public for consumption on the premises and may include the sale of food for consumption off
premises. Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages, also referred to as food service
establishments FSE-Class A, B, C, and E, must offer full course meals at all times while open,
shall not exclude persons under the age of twenty-one (21) from full use of the establishment at
all times, and shall not possess a special amusement permit for dancing as defined pursuant to
Chapter 10, Article III, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston. Restaurants serving
alcoholic beverages that do not satisfy the above provisions shall be deemed to be and regulated
as drinking places.
Retail means sale to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for trade.
Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by deed, reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road,
cross-walk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or storm
sewer and other similar uses.
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries),
stream, brook, etc.
Roof means the roof slab or deck with its supporting members.
Roof structure means a structure above the roof of any part of a building enclosing a
stairway, tank, elevator machinery or service equipment, or such part of a shaft as extends above
the roof, and not housing, living or recreational accommodations.
Rural areas means rural areas include both open agricultural fields and woodlands. The
land is either undeveloped or developed at very low intensity with scattered farms or homes.
Although some parcels may abut a highway, they are generally of such a depth that most
development will occur off the highway frontage in the form of residential enclaves, large scale
retail centers, and/or campus style office industrial parks.
Scroll means a mode of message transition on a changeable message sign where the
message appears to move vertically across the display surface.
Self-storage facilities means a business or commercial establishment consisting of small,
individually lockable storage units which are rented, leased or sold to the general public for the
storage of personal property. A self-storage facility may contain an accessory dwelling unit for
the exclusive use of a resident manager.
Setback, front means the distance between the front line of the property or the side line of
the street, whichever is closer to any part of any principal or accessory structure, and the nearest
part of any principal or accessory structure.
Setback, normal high water mark means the distance from the normal high water mark of
any perennial stream or pond to the nearest part of a structure.
Setback, rear means the distance between the rear line of the lot, extending the full width
of the lot, and the nearest part of any principal or accessory structure. Back and rear setback are
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:25
synonymous terms.
Setback, side means the distance between the side property line and the nearest part of
any principal or accessory structure. Any lot line not a back lot line or a front lot line shall be
deemed a side lot line.
Shelter means a charitable facility operated by a not-for-profit corporation or a religious
organization providing free temporary overnight housing in a dormitory-style, barrack-style, or
per-bed arrangement to homeless individuals.
Shore frontage means the length of a lot's shoreline as measured in a straight line
between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the shoreline at normal high water
elevation.
Sight distance means the length of unobstructed sight line of motor vehicle drivers in
normal daylight conditions. Sight distance shall be measured from the perspective of a
hypothetical person seated in a vehicle from three vantage points: (1) sitting in the access
viewing vehicles traveling on the highway (both left and right), (2) traveling on the highway
viewing a vehicle sitting in an access and (3) traveling on the roadway viewing a vehicle turning
into the access (both ahead and behind). In case of discrepancy between these measurements, the
lesser measurement shall be used to determine whether the sight distance standard is met. Sight
distance shall be measured to and from the point on the centerline of the proposed access that is
located ten (10) feet from the edge of traveled way. The height of the hypothetical person's view
shall be three and one-half (3 1/2) feet above the pavement and the height of the object being
viewed shall be four and one-fourth (4 1/4) feet above the pavement.
Sign means a structure, device, letter, banner, symbol, or other representation which is
used as or is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement, or direction; which is erected,
assembled, affixed or painted on the exterior of a building or structure and which is visible from
a public way. For purposes of this Code, "visible from a public way" means capable of being
seen without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity, from a way designated for vehicular
use and maintained with public funds.
Sign area means the area of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or
combination thereof, which encompasses the facing of a sign, including copy, insignia,
background and borders, but not including structural supports of the sign. A sign's area is the
sum of the areas of each of its sides. A wall sign's area shall be based on the area of a
freestanding sign as calculated above that would be required to accommodate the same features.
Sign, awning means a sign mounted on a temporary overhanging shelter to the face of a
building.
Sign, directory means a sign listing the names and locations of principal businesses,
services, activities, or individuals.
Sign, ground means an outdoor sign that is directly and permanently supported on the
ground and is physically separated from any other structure.
Sign, marquee means a sign mounted on or suspended from a permanent overhanging
shelter perpendicular to the face of a building.
Sign, projecting means an outdoor sign which is attached to a wall and extends at a ninety
(90) degree angle from the wall for more than eighteen (18) inches.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:26
Sign, roof means an outdoor sign that is displayed above the eaves of a building.
Sign, wall means an outdoor sign that is attached flat to or pinned away from the wall of a
structure and does not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall.
Sign, window means a sign mounted on a window or located inside a window and not
part of a show window display.
Single-family cluster development means a residential subdivision consisting of detached
single-family homes with each dwelling located on an individual lot. The lot area of the
individual lots may be reduced in accordance with provisions of this Code provided that the
overall density of the development conforms to the zoning district regulations by providing
permanent open space as part of the development.
Sludge means residual materials produced by industrial processes, water or sewage
treatment processes, or domestic septic tanks.
Small day care facility means child care for three (3) to twelve (12) children under
thirteen (13) years of age who, are unattended by parents or guardians for any part of the day, in
a non-home setting. Small day care facilities shall not be operated within a private family
residence (i. e. dwelling unit).
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard."
Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the principal structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Stream means a channel between defined banks. A channel is created by the action of
surface water and has two or more of the following characteristics:
(1) It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent edition of the U.S.
Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map or, if that is not available, a
15-minute series topographic map.
(2) It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously for a period of at
least three months of the year in most years.
(3) The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral material such as sand and
gravel, parent material or bedrock that has been deposited or scoured by water.
(4) The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic insects, or mollusks in
the water or, if no surface water is present, within the stream bed.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:27
(5) The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially devoid of upland
vegetation.
"Stream" does not mean a ditch or other drainage way constructed and maintained solely
for the purpose of draining stormwater or a grassy swale.
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the
ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground, excluding light
poles, awnings and canopies, transformer pads, driveways, walkways, patios, and other paved
surfaces, fences, and underground utilities and their related appurtenances (not including
buildings) whether or not underground. Additionally, for floodplain management purposes, a
structure is a walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50)
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial development means improvements to a site for which development approval
has been granted pursuant to the standards set forth in article XIII which constitutes one or more
of the following: The complete construction of at least 50 percent of all proposed principal
buildings; the installation of all proposed principal building foundations; the construction of all
road bases for proposed streets in subdivisions unless the project is phased, in which case only
those road bases in an active phase need be constructed; filling and grading to near finish
contours for earth material activities in excess of 5,000 cubic yards for major projects, or 1,000
cubic yards for minor projects; and the construction of all proposed additions or accessory uses
or structures to a level of completion where a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the code enforcement officer.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. For purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur at
the time of the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is
obtained from the board of appeals.
Subsurface sewage disposal system means a collection of treatment tank(s), disposal
area(s), holding tank(s) and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface
ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other devices and associated piping designed to function as a
unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth.
The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:28
414, any surface wastewater disposal system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 413, Subsection
1-a, or any public sewer. The term shall not include a wastewater disposal system designed to
treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter
13, Subchapter 1.
Suburban strip means the organizing principle of the Suburban Strip is the highway, and
development is largely geared for automobile convenience. Buildings are spatially separated, and
have a relatively low density due mostly to the high parking ratios. Existing land uses are mixed
and include residential, commercial retail and office. Some parcels are not yet developed.
Historically, buildings have been of relatively inexpensive construction, and lack widely
recognized architectural or historical significance.
Swimming pool means a body of water in an artificial receptacle or other container,
whether in the ground or above the ground, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing
and designed for a water depth of thirty-six (36) inches or more.
Tattoo Establishment means a permanent, nondwelling premise where a tattoo
practitioner/operator, being the person who places a tattoo on a human being, and is at least 18
years of age, performs tattooing.
Tattoo parlor is a business or commercial establishment at which an individual performs
or practices the art of tattooing on the person of another. This involves inserting pigment under
the skin of a human being by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible
mark or figure visible through the skin.
Timber harvesting means the cutting or removal of at least ten (10) cords, or equivalent,
of timber on a lot or lots in contiguous ownership during a calendar year for the primary purpose
of selling or processing forest products.
Time and temperature sign means a special type of changeable message sign that is
capable of displaying only public service information such as time, date and temperature, but not
words, symbols or other advertising messages.
Tourist home means a commercial building which accommodates, for a fee, travelers or
other transient guests who are staying for a limited duration, and having eight (8) or fewer
sleeping rooms. A tourist home may include associated rooms for meals or the use of guests.
Transit and ground transportation facilities means urban transit systems, chartered bus,
school bus, interurban bus and rail transportation, and taxis with either scheduled or
nonscheduled service, as defined in NAICS subsection 485.
Travel means a mode of message transition on a changeable message sign where the text
appears to move horizontally across the display surface.
Urban neighborhoods means urban neighborhoods are characterized by established
housing and commercial development, and may include historically or architecturally significant
buildings. Densities are relatively high and buildings are in close proximity to one (1) another.
Buildings relate strongly to the street, and the streetscape is well defined by street trees, building
facades, and pedestrian activity. Automobile travel speeds are relatively slow, and pedestrian
traffic is high.
Upland edge of a wetland means the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes
of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Lewiston Code A II:29
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters
(approximately twenty (20)foot) tall or taller.
Utility structures means buildings which house or service utility services, including
structures such as radio towers, transmitting stations, and satellite dishes serving more than a
residential use on a single lot. Satellite dishes serving a residential use on a single lot shall be
considered accessory to such use.
Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this Code where such variance will not be
contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not
the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Code will result in
unnecessary or undue hardship. As used in this Code, a variance is authorized only for the space
and bulk requirements of Article XI and the performance standards of Article XII, and the
floodplain management ordinance of Article XIV.
Violation means the failure to comply with applicable provisions of the Zoning and Land
Use Code.
Warehousing means the storage of goods, wares and merchandise in a warehouse.
Wetland means land which is associated with or linked to the drainage systems of
streams, ponds, and lakes, and the soils of which are saturated, with the water table at or above
surface level for most of the year.
Wholesale means sale for resale, not for direct consumption.
Yard means an open, landscaped area adjacent to the property line which is not and may
not be occupied by buildings, structures, parking lots, storage or similar uses. Access roads or
drives and sidewalks may be located to allow vehicular and pedestrian traffic to cross yard areas.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-4, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord.
No. 90-12, 11-16-90; Ord. No. 90-15, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 91-1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 91-6A, 7-4-91; Ord. No.
92-5, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 92-20, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 93-9, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 95-1,
2-2-95; Ord. No. 95-8, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 96-7, 7-18-96; Ord. No. 96-11, 9-12-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-
97; Ord. No. 97-9, 10-16-97; Ord. No. 00-16, 8-17-00; Ord. No. 00-17, 8-17-00; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00;
Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 01-23, 2-7-02; Ord. No. 02-21, 1-9-03; Ord. No. 03-18, 1-1-04; Ord.
No. 04-02, 2-19-04; Ord. No. 04-06, 4-15-04; Ord. No. 04-21, 9-9-04; Ord. No. 04-25, 2-3-05; Ord. No.
04-26, 2-3-05; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 05-20, 1-19-06; Ord. No. 06-04, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 06-
05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 07-01, 3-8-07; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-10; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-
6-11; Ord. No. 11-15, 01-19-12; Ord. No. 12-03, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-04, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-15,
02-07-13; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13; Ord. No. 13-10, 10-17-13; Ord. No. 14-12, 01-15-15; Ord. No. 15-
08, 08-13-15; Ord. No. 17-20a, 12-21-17; Ord. No. 19-03, 08-15-19; Ord. No. 19-14, 12-19-19; Ord. No.
19-15, 12-19-19)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE III. OFFICIAL MAP
Lewiston Code A III:1
Sec. 1. Applicability.
The city, through the planning board, may adopt and amend an official map showing the
location of public ways and other public property, ways used in common by more than two (2)
owners of abutting property and approved subdivisions. The map may include all or part of the
city, and the following provisions apply only to that area outlined on the adopted map:
(1) When the official map has been approved by the city council, the map shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk. All amendments to the map shall be approved
by the city council, and all amendments so approved shall be recorded by the city
clerk.
(2) The lines of ways, public property and subdivisions established or modified after
adoption of the official map shall be added to the map and become part of it. The
planning board shall prepare the map and keep it current.
(3) On the official map, the planning board may place lines of planned new and/or
modified ways and public property which are in conformance with the city's
comprehensive plan.
(4) The placing of a line on the official map does not constitute the establishment or
modification of any way or public property, nor the taking or acceptance of land
for any purpose.
(5) A permit for the erection of any structure to be located within the boundaries of
an existing or proposed way or public property shown on the official map may not
be issued, except as provided by Title 35, Sections 2341 and 2347 of the State of
Maine's Revised Statutes. A permit for the erection of any structure or the use of
land which requires access from a way may not be issued unless a way which
provides the required access appears on the map or has been approved for the
purpose by the planning board. A public water supply, sewer or other public
utility, a pavement or other improvement may not be constructed along a way not
shown on the map, or approved for the purpose by the planning board.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A IV:1
Sec. 1. Zoning map.
A map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Lewiston" is hereby adopted as part of this
Code and shall be referred to as the "official zoning map." The official zoning map shall be
identified by the signature of the mayor, chairman of the planning board and attested by the
signature of the city clerk. The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the city clerk.
Sec. 2. Zoning districts.
The city is divided into the following districts, as shown by the district boundary lines on
the official zoning map:
RA Rural Agricultural District
LDR Low Density Residential District
SR Suburban Residential District
MDR Medium Density Residential District
RF Riverfront District
NCA Neighborhood Conservation "A" District
NCB Neighborhood Conservation "B" District
NCBP Neighborhood Conservation “B” Preservation Overlay District
OR Office-Residential District
DR Downtown Residential District
IO Institutional-Office District
CB Community Business District
HB Highway Business District
CV Centreville District
OS Office-Service District
I Industrial District
UE Urban Enterprise District
M Mill District
RC Resource Conservation District
GC Groundwater Conservation Overlay District
LC Lake Conservation Overlay District
MH Mobile Home Park Overlay District
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 17-20a, 12-21-2017)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A IV:2
Sec. 3. District boundaries.
(a) Uncertainty of boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries of
various districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, or rights-of-way shall be construed to follow the center lines of such
rights-of-way;
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following well established lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines;
(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal limits shall be
construed as following municipal limits;
(4) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow the
normal high water line, and in the event of natural changes in the shoreline shall
be construed as moving with the actual shoreline;
(5) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams and
other water bodies shall be construed to follow such center lines and in the event
of natural change in the location of the water body, shall be construed as moving
with the actual center line;
(6) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
subsections (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(7) Boundaries indicated as approximately following natural features such as flood
plains, wetlands, aquifers or watershed boundaries shall be construed to follow
said natural feature. The location of said natural feature shall be determined by
reference to:
a. The flood insurance rate map and floodway map;
b. The inventory of significant wetlands;
c. The state studies of significant sand and gravel aquifers.
(b) Division of lots by district boundaries. Where a zoning district boundary line other than
the boundary of an overlay district divides a lot or parcel of land in the same ownership
of record at the time such line is established by adoption or amendment of this Code, the
use regulations applicable to the one (1) portion of the lot may be extended into the other
portion of the lot by not more than thirty (30) feet, provided that the other portion is not a
Resource Protection District. The space and bulk regulations of the districts shall apply to
the land within those districts and are not subject to the thirty (30) foot provision.
(c) Division of lots by municipal boundaries. When a lot is situated in part in the city and in
part in an adjacent municipality, the provisions, regulations and restrictions of this Code
shall be applied to that portion of such lot as lies in the city.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:1
Sec. 1. Conformity required.
No building hereafter erected, moved, added to or structurally altered, no existing
building or structure and no land shall be used except in conformance with the provisions,
regulations and restrictions of this Code. All construction or moving of buildings and structures
or the alteration of the land shall be in conformance with this Code.
Sec. 2. Violation as a nuisance.
Any property or use existing in violation of this Code is a nuisance.
Sec. 3. General provisions.
(a) All buildings and other structures shall be so located and arranged on lots as to provide
safe and convenient access for fire protection, servicing and off-street parking and
loading located on the premises. No building or structure may be constructed or erected
on any lot which does not have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage or twenty-five (25) feet
of frontage for lots located in the Centreville and Mill Districts.
However, lots of record that existed prior to December 9, 1987, which were legally
established having less than fifty (50) feet of frontage, may apply for a variance pursuant to
Article VIII, section 4(2) of this Code in order to have a building or structure constructed or
erected on said lot.
(b) Land within the lines of a street may not be counted as part of any lot for the purposes of
meeting the area requirements of this Code even though the fee to such land is owned by
the owner of such lot.
(c) No division of land shall be made whereby any lot created thereby is smaller than the
minimum size required for the district in which said lot is located, or has less frontage,
setback or yard space that the minimum required, except as provided by Article VI and
subsections (w) and (z), below.
In addition, the following criteria apply to the creation of all lots unless demonstrated adequately
to the reviewing authority that the application of one (1) or more of the following criteria is not
practical:
(1) If a lot on one (1) side of a stream, road, or other similar barrier fails to meet the
minimum lot size required by the zoning ordinance, it may not be extended to the
other side of the barrier to meet the minimum lot size or for the purposes of
individual, on-site waste disposal.
(2) Lots in which parcels of land such as narrow strips are used or are joined to other
parcels to meet minimum lot size or frontage requirements, or other
reconfiguration of parcels which create irregular-shaped lots (examples of such
lots are illustrated in the Site Plan Review Ordinance and Design Guidelines) are
prohibited.
(3) For all proposed lots the lot width shall be at least equal to the minimum frontage
requirement.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:2
(4) All proposed lots must be able to completely contain within its boundaries an area
as would be defined by a circle with minimum diameter equal to the required
minimum frontage for the district.
(5) To the extent possible, lots will be oriented in order to make maximum use of
direct sunlight and where feasible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street
lines (or radial to curving street lines.)
(d) Any land taken by eminent domain, or conveyed to a public entity incident to the
construction or improvement of a public way or utility line shall not be deemed to be
transferred in violation of the area, width, setback and yard space provisions of the Code.
(e) Except as provided in subsection w and z, below, no lot may be reduced in size if, as a
result, the setbacks, yards, or other open spaces are smaller than prescribed by this Code.
No setback, yard, or other open space may be counted as required open space for more
than one (1) building.
(f) On a corner lot in any district, a building or structure may face either street, and the front
setback and yard shall be between the principal building or structure and the street on
which the building or structure is to be numbered. The side setback and yard, between the
building and side street, shall meet front setback and yard requirements of the applicable
district. Additionally, the rear setback and yard, between the principal building and the
abutting property on the side street, shall meet side setback and yard requirements of the
applicable district.
(g) A use which is not specifically listed as a permitted or conditional use shall be regulated
as a conditional use if the board of appeals or the planning board, reviewing a major
development under Article XIII, determines that the proposed use is substantially similar
to and compatible with permitted or conditional uses in that district.
(h) The following land areas shall not be included in the calculation of net lot area or
minimum lot size in any zoning district:
(1) Land which is situated below the normal high water mark of any water body.
(2) Land which is located within the one-hundred (100) year flood plain as identified
by an authorized federal or state agency.
(3) Land which is located within a wetland as identified and defined by the State of
Maine.
(i) Any use which was a legally existing permitted use prior to the adoption or subsequent
amendment of this Code and which becomes a conditional use as a result of the adoption
or amendment shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use but shall be deemed to be,
and regulated as, a conditional use for which a permit was duly issued.
(j) The minimum lot size, minimum frontage, minimum setback and minimum yard
requirements of Article XI for single-family cluster developments, mixed residential
developments, mixed single-family residential developments and mobile home parks
shall apply to the development in its entirety as if it were a single unit. The setback and
yard requirements shall apply only where the development abuts an existing public street
or easement or property which is not part of the development. Individual buildings or lots
within these developments shall comply with the space and bulk regulations appropriate
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:3
to the type of use.
(k) Except for streets, no access for a use shall be permitted across a residential zoning
district in which said use is not permitted, unless no other means of access is available
and the proposed access and use are to be located on a single lot of record in existence as
of December 9, 1987; and the use complies with the standards of Article XI, district
regulations and the development of the lot and access complies with the standards of
Article XII, performance standards; and Article XIII, development review standards, of
this Code.
(l) Unless expressly designated as an allowed use under Article XI of this Code, no lot in
any zoning district may contain more than one (1) principal structure in residential use.
(m) In all zones, non-permanent structures may be used for the purposes of temporary
construction offices during on-site construction. Permits for such structures will be issued
for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. Such permits may be extended by the
Code Enforcement Official upon submission of evidence that construction is proceeding
in good faith and in accordance with approved plans.
(n) Unless expressly designated as an allowed use under Article XI of this Code, a lot in a
residential zoning district or a lot in residential use may not contain in outside storage
more than one (1) unregistered or uninspected vehicle.
(o) No lot in any residential zoning district may contain any vehicle utilized for commerce
which is parked thereon when not in use except for one passenger-type van, small utility
van or pickup truck, and an enclosed trailer not to exceed eighteen (18) feet in total
length (but not including tow trucks or ambulances).
(p) Lots on which a building existed on December 9, 1987 may contain unenclosed porches,
landings, other similar building features up to thirty-six square feet in total area, and
wheelchair ramps, which project up to seven feet into a required yard.
(q) Chimneys, air conditioners, cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, canopies and awnings
made of nonpermanent materials, architectural or other similar features, excluding
building projections with interior space such as bay windows, may encroach into a
required yard by up to two feet. [Canopies made of permanent materials, such as those
commonly found at gasoline service stations, must meet setback requirements at their
fixed location on or in the ground, and the ends and sides of the canopies must meet all
yard requirements.]
However, for nonresidential uses, all types of proposed awnings and canopies may
encroach into a required yard to the extent the existing yard has been legally occupied by
pavement, crushed stone or hard-packed gravel, as long as the installation will not result in
undue impact on adjacent properties, due to the placement of the awnings or canopies, location
of service, parking or storage areas, or blocking of solar access, and shall in no way interfere
with the utilities or with convenient and safe use of the sidewalk and street right-of-way by all
pedestrians and vehicles, but in no case may the canopy be closer than two feet from the property
line.
Awnings and canopies that are attached to a building without any support structures
affixed to the ground or pavement may project over a sidewalk or street right-of-way as long as
the following criteria are met:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:4
(1) The awning or canopy must be safely made, fixed, supported and maintained, so
as in no way to interfere with the convenient and safe use of the sidewalk and
street right-of-way by all pedestrians and vehicles;
(2) The lowest part of such awning or canopy shall be at least eight feet in height
above the sidewalk or street right-of-way;
(3) The awning or canopy shall be a minimum distance of two feet from the curb-face
or edge of pavement line;
(4) On designated historic structures, or within designated historic districts, canopy or
awning installations must be approved by the historic preservation review board
for appropriateness as provided under article XV, section 5; and
(5) Signage on the awning or canopy must conform to the standards of article XII,
section 16.
(r) Lots on which a building existed on December 9, 1987 may contain unenclosed fire
escapes to the lot line if they are required by law as a second means of egress. Fire
escapes will be located and designed to minimize encroachment into the yard area. This
provision shall not apply when a fire escape is required as a result of alterations to a
building.
(s) Lots which front on existing or proposed culs-de-sac may reduce their required frontage
by not more than 25 percent as long as the lot width is not less than the minimum
frontage required in the district.
(t) Notwithstanding the provisions under article VI, nonconformance, lots on which a
gasoline service station existed on December 9, 1987, which are going through
modernization modifications, may replace existing nonconforming pump islands as long
as the installation does not worsen the existing violation of the required setback or yard,
and is approved in connection with development review pursuant to article XIII hereof.
(u) Notwithstanding the provisions under article XI, district regulations, with respect to
standards for minimum side and rear setbacks and yards, one structure not exceeding 100
square feet in floor area and a height of ten feet, which is accessory to a residential use
and is to be utilized for storage purposes only, may be constructed within three feet of the
side or rear property line, but not closer than 15 feet from the nearest point of any
principal residential structure existing on any adjacent lot.
(v) Notwithstanding the provisions under article XI, sections 1 through 14, district
regulations, with respect to space and bulk standards for setbacks, yards, maximum lot
coverage ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios, minimum open space ratios, and
maximum building height, modifications of these standards not to exceed 25 percent may
be granted by the code enforcement official provided that the criteria contained in article
IX, subsections 3(9)(a) through (d) are met and satisfied; for lots in the highway business
and community business zoning district with frontage on Main Street, Sabattus Street or
Lisbon Street, the modification may be up to 30 percent. The code enforcement official
shall not grant modifications for developments that also require other levels of approval
by the board of appeals, planning board, or staff review committee; where additional
levels of approval are required, the board of appeals, planning board or staff review
committee may grant such modifications.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:5
If the code enforcement official finds that the aforementioned criteria is met, at least ten
days prior to granting such modification, he/she must notify the owner(s) of the
property(ies) that is/are immediately adjacent to the proposed improvement, of the
proposed modification. For the purpose of this subsection, immediately adjacent to the
proposed improvement shall mean, with respect to setback or yard requirements, only
those properties which share the common property line from which the required setback
is measured or by reference to which the required yard is defined; with respect to
maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios, minimum open space
ratios and maximum building height, "immediately adjacent to the proposed
improvement" shall mean those properties that share any common property line with the
property which is the subject of the requested modification. If an aggrieved party feels
that the code enforcement official has erred in his/her finding, he/she may take an
administrative appeal pursuant to article VIII, section 4(1), except that, for the purpose of
this subsection, the time set forth in said article VIII, section 4(1) for taking such an
appeal shall be ten days after the mailing of the notification required hereby. If an
administrative appeal is not filed, or if each owner of property immediately adjacent to
the proposed improvement waives in writing the ten-day appeal period, the code
enforcement official may grant the modification.
(w) In the downtown residential zoning district, attached principal residential structures that
do not share common hallways or stairways for access to individual dwelling units and
detached principal residential structures may be conveyed separately if the staff review
committee, pursuant to the provisions of article XIII section 3, finds that all the following
standards are met:
(1) The structures were constructed prior to December 9, 1987.
(2) At least one dwelling unit in each building shall be owner occupied.
(3) The lot shall be divided to minimize any resulting nonconformities with regard to
the space and bulk standards of the zoning district in which the buildings are
located.
(4) The applicant shall assure implementation of any easements required for access,
parking, utilities, maintenance and similar circumstances.
(5) The applicant shall submit a standard boundary survey plan prepared by a
professional surveyor depicting the location of each building and the boundaries
of each lot. Such plan shall also include any easements as described in subsection
(4), above.
(x) Temporary housing. Notwithstanding article V, section 3(l) and article XI, district
regulations, mobile homes and recreational vehicles such as motorhomes and travel
trailers may be used as temporary housing on lots where owner occupied single-family
detached dwellings and owner occupied two-family dwellings have been damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, lightning, wind, structural failure or any other cause provided
that the following conditions can be met and satisfied:
(1) Temporary housing shall only be approved in those situations where the
homeowner makes a valid case to the satisfaction of the code enforcement official
that it is in the best interest of the home owner to not leave the site for other
temporary housing.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:6
(2) Temporary housing shall be approved on a lot where reconstruction is underway
or pending.
(3) Upon receipt of a permit by the code enforcement official, temporary housing
may be established for not longer than 90 days; however, two extensions, each not
to exceed 90 days, may be granted by the code enforcement official provided that
the reconstruction of the permanent housing is being diligently pursued to a level
of completion where a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
code enforcement official.
(4) Temporary housing shall be placed not closer than five feet from a side and rear
property line and ten [feet] from a front property line; however, the ten-foot front
setback may be reduced by the code enforcement official to the extent necessary
to accommodate temporary housing if he/she finds, following an on-site
inspection of the premises, that a lesser distance will neither create, nor aggravate
a safety hazard or interfere in municipal snow plowing activities.
(5) Temporary housing must be located a minimum of six feet from the nearest point
of any principal structure.
(6) There shall not be more than one mobile home or recreational vehicle placed on
any lot for use as temporary housing.
(7) The temporary housing shall be connected to an approved electrical supply other
than a generator, and to municipal or private water and sewer; and connection
permits are required.
(8) Temporary housing shall be removed within 30 days from the completion of the
reconstruction; however, in the event that the reconstruction is not completed at
the termination of the approved time period, including any extensions, the
temporary housing must be removed within 30 days from said termination.
(y) Adult use and medical marijuana. Notwithstanding Article IX, District Regulations, the
following provisions apply to registered caregivers as defined in Article II, Section 2 and
personal adult use:
(1) Each person 21 years of age or older who is cultivating as a caregiver or for adult
use as allowed per state law other than for the personal use shall not cultivate
marijuana on or within any property containing more than two dwelling units.
(2) Each person 21 years of age or older who is cultivating as a caregiver for their
personal medical use and/or for their personal adult use as allowed per state law
are not subject to sections 5 and 6 of this Article and are permitted throughout the
City.
(3) Each person 21 years of age or older who is cultivating as a caregiver or for adult
use as allowed per state law other than for the personal use are permitted in
accordance with Article XI and subject to licensing as per Chapter 22. Article XV
of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewiston.
(z) Notwithstanding Appendix A, Article XI Section 23 of this Code, single lots developed
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:7
with three or more principal structures in residential use, at the time of the division, may
be divided to create new lots for each of the individual principal structures in residential
use, provided that the following provisions can be met and satisfied:
(1) All principal residential structures on the lot to be divided were constructed prior
to the enactment of State Subdivision Law (ie. September 23, 1971).
(2) All principal residential structures on the lot to be divided are single-family
detached dwellings, two-family dwellings and three-unit multifamily dwellings.
(3) All new lots must, to the greatest extent practicable, comply with the applicable
space and bulk requirements of Appendix A, Article XI Section 23 and Article
XII, Section 2 of this Code. Whether the new lots meet this standard shall be in
the reasonable judgment of the code enforcement director, whose approval shall
be required.
(aa) Notwithstanding, the provisions under Article XI, Sec. 23 of this Code, the keeping of up
to six female chickens is permitted in the Rural-Agricultural (RA), Low Density
Residential (LDR), Suburban Residential (SR), Medium Density Residential (MDR), and
the Neighborhood Conservation “A”(NCA) districts on lots of no less than 30,000 square
feet developed with single family detached dwellings including mobile homes on
individual lots pursuant to the provisions contained in Chapter 14, Article XIII, Sec. 14-
45 through 14-53.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-15, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 91-1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord.
No. 93-17, 10-7-93; Ord. No. 95-8, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 97-2, 4-17-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 99-
11, 5-20-99; Ord. No. 00-5, 5-4-00; Ord. No. 03-17, 1-1-04; Ord. No. 08-10, 1-15-09; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-
6-11; Ord. No. 15-07, 08-13-15; Ord. No. 15-13, 12-31-15; Ord. No. 16-06, 10-6-16; Ord. No. 18-08, 9-
13-18; Ord. 19-14, 12-19-19)
Sec. 4. Administrative official.
Unless otherwise specifically stated, the director of code enforcement and the code enforcement
officers and inspectors under his supervision (hereinafter code enforcement official) shall
administer and enforce this Code and shall have all the powers and duties provided for in Title
30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4451, as amended. (Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 5. Administrative procedures.
(a) A building/ use permit shall be required for all activities regulated by this code including,
but not limited to the following:
(1) The construction, alteration, relocation, demolition, placement, or removal of or
the addition to any structure or building or part thereof;
(2) The construction/ installation of a wall or fence 3.5 feet or greater in height in
accordance with Article XII, Sec. 7;
(3) The erection/ installation of a sign or the replacement of a sign face regulated in
accordance with Article XII, Section 16 of this code;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:8
(4) The construction/ installation of a swimming pool regulated in accordance with
Article XII, Section 6 of this code;
(5) The construction of a driveway or parking lot;
(6) The change of use or occupancy of a building, structure, or lot of land
(7) Campgrounds
No permit shall be issued for the construction, addition, alteration, removal, demolition or
change of use of any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any premises
unless the plans and intended use indicate that the building, structure or premises is to
conform in all respects to this Code and the land use laws of the State of Maine.
(b) The code enforcement official is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections
as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Code.
(c) The code enforcement official shall be given free access at reasonable hours to all parts
of lots and structures regulated by this Code.
(d) The code enforcement official shall act upon all written applications for building or use
permits required by this Code signed by the applicant and directed to the code
enforcement official, either by issuing or refusing to issue such permits within 30 days
from the date of filing of the application. Notice of refusal to issue any permit shall be
given to the owner or to his authorized representative in writing and shall state the
reasons for said refusal. The failure of the code enforcement official to issue a written
notice of his decision, directed to the applicant, within 30 days from the date of filing of
the application, constitutes a refusal of the permit. The applicant may then either appeal
the decision of the code enforcement official to the board of appeals or reapply for a
permit after changing whatever conditions led to the original denial.
(e) All applications for permits for proposed buildings shall be accompanied by a site and a
floor plan drawn to scale and submitted in duplicate reflecting the outside contour of all
buildings and main bearing partitions, location of said building on the lot, and such other
information as may be required to demonstrate compliance with this Code. All
applications for permits for structures shall be accompanied by a sketch submitted in
duplicate of the proposal giving the location of the structure on the property and all
dimensions necessary for a clear understanding of what is intended.
(f) The code enforcement official shall, upon approval of any application for a building or
use permit required by this Code, furnish the applicant a permit and retain a copy for his
files.
(Ord. No. 11-16, 1-19-12)
Sec. 6. Fees.
(a) Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by the Policy
Manual of the City of Lewiston have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be
released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid.
(b) Belated fees. Any person who commences any work prior to obtaining a permit required
by this code shall be subject to a double permit fee.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:9
(c) Refunds. Upon request by the applicant and approval of the director of code enforcement,
a permit fee may be refunded within 90 days of issuance of the permit.
(Ord. No. 11-16, 1-19-12)
Sec. 7. Certificate of occupancy.
No building or structure, nor any use of land hereafter erected, moved, added to, or structurally
altered, nor any use of land which is intensified shall be permitted until the code enforcement
official has issued a certificate of occupancy, certifying that the completed building, structure
and/or use are in conformance with the terms of this Code. A temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued for a period of not more than six months, provided there is a schedule for timely
completion of the work and the code enforcement official determines that there are no hazards to
the occupants or the public. The code enforcement official may revoke any certificate of
occupancy if he finds that any conditions of approval are not being met. (Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89;
Ord. No. 11-16, 1-19-12)
Sec. 8. Violations.
(a) The code enforcement official, on his own initiative, at the request of any municipal
officer, or upon any complaint in writing of a possible violation of this Code, shall make
or cause to be made an investigation of facts and an inspection of the premises where
such violation is said to exist.
(b) If said investigation or inspection reveals evidence of a violation, the code enforcement
official shall give notice of the violation to the owner or his agent and to the occupant of
such premises. Said notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time fixed in the notice for the performance of any act it
requires;
(4) Be served upon the owner or agent and the occupant of the premises, as the case
may require, by the code enforcement official or be sent by certified mail to their
last known address.
(c) Whenever, after investigation and inspection, the code enforcement official finds
evidence of a violation which requires immediate action to protect the public health and
safety, he may, without notice, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency
and require that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the emergency.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, such order shall be effective
immediately.
(Ord. No. 11-16, 1-19-12)
Sec. 9. Violation abatement.
If after such notice and demand (or demand in the emergency situation described in
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Lewiston Code A V:10
subsection 8(c), above) such violation has not been abated within the time specified, the code
enforcement official will institute, in the name of the city, any and all actions and proceedings,
either legal or equitable, that may be necessary or appropriate for the enforcement of the
provisions of this Code. The code enforcement official is hereby authorized to institute
proceedings in the district court in accordance with Rule 80K of Maine Rules of Civil Procedure,
as amended. (Ord. No. 11-16, 1-19-12)
Sec. 10. Penalty.
Any person, including, but not limited to, a land-owner, his agent, tenant, contractor or
other person in possession of or having control or use of any building, structure, land or premise,
or part thereof, who violates any of the provisions of this Code or fails to conform to any of the
provisions thereof, shall be penalized in the manner provided for in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section
4452, as amended. Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after
notification thereof shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. No. 93-9, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 11-16,
1-19-12)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:1
Sec. 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming lots, uses and structures, as
defined in this Code, such that they can be reasonably developed, maintained, or repaired, or
changed to other less nonconforming uses or brought into conformance with this Code.
Sec. 2. Nonconforming lots.
(a) Single, unimproved lots. A single, unimproved, nonconforming lot which is not
contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership may be used as if it were a
conforming lot provided that all of the following are met:
(1) The lot shall have at least 50 feet of frontage;
(2) The use does not require a lot size greater than the established minimum lot size
for the particular district;
(3) The use conforms to all other requirements of the particular district, or a variance
has been obtained from the board of appeals;
(4) The use conforms to all other applicable local and state land use regulations; and
(5) All structures conform to all space and bulk requirements except lot size and
frontage.
(b) Multiple unimproved lots. Two or more contiguous, unimproved nonconforming lots held
in the same ownership of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code shall
be combined to the extent necessary to comply with the space and bulk regulations of the
district in which they are located and thereafter shall be considered under the provisions
of subsection 2(a) of this article.
(c) Single, unimproved lots adjacent to developed lot.
(1) A single, unimproved, nonconforming lot contiguous with a developed
conforming lot held in the same ownership at the time of adoption or amendment
of this Code shall be developable only if the unimproved is a lot of record and
satisfies the requirements of subsections 2(a)(1)--(5) of this article. If the
unimproved lot does not meet said requirements, it shall be combined with the
developed lot.
(2) If an unimproved lot has frontage on a parallel or nearly parallel street from a
contiguous nonconforming developed lot held in the same ownership at the time
of adoption of this Code and complies with subsection 2(a) of this article, the lots
may be conveyed separately or together.
(d) Multiple unimproved lots adjacent to improved lot. If two or more unimproved
nonconforming lots are held in contiguous ownership with a developed lot, any
subsequent division of the lots shall comply with the requirements of this Code.
(e) Single developed lots. A nonconforming lot containing a legally existing structure may be
used as if it were a conforming lot provided that any change or expansion of the use or
structure shall comply with all applicable space and bulk regulations of the district in
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:2
which it is located and shall not increase any nonconformity with respect to lot area, floor
area ratio or impervious surface ratio.
(f) Multiple developed lots. If two or more contiguous, nonconforming lots or parcels are in
the same ownership of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code, and if a
principal structure or use exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed
separately or together, providing all other state law and local land use ordinance
requirements are met.
(g) Contiguous lots in shoreland area. Two or more contiguous lots or parcels held in single
or joint ownership at the time of adoption or amendment of this Code that do not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of the shoreland area standards as
outlined under article XII, subsection 2(e) shall be combined to the extent necessary to
meet the dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is
nonconforming, held in single or joint ownership at the time of adoption or amendment of this
Code and recorded in the registry of deeds if the lot is serviced or to be serviced by a public
sewer, or can accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with article
XII, subsection 2(m), the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and if they can
meet either of the following criteria:
(1) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet
of lot area; or
(2) The lots must be reconfigured or combined so that each lot contains at least 100
feet of shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
Should the lots not be able to meet either of the aforementioned criteria, the owner(s) of
record may apply to the board of appeals for a variance in order to develop said lots provided
that: (1) Each lot can meet the minimum lot size for newly created lots in their underlying
residential zoning district; and (2) each lot is serviced by public sewage; and (3) all of the
standards for the granting of a variance as listed under article XI, subsections (2)(a--f) have been
met.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-2, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 92-19, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 94-10, 8-18-94; Ord.
No. 03-15, 12-18-03)
Sec. 3. Nonconforming structures.
(a) Maintenance and enlargement. A structure in lawful existence as of the effective date of
this Code that does not meet space and bulk regulations of the district in which it is
located, may be repaired and maintained. Unenclosed porches, decks, stairways and other
similar facilities may be added or modified provided that they are located so that they
comply with setback and yard requirements or do not worsen the violation of the required
setback or yard requirement of the existing structure. It may be enlarged and/or accessory
structures may be added to the site without a variance upon obtaining a building permit
from the code enforcement official, provided that all of the following are met:
(1) The enlargement or accessory structure does not itself exceed the prescribed
height standard;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:3
(2) The enlargement in combination with the existing structure does not exceed, or
worsen the existing violation of, the prescribed maximum lot coverage, floor area
ratio, impervious surface ratio, off-street parking requirement or other regulation
of intensity of use; and
(3) The enlargement or accessory structure itself meets the prescribed setback
requirements and yard requirements; provided, however, that a vertical expansion
of a detached single-family residential structure, which does not meet the
prescribed setback requirements and yard requirements, may be built; (a) if the
vertical expansion does not extend any further into the required yard or setback
than does the existing structure over which it is built; and (b) if the expansion will
not result in undue impact on adjacent properties, due to the placement of
buildings or structures, location of service, parking or storage areas, diversion of
surface water or blocking of solar access.
(4) Structures which are located in a shoreland area and are nonconforming because
they; (a) do not meet the current space and bulk standards of the zoning district in
which they are located; or (b) do not meet the shoreline setback requirements as
outlined under article XII, subsection 2(d)(1) of this Code, may be enlarged as
long as subsections (1), (2) and (3) above are met, and the expansion of the
structure's volume or floor area, during the lifetime of the structure, is less than 30
percent.
(b) Reconstruction. A nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood,
lightning, wind, structural failure or any other cause to an extent less than 80 percent of
the market value of the structure at the time of such damage or destruction may be
reconstructed. The reconstructed structure need not comply with the space and bulk
regulations of the district in which it is located, Article VI, Section 2, or Article XII,
Section 17 (d), but shall be the same size or less than the previous structure, and comply
with all other requirements of this Code. A nonconforming structure, other than a singlefamily
detached dwelling, two-family dwelling, or three-unit multifamily dwelling, that is
damaged or destroyed by fire, flood lightning, wind, structural failure or any other cause
to an extent of 80 percent or more of the market value may be reconstructed only in
conformance with space and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
A nonconforming single-family detached dwelling, two-family dwelling, or three-unit
multifamily dwelling damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, lightning, wind, structural
failure or other cause to an extent of 80 percent or more of the market value of the
structure at the time of such damage or destruction may be reconstructed. The
reconstructed structure need not comply with the space and bulk regulations of the
district in which it is located, Article VI, Section 2, or Article XII, Section 17(d), but
shall be the same size or less than the previous structure and comply with all other
requirements of this Code. Any reconstruction permitted by this subsection shall begin
within one year and be completed within two years of the date of such damage or
destruction. The board of appeals may extend the period for reconstruction upon a
showing that work could not begin or be completed for reasons outside the control of the
owner. The request to the board must be filed before the expiration of the applicable time
and not more than a one year extension shall be granted.
(1) A residential structure which is located in a shoreland area and is nonconforming
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:4
because it; (a) does not met the current space and bulk standards of the zoning
district; or (b) does not meet the shoreline setback as outlined under article XII,
subsection 2(d)(1), and which is damaged or destroyed by 50 percent or less of
the market value of the structure before such damage or destruction, excluding
normal maintenance or repair, may be reconstructed, in place, as it existed.
However, if the structure is removed, or damaged or destroyed by more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before such damage or destruction, it
may be reconstructed or replaced, provided that a permit is obtained within one
year of the date of said removal, damage or destruction, and that such
reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water setback
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the code
enforcement director. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so
as to increase its nonconformity.
(2) In determining whether the building enlargement, reconstruction or replacement
meets the setback requirements, as outlined under article XII, subsection 2(d)(1),
to the greatest practical extent, the following criteria shall be considered:
a. The size of the lot;
b. The slope of the land;
c. The potential for soil erosion;
d. The location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties;
e. The location of the septic system, and other on-site soils suitable for septic
systems; and
f. The type and amount of vegetation to be removed in order to accomplish
the enlargement, reconstruction or replacement.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-9, 7-20-89; Ord. No. 92-19, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 15-07, 8-13-15)
Sec. 4. Nonconforming uses.
(a) Continuance. The use of land, buildings, structures, lawful at the time of adoption or
subsequent amendment of this Code, may continue, although such use does not conform
to the provisions of this Code. This shall include the replacement of mobile homes in a
nonconforming mobile home park, provided all other provisions of article XII, section 14
are met, as well as the replacement of mobile homes on individual lots, provided all other
provisions of article XII, sections 2, 4, and section 13, subsections (2) through (6) are met
and the new mobile home must meet the suggested safety standards as proposed in
appendix A of "Maine's New Mobile Home Park Law - A Guidebook for Local
Officials," dated September, 1989. Permitted uses that were made conditional uses as a
result of the adoption or amendment of this Code shall be treated as conditional uses for
which a permit was duly issued, and any expansion of such structure or use shall occur
only after the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with article X.
(b) Resumption. Whenever a nonconforming use of land and/or a structure is superseded by
an allowed use, such structure and/or land shall thereafter conform to the provisions of
this Code and the nonconforming use may not be resumed, except as provided below in
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:5
section 4(c)(2).
(c) Abandonment.
(1) Except for single-family detached dwellings on individual lots and two-family
dwellings on individual lots, if any nonconforming use of a building, structure or
land is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months or more, abandonment,
except as provided below, is conclusively presumed and such use shall not be
resumed, and only a use conforming with the provisions of the district in which
the property is located shall be made of such building, structure or land.
Abandonment of a seasonable nonconformity is conclusively presumed when the
building, structure or use is idle, unopened or otherwise not in actual use during
any part of any two consecutive calendar years. Nonconforming uses presumed
abandoned may be reestablished during the 12-month period immediately
following the date of presumed abandonment as long as a completed application
for the conditional use permit is submitted to the office of the director of code
enforcement within this period, and the permit is subsequently granted by the
board of appeals. In addition to applying the standards for conditional use permits
(article X, sections 3 and 4), the board of appeals shall grant a permit only when it
finds that the following additional standards have been met:
(a) Good cause has been shown for the discontinuance of the use; and
(b) The proposed use will not inhibit or discourage the creation, development
or use of permitted uses in the neighborhood.
(2) For those historic buildings and structures identified in Appendix A, Article XV,
Sections 6 through 10 of this Code located in the Centreville district, a
nonconforming use may be reestablished to its original use in an effort to retain
and preserve the original purpose of said building or structure as long as a
completed application for the conditional use permit is submitted to the office of
the director of planning and code enforcement and the permit is subsequently
granted by the board of appeals. In addition to applying the standards for
conditional use permits (article X, sections 3 and 4), the board of appeals shall
grant a permit only when it finds that the following additional standards have
been met:
a. Documentation has been shown demonstrating what the original use of the
building or structure was;
b. Good cause has been shown for the discontinuance of the use;
c. That the proposed use will not inhibit or discourage the creation, development
or use of permitted uses in the Centreville district;
d. That the proposed use will not create a traffic hazard, nor increase an existing
traffic hazard;
e. That the amount of parking required to meet the minimum code requirements
for the proposed use exists on the site or will be otherwise provided in
accordance with article XII, Section 17 of the Code;
f. That the amount of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, dust and air discharges of
the proposed use shall be equal to or less than the present use;
g. That the rate of surface water runoff from the site will not be increased;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:6
h. That the hours of operation of the proposed use will be compatible with the
existing, surrounding land uses;
i. That the proposed use will not increase the adverse impact on surrounding
properties.
(d) Expansion of use. The expansion of a nonconforming use including a nonconforming
outdoor use of land is not permitted. Additions to residential buildings and structures
accessory to residential uses are permitted as long as the use is not intensified. In all
zoning districts, except the Resource Conservation District and the Groundwater and
Lake Conservation Overlay Districts, on legally-developed existing lots of record as of
the adoption date of this Code, which contain less than 75 feet of lot width, said
residential additions and accessory structures shall meet the applicable minimum space
and bulk requirements of article XI, section 5 Neighborhood Conservation "A" District,
subsection (3) for existing lots having less than 20,000 square feet On developed lots of
record as of July 2, 1998, containing 75 or more feet of lot width, the minimum space and
bulk regulations of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
(e) Conversion to a new, nonconforming use. The board of appeals may grant permission for
the conversion of an existing nonconforming use into another nonconforming use in
accordance with the procedures of article IX if the board finds that the new use will be
more conforming to the intent of this Code and more compatible with the existing
development of the neighborhood than the existing use. The existing nonconforming use
shall be discontinued if the conversion is approved by the board of appeals and the
approved change implemented. In determining whether the new use is more conforming
to the intent of the Code, the board of appeals shall find all of the following:
(1) That the existing use was legally established, was made nonconforming by the
adoption or amendment of the Code and is not a home occupation;
(2) That the proposed use is of the same character or less noxious than the current
nonconforming use. The determination as to whether such a use is of the same
character or less noxious is to be made by a reference to the most restrictive
zoning district where the current nonconforming use is allowed;
(3) That the proposed use will not create a traffic hazard, nor increase an existing
traffic hazard;
(4) That the amount of parking required to meet the minimum code requirements for
the proposed use exists on the site or will be otherwise provided in accordance
with article XI of the Code;
(5) That the amount of noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, dust and air discharges of the
proposed use shall be equal to or less than the present use;
(6) That the rate of surface water runoff from the site will not be increased;
(7) That the hours of operation of the proposed use will be compatible with the
existing, surrounding land uses;
(8) That the proposed use will not increase the adverse impact on surrounding
properties.
(f) Replacement of nonconforming use. A nonconforming use which is damaged or
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:7
destroyed by fire, flood, lightning, wind, structural failure or other cause to an extent less
than 80 percent of the market value of the structure at the time of such damage or
destruction may be reconstructed. The reconstructed use need not comply with the space
and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located, Article VI, Section 2, or Article
XII, Section 17(d), but shall be the same size or less than the previous structure, and the
intensity of use shall not be made more nonconforming.
A nonconforming use, other than a single-family detached dwelling, two-family
dwelling, or three-unit multifamily dwelling, that is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood,
lightning, wind, structural failure or any other cause to an extent of 80 percent or more of
the market value may be reconstructed, upon the receipt of development approval and a
building permit, only in full conformance with the space and bulk regulations of the
district in which it is located. Any reconstruction of a nonconforming use shall be the
same size or less than the previous structure, and the intensity of use shall not be
increased. Any reconstruction permitted by this subsection shall begin within one year
and be completed within two years of the date of such damage or destruction. The board
of appeals may extend the period for reconstruction upon a showing that work could not
begin or be completed for reasons outside the control of the owner. The request to the
board must be filed before the expiration of the applicable time and not more than a one
year extension shall be granted.
A nonconforming use of a single-family detached dwelling, two-family dwelling or threeunit
multifamily dwelling damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, lightning, wind, structural
failure or other cause to an extent of 80 percent or more of the market value of the
structure at the time of such damage or destruction may be reconstructed. The
reconstructed use need not comply with the space and bulk regulations of the district in
which it is located, Article VI, Section 2, or Article XII, Section 17(d), but shall be the
same size or less than the previous use, and the intensity of use shall not be made more
nonconforming. Any reconstruction permitted by this subsection shall be begun within
one year and completed within two years of the date of such damage or destruction. The
board of appeals may extend the period for reconstruction, upon a showing that work
could not begin or be completed for reasons outside the control of the owner. The
request to the board must be filed before the expiration of the applicable time and not
more than a one year extension shall be granted.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 91-5, 5-16-91; Ord. No. 94-16, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 97-6, 6-17-97; Ord.
No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 10-09, 10-7-10; Ord. No. 13-07, 8-15-13; Ord. No. 15-07, 8-13-15)
Sec. 5. Nonconforming signs.
A nonconforming sign which has been removed for more than 30 days shall not be
reinstalled. A nonconforming sign, to be replaced or altered shall be brought into conformance
with the provisions of this Code. (Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
Sec. 6. Nonconforming adult business establishments and drinking places.
Notwithstanding article VI, section 4, any nonconforming adult business establishment or
drinking place shall be entitled to operate and continue operation if it was lawfully open for
business on the effective date of this section and was lawfully engaged in business activity, as an
adult business establishment or drinking place, for at least 150 days during the 12-month period
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMANCE
Lewiston Code A VI:8
prior to the effective date of this section and said adult business establishment or drinking place
shall be entitled to continue to operate on an annual basis provided it was lawfully open for
business and was lawfully engaging in business activity, as an adult business establishment or
drinking place, on at least 150 days during the preceding 12-month period.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05)
Sec. 7. Off-street parking and loading spaces.
(a) A building or structure which is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street
parking space shall not be enlarged or altered to create additional dwelling units, seats,
accommodations, or floor space unless off-street parking is provided sufficient to satisfy
the requirements of this Code for the enlargement or alteration.
(b) A use which is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street parking space may not
be changed or intensified unless off-street parking is provided for an additional number
of spaces representing the difference between what this Code would require for the
existing use were it not nonconforming and what this Code requires for the proposed use.
(c) A building which is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street loading space
shall not be enlarged or added to unless off-street loading space is provided sufficient to
satisfy the requirements of this Code for the addition or enlargement.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
Sec. 8. Transfer of ownership.
Ownership of nonconforming lots, structures and uses may be transferred and the new
owner may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or
lot, subject to the provisions of this Code.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VII. PLANNING BOARD
Lewiston Code A VII:1
Sec. 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the organization, authority and responsibilities
of the planning board.
Sec. 2. Authority.
The planning board is established pursuant to Section 4.05 of the City Charter and the
laws of the state as amended.
Sec. 3. Organization and rules.
(a) A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting of the planning board shall consist of
at least four members.
(b) The concurring vote of at least four members is required to constitute an action on any
matter requiring a public hearing.
(c) All seven members enjoy the same rights and privileges regardless of any planning board
office that they may hold.
(d) The mayor or chairman of the planning board may call special meetings of the board.
(e) Any request for a recommendation by the city council shall be acted upon within 30 days
of the request except as otherwise provided for by statute or ordinance or unless a longer
period is specified by the city council.
(f) The planning board may adopt rules of procedure and may adopt statements of policy
consistent with the Charter and this Code to assist it in the performance of its functions.
(g) No member of the board shall participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in
which he has an interest. Any question of whether a member has a conflict of interest
sufficient to disqualify the member shall be decided by a majority vote of the members
present, except the member whose possible conflict is being examined. Where such vote
results in a tie, the subject member shall be disqualified.
Sec. 4. Powers and duties.
(a) The planning board shall prepare and maintain the official map.
(b) The planning board shall prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan as defined in 30
M.R.S.A. section 4961 as amended and shall review and make recommendations on all
investigations, reports and plans relating to the planning and development of the city or
affecting the comprehensive plan.
(c) The board shall perform those duties prescribed by ordinance and statute including, but
not limited to, approving or disapproving subdivisions, making recommendations on
amendments to the land use code and administering and enforcing certain provisions of
the Code.
(d) The board shall perform those duties requested by the city council and may perform
duties upon request of other public agencies.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VII. PLANNING BOARD
Lewiston Code A VII:2
(e) The board shall review the annual capital program and report to the city council in
accordance with Section 6.05 of the City Charter its findings regarding the needs of the
city for the improvement, replacement and alteration of existing facilities and the
acquisition or construction of additional facilities and the order in which such projects
should be undertaken. The board shall hold at least one public hearing prior to making its
recommendations to the city council.
(f) The board shall review and make a recommendation to the city council with regard to all
capital expenditures costing $100,000.00 or more which are not included in the annual
capital program.
(g) The board may provide assistance and recommendations to any municipal department on
matters affecting the comprehensive plan. Each officer and department of the city shall
give all reasonable aid, cooperation and information to the board.
(h) The board shall review and make a recommendation to the city council with regard to the
acquisition, except through tax lien foreclosure (36 M.R.S.A. section 942 as amended),
and disposition of all public ways, lands, buildings and other municipal facilities.
(i) The powers and duties described in this section are subject to the powers and duties
assigned to the historic preservation review board in article XV of this Code.
(j) Conditional use permits. The board shall hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits, where the development is a major development as defined in article XIII of this
Code, in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in article X of this Code.
(k) Modifications. The board shall hear and decide requests for the reduction of the
provisions under article XI, sections 1 through 14, district regulations, with respect to
space and bulk standards for setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum
impervious surface ratios, minimum open space ratios, and maximum building height,
where the development is a major development as defined in article XIII, subsection
3(a)(2) of this Code. In order for the board to grant the aforementioned relief, it must find
that the standards contained in article IX, sections 3(9), (10) and (11), as applicable, are
met.
(l) The board shall make determinations necessary for its review of major developments as
defined in article XIII of this Code.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 99-11, 5-20-99)
Sec. 5. Administration and staff support.
(a) The planning director shall assist the planning board in the administration of its powers
and duties including preparing agendas and minutes, providing public notice of meetings,
handling correspondence and maintaining all official records.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, whenever the planning board
conducts a public hearing, notice of said public hearing shall be provided by publication
of said notice at least seven days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VII. PLANNING BOARD
Lewiston Code A VII:3
Sec. 6. Appeal of planning board action.
Any appeal from an action of the planning board in administering the provisions of this
Code shall be made to the superior court in accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure as amended.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VIII. BOARD OF APPEALS
Lewiston Code A VIII:1
Sec. 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the authority and responsibilities of the board of
appeals for the administration and enforcement of this Code.
Sec. 2. Authority.
The board of appeals created by Section 4.06 of the Charter shall serve as the board of
appeals under this Code and shall hear and decide those appeals set forth in this section.
Sec. 3. Organization and rules.
(a) The board of appeals shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the provisions of 30-
A M.R.S.A. section 2691, and chapter 2, article IV, division 2, of the Code of Ordinances
as amended.
(b) The board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedure to aid it in the orderly conduct of its
meetings.
Sec. 4. Power and duties.
The board of appeals shall have the following powers and duties under this Code:
(1) Administrative appeals. To affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the code
enforcement official in issuing or denying any building permit, certificate of
occupancy, other permit, order, requirement, decision, determination or
interpretation in the enforcement of this Code. No administrative appeal shall lie
to the board of appeals from a determination of the planning board. An
administrative appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the decision or
action of the enforcement official, or within 60 days of the date of application, if
no action has been taken thereon, unless otherwise specified by law. The filing of
an administrative appeal shall not stay the administrative action form which said
appeal is taken.
(2) Variances. To approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove appeals for
variances from the strict enforcement of only the provisions of this Code which
relate to the space and bulk standards of the district regulations (article XI), and/or
floodplain management and administration standards (article XIV). The board of
appeals is not empowered to grant a variance to allow a use in a district in which
it is not allowed under the district regulations of article XI.
(3) Changes from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, or for the
reestablishment of an abandoned nonconforming use. To approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove requests to change a nonconforming use to a new
nonconforming use or for the reestablishment of an abandoned nonconforming
use, pursuant to article VI of this Code.
(4) Determination of zoning boundaries. To interpret the boundaries of land use
districts shown on the "official zoning map" in accordance with the standards set
forth in article IV of this Code when there is uncertainty about the location of a
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE VIII. BOARD OF APPEALS
Lewiston Code A VIII:2
district boundary.
(5) Appeals of staff decisions on development reviews. To affirm, modify or reverse
the action of the staff review committee in approving or denying applications for
development review and approval of minor projects when the applicant or any
party to the action appeals the decision of the committee as provided for in article
VIII.
(6) Conditional use permits. To hear and decide applications for conditional use
permits in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in articles IX
and X of this Code unless the development is a major development as defined in
article XIII of this Code.
(7) Modification of off-street parking standards. To hear and decide requests for
modifications of the requirements of article XII, subsections 17(e) and (h).
(8) Modification of fence and wall standards. To hear and decide requests for
modifications of the requirements of article XII, section 7, of this Code relative to
walls and fences.
(9) Appeals of historic preservation review board actions on certificates of
appropriateness. To affirm, modify or reverse the actions of the historic
preservation review board in issuing or denying certificates of appropriateness as
provided for in article XV.
(10) Modifications. The board shall hear and decide requests for the reduction of the
provisions under article XI, sections 1 through 14, district regulations, with
respect to space and bulk standards for setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage
ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios, open space requirements and
maximum building height.
The board of appeals may not further reduce space and bulk requirements already
reduced pursuant to the cluster provisions found under article XIII, sections 7 and 9; or
reduce the minimum lot size, minimum setback and minimum yard requirements of
article XI for single-family cluster developments, mixed residential developments, mixed
single-family residential developments and mobile home parks as they apply to the
development in its entirety as if it were a single unit; or further modify yard and setback
reductions allowed for awning and canopy installations, and existing service stations,
pursuant to article V, subsections 3(q) and (t), respectively.
The board of appeals may not further reduce space and bulk requirements already
reduced pursuant to the cluster provisions found under article XIII, sections 7 and 9; or reduce
the minimum lot size, minimum setback and minimum yard requirements of article XI for singlefamily
cluster developments, mixed residential developments, mixed single-family residential
developments and mobile home parks as they apply to the development in its entirety as if it
were a single unit; or further modify yard and setback reductions allowed for awning and canopy
installations, and existing service stations, pursuant to article V, subsections 3(q) and (t),
respectively.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 91-1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 91-2, 3-19-91; Ord.
No. 91-5, 5-16-91; Ord. No. 94-17, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 99-11, 5-20-99; Ord. No.
06-05, 4-20-06)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:1
Sec. 1. Applicability.
The procedures and standards set forth in this article shall apply to appeals that are
brought before either the board of appeals or planning board under this Code and, except as
otherwise provided in article X, to applications for conditional use permits pursuant to article X.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
Sec. 2. Appeal procedures.
(a) Petition.
(1) A written petition for an appeal shall be filed in the office of the director of code
enforcement within the applicable time period as set out in this Code. In the event
no specific time period is provided for in this Code, the petition shall be filed
within 30 days of the action from which the appeal is taken. When the appeal is
taken from a failure or refusal to act, the petition shall be filed within 60 days
after the action was first requested. The petition shall be on forms provided by the
city for that purpose and shall be addressed to the board of appeals. A
nonrefundable application fee, as established from time to time by the city council
to cover administrative costs and the costs of a hearing, shall accompany each
petition.
(2) The petition for appeals shall contain the following information:
a. Street address of the property in question;
b. The legal name and address of the petitioner;
c. The legal name and address of the owner of the property involved;
d. The legal name and address of the applicant for any permit which is the
subject of the appeal, if different from the owner;
e. Description of the property in question;
f. Petitioner's description of what is intended to be done;
g. A drawing, which is substantially to scale, of the site, showing existing
and proposed buildings, roads, drives, parking areas and utilities, the
actual relationship of these facilities to each other and the boundaries of
the parcel and the location of buildings or abutting lots which are within
50 feet of the property line of the site. Where development approval is
required by article XIII of the Code, this drawing shall meet the
requirements of article XIII, subsection 3(h)(3).
h. A statement of the reason or reasons why the petitioner believes the appeal
should be granted;
i. If the appeal challenges the issuance of a permit, a description of the
permit which was issued.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:2
(b) Scheduling.
(1) All hearings shall be held within 30 days of the receipt of a complete petition for
appeal, unless otherwise agreed between the petitioner and the board of appeals at
the hearing of which public notice has been given pursuant to subsection (c) of
this section.
(c) Public notice. Before taking action on a petition for appeal, the board of appeals shall
hold a public hearing. The office of the director of code enforcement shall notify, by
regular mail, the following parties of the subject matter, time, date and place of the
hearing at least seven days before the date of such hearing:
(1) Each member of the board of appeals;
(2) The petitioner, the development department, the mayor and city council, the
director of code enforcement, and the owner of the property which is the subject
matter of the appeal, if other than the petitioner;
(3) The owners of property within 300 feet of all the frontage on both sides of the
street and all landowners whose property touches upon the lot involved in the
appeal.
The owners of property shall be considered to be the parties listed by the chief assessor as
those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive said notice shall
not necessitate another hearing and shall not invalidate any action by the board of appeals.
(d) Representation.
(1) Anyone may appear personally at a public hearing or be represented by an agent
or an attorney. When the petitioner is not represented by an attorney, the board
shall provide to the petitioner a copy of the provisions of this Code applicable to
the appeal.
(2) The petitioner, either personally or through an agent or attorney, must appear at
the hearing at which the petition is to be heard. Failure to appear shall require that
the board dismiss the petition and provide the petitioner with written notice
thereof.
(3) A continuance may be granted to a petitioner or other party in interest where good
cause is shown.
(e) Conduct of hearing. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
have their views expressed at any hearing.
(f) Action by the board. Within 45 days of the hearing of which public notice was given
pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the board shall render its decision, granting the
appeal, granting it subject to conditions or denying it. The failure of the board to act
within 45 days shall be deemed a denial of the appeal, unless such time period is
mutually extended in writing by the petitioner and the board. Within five days of such
decision or the expiration of such period, whichever first occurs, the secretary shall mail
notice of such decision or failure to act to the petitioner and, if the appeal was granted,
shall notify the director of code enforcement, listing all conditions imposed by the board.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:3
Sec. 3. Standards for the granting of appeals.
The Board of appeals shall grant an appeal only when it finds that the following standards
have been met:
(1) Administrative appeals. That the code enforcement official erred in either his
interpretation of the Code or in the application of the Code to the particular
circumstances of the application. If the board of appeals finds that the code
enforcement official correctly interpreted and applied the provisions of this Code,
the board shall affirm his decision. If the board finds that the code enforcement
official erred in the interpretation or application of the Code, the decision of the
code enforcement official shall be reversed and the board shall make an official
interpretation of the Code to be used by the code enforcement official.
(2) Variances.
a. The board of appeals shall grant a variance only when it finds that the
strict application of a provision of this Code to the petitioner and his
property would cause undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" as used
in this subsection means:
1. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted because there are physical conditions unique to
the property which are of such an extraordinary nature that strict
application of the provisions of this Code greatly decreases its
value for any use to which it can be put under the provisions of this
Code;
2. The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
3. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the petitioner or a
prior owner;
4. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality;
5. The granting of the variance will not result in undue impact on
adjacent properties due to the placement of buildings or structures,
location of storage, parking or service areas, diversion of surface
water or blocking of solar access; and
6. The granting of the variance will not impede the ability of public
safety services to reach or service the property or adjacent
properties.
b. In addition to the standards contained in subsection a., within mandated
shoreland zoning areas or in resource conservation, lake conservation or
groundwater conservation districts, the board of appeals shall grant a
variance only when it finds that the granting of the variance:
1. Will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
2. Will not result in erosion or sedimentation;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:4
3. Will not result in water pollution;
4. Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life,
bird and other wildlife habitat;
5. Will conserve shoreland vegetation;
6. Will conserve visual points of access to waters as viewed from
public facilities;
7. Will conserve actual points of public access to waters;
8. Will conserve natural beauty; and
9. Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and
use, such as erosion, increased risk of flood damage to upstream
properties or increased flood damage.
c. Variance from the floodplain management standards of article XIV.
1. The board of appeals shall grant a variance from the floodplain
management standards of article XIV only when it finds that the
granting of the variance:
a. Within any designated regulatory floodway will not result in an
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge;
b. Is supported by good and sufficient cause;
c. Will not result, should a flood comparable to the base flood occur,
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of
the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances;
d. Will not cause a conflict with other state, federal or local laws or
ordinances;
e. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief, and the board of appeals may impose such
conditions to a variance as it deems necessary; and
f. Would result in “undue hardship,” which in this subsection means:
i. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
ii. that the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood; and
iii. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
iv. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:5
2. The board of appeals shall grant a variance for new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use only when it finds that:
a. Other criteria of article IX and article XIV, subsection 6(k) are
met; and
b. The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
3. The board of appeals may grant a variance for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. Upon the
determination that:
a. The development meets the criteria of subsections 3(2)(a) through
(d) above; and
b. The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
4. Any applicant who meets the criteria of article IX, subsections (1) through
(3) shall be notified by the board of appeals in writing over the signature
of the chairman of the board of appeals that:
a. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 per $100.00 of
insurance coverage;
b. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and
c. The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the
applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the
use of land located in a floodplain.
5. The board of appeals shall submit to the code enforcement official
a report of all variance actions, including justification for the
granting of the variance and an authorization for the code
enforcement official to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
6. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceeding before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:6
Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of appeals.
(3) Changes from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. That the
criteria set out in article VI, section 4 have been met.
(4) Determination of zoning district boundaries. That the criteria set out in article IV,
section 3 have been met.
(5) Appeals of staff decisions on development reviews. That the staff review
committee erred in the interpretation or application of the approval criteria set
forth in article XIII. If the board finds that the staff review committee correctly
interpreted and applied the provisions of this Code, the board shall affirm its
decision. If the board finds that the committee erred in its decision, the decision of
the committee shall be reversed and the board shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny the application.
(6) Modifications of off-street parking requirements. That the criteria set out in article
XII, section 17, subsections (e) and (h) have been met.
(7) Modification of wall and fence requirements. That the criteria as set out in article
XII, section 7, subsection (f), have been met.
(8) Appeals of historic preservation review board actions on certificates of
appropriateness. That the historic preservation review board erred in the
application of the approval criteria set forth in article XV. If the board of appeals
finds that the historic preservation review board correctly interpreted and applied
the provisions for granting a certificate of appropriateness, the board of appeals
shall affirm its decision. If the board of appeals finds that the historic preservation
review board erred in its decision, the decision of the review board shall be
reversed and the board of appeals shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application.
(9) Modifications of setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage ratio, maximum
impervious surface ratio, minimum open space ratios, and maximum building
height requirements by not more than 25 percent; for lots in the highway business
and community business zoning districts with frontage on Main Street, Sabattus
Street or Lisbon Street, the modification may be up to 30 percent. The requested
modifications of the aforementioned space and bulk requirements shall meet the
following criteria:
a. Detached single-family dwellings and their accessory structures may be
located a minimum of ten feet from the nearest point of any existing
principal structure or building on any adjacent lot.
All other residential and nonresidential structures requesting modifications
must be constructed in accordance with the current building code.
b. The granting of the reduction will not result in undue impact on adjacent
properties due to the placement of buildings or structures, location of
service, parking or storage areas, diversion of surface water or blocking of
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:7
solar access;
c. The modification will not impede the ability of public safety services to
reach or service the property or adjacent properties;
d. The modification provisions cannot be used to further modify space and
bulk requirements already reduced pursuant to the cluster provisions found
under article XIII, sections 7 and 9; or to reduce the minimum lot size,
minimum frontage, minimum setback and minimum yard requirements for
article XI for single-family cluster developments, mixed residential
developments, mixed single-family residential developments and mobile
home parks as they apply to the development in its entirety as if it were a
single unit; or to further modify yard and setback reductions allowed for
awning and canopy installations, and existing service stations, pursuant to
article V, subsections 3(q) and (t), respectively.
(10) Modifications of front setbacks limited to vertical expansions, side and rear yards,
side and rear setbacks, maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum impervious
surface ratios, minimum open space ratios, maximum building height
requirements by more than 25 percent (or by more than 30 percent for lots in the
highway business and community business zoning districts with frontage on Main
Street, Sabattus Street or Lisbon Street), but not greater than 50 percent. The
requested modifications of the aforementioned space and bulk requirements shall
meet the criteria contained in subsection 3(9) above and the following additional
criteria:
For modifications to the front setbacks, side and rear yards, side and rear setbacks,
maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios, minimum
open space ratios and maximum building height requirements, the proposed
structure, building, storage area, parking or other impervious area cannot
otherwise be practically located on the lot to satisfy the code requirements from
which relief is sought. In assessing practicality, the board shall take into
consideration impediments to development imposed by floodplains, wetlands,
shore land zoning, topography, geology, lot size and configuration and limitations
caused due to existing conditions of development.
The reviewing authority shall also assess the need for the development and the
use of the property in relation to the relief requested such as could the proposed
improvements be reduced in scope or be reasonably placed at another location on
the lot and still generally meet the petitioners objectives; or are there aesthetic,
architectural or structural considerations that warrant that the proposed relief be
granted.
(11) Modifications of side and rear yard and side and rear setback requirements by
more than 50 percent. The requested modification of the aforementioned space
and bulk requirements shall meet the criteria contained in subsections 3(9) and
3(10) above. In addition, the reviewing authority shall require that the petitioner
obtain a maintenance easement/agreement from the owner(s) of adjacent impacted
property(ies), (i.e. those properties that are immediately adjacent to the proposed
improvement(s) requiring relief that will, in the reviewing authority's opinion, be
impacted due to construction, maintenance, stormwater runoff, snow and the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:8
potential to limit future development opportunity). The easement/maintenance
agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the reviewing authority and shall be
recorded at the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds by the petitioner prior to
the issuance of any required permits. In addition, the property boundary subject to
the requested relief shall be established by a licensed land surveyor with
verification provided to the code enforcement official prior to the issuance of any
permits for the requested improvements.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 91-1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 93-9, 6-17-93; Ord.
No. 94-17, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 94-19, 1-12-95; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 98-12, 11-19-98; Ord.
No. 99-10, 5-6-99; Ord. No. 02-01, 2-21-02; Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06;Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 4. Burden of proof.
The burden of proof is on the petitioner to demonstrate satisfaction of all standards
imposed for the granting of an appeal.
Sec. 5. Conditions of approval.
In granting any appeal, the board of appeals may impose conditions on that approval that
it finds necessary to ensure full satisfaction of the standards imposed for the granting of the
appeal and other applicable provisions of this Code. Violations of these conditions shall be a
violation of this Code. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for the
following:
(1) Vegetation, buffering, and screening;
(2) Increased setbacks and yards, and access restrictions;
(3) Hours of use and operational controls;
(4) Location of signs, parking and lighting;
(5) Conservation easements and other deed restrictions;
(6) Professional maintenance and inspection of facilities or improvements necessary
to ensure adequate maintenance and inspection;
(7) Off-site improvements of roads, utilities or drainage facilities.
Sec. 6. Limit of variances.
The board of appeals shall limit the terms of any variance granted to that which is
necessary to relieve the proven hardship.
Sec. 7. Reapplication.
If the board of appeals denies an appeal, the petitioner may not have a petition seeking
the same or similar relief heard within 90 days of the denial unless the board finds at a duly
noticed public hearing, substantial new evidence has been brought forward or that an error of law
or mistake of fact was made. If the board so finds, the board shall proceed to hear the second
petition on the merits. If the board does not so find, the second petition shall be dismissed.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:9
Sec. 8. Notification of state.
The office of the director of code enforcement shall notify the state department of
environmental protection of any variance granted by the board of appeals in areas covered by
mandatory shoreline zoning.
Sec. 9. Duration of permission.
Any right, including but not limited to variances, miscellaneous appeals and changes or
extensions of nonconforming uses, secured by action of the board of appeals, shall expire if the
work or change involved is not begun within six months and substantially completed within one
year of such action. However, the board may grant one or more extensions of time, each not to
exceed one year, if, prior to the expiration of the applicable time, the petitioner files a written
request with the board stating the reason for such request. Notwithstanding the above, the board
may grant an extension of time not to exceed two additional years on the date of action on an
appeal if the petition for appeal requests such extension. In all cases, the burden of proof shall be
on the petitioner to demonstrate that, under the circumstances, the work or change involved
cannot reasonably be begun, or substantially completed, within the applicable time.
Sec. 10. Floodplain notification.
Any petitioner who is granted a variance in a flood hazard area shall be notified by the
board of appeals in writing that:
(1) The construction of a structure below the base flood level may result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance; and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
Prior to the granting of any such variance, the petitioner must file with the board of
appeals a written statement that he is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use of land
subject to flooding, that he assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the city
against any claims filed against it that are related to the petitioner's decision to use land located
in a floodplain and that the petitioner individually releases the city from any claims the petitioner
may have against the city that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
Sec. 11. Effect of granting of appeal.
The granting of an appeal shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of
applications for any permits or approvals which may be required by the codes and ordinances of
the city including, but not limited to, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy or a
development approval. It shall not authorize the petitioner to proceed with the project unless
proper permits and approvals are obtained.
Sec. 12. Effect of granting a variance for single-family detached dwelling and mobile
homes on individual residential lot.
Unless specifically limited by conditions imposed in accordance with Article IX Section
6 by the board of appeal's upon the granting of a space or bulk variance for a single-family
detached dwelling or mobile home on an individual residential lot, subsequent additions or
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE IX. APPEALS
Lewiston Code A IX:10
improvements to the lot shall not require other variances but shall be subject to all other use and
space and bulk standards, existing as of the time of subsequent additions or improvements, for
the district in which the lot is located.
(Ord. No. 03-12, 9-4-03; Ord. No. 17-09, 09-14-17)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE X. CONDITIONAL USES
Lewiston Code A X:1
Sec. 1. Conditional use permit.
(a) A building, structure, or parcel of land may be employed for a conditional use if the use
is specifically listed as a conditional use in the regulations governing the zoning district
in which the use is proposed and, except as provided in subsection (b) hereof, a
conditional use permit is approved by the board of appeals.
(b) A building, structure or parcel of land may be employed for a conditional use if the use is
specifically listed as a conditional use in the regulations governing the zoning district in
which the use is proposed and, when the proposed development is a major development
as defined in article XIII, subsection 3(a)(2), if a conditional use permit is approved by
the planning board.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
Sec. 2. Application.
Applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the office of the director of
code enforcement. A nonrefundable application fee, as established from time to time by the city
council to cover administrative costs and costs of a hearing, shall accompany each application.
The application shall be on forms provided by the city for that purpose and shall contain the
following information and documentation:
(1) The applicant's name and address and his interest in the subject property;
(2) The owner's name and address, if different than the applicant;
(3) The address and map and lot number, as shown in the records of the office of the
assessor, of the subject property;
(4) The particular provision of this Code authorizing the proposed conditional use;
(5) The zoning classification and present use of the subject property;
(6) A general description of the proposed conditional use;
(7) A drawing, which is substantially to scale, of the site, showing existing and
proposed buildings, roads, drives, parking areas and utilities, the actual
relationship of these facilities to each other and the boundaries of the parcel and
the location of buildings or abutting lots which are within 50 feet of the property
line of the site. Where development approval is required by article XIII of this
Code, the drawing shall meet the requirements of article XIII, subsection 3(h)(3)
of that article.
Sec. 3. Standards for conditional use permits.
A conditional use permit shall be granted by the board of appeals or planning board
unless the board finds that the granting of the permit would violate one or more of the following
standards:
(1) Neither the proposed use nor the proposed site upon which the use will be located
is of such a character that the use will have significant adverse impact upon the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE X. CONDITIONAL USES
Lewiston Code A X:2
value or quiet possession of surrounding properties greater than would normally
occur from such a use in the zoning district. The board may not find that this
standard is satisfied unless it finds that:
a. The size of the proposed use is comparable to surrounding uses; and
b. The amount and type of traffic to be generated, hours of operation,
expanse of pavement, and the number of parking spaces are comparable to
surrounding uses; and
c. The generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, litter and
other nuisances is comparable to surrounding uses; and
d. The impact of the use on the quality and quantity of groundwater available
to abutting properties is comparable to surrounding uses; and
e. Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size of the lot, shape
of the lot, topography, and soils, do not aggravate adverse impacts upon
surrounding properties.
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian access to, into and within the site will be safe and will
not be overburdened or create hazards because they are inadequate. The board
may not find that this standard is satisfied unless it finds that:
a. Vehicular access to the site will be on roads which have adequate capacity
to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
1. Adequate capacity means that:
(i) Intersections on major access routes to the site within onehalf
mile of any entrance road will function after
development at a minimum at Level of Service C; or
(ii) If they are functioning at a Level of Service D or lower
prior to the development, the project will not reduce the
current level of service.
2. The board of appeals or planning board may approve a conditional
use permit for an application not meeting this requirement if the
applicant demonstrates that:
(i) A public agency has committed funds to construct the
improvements necessary to bring the level of access to said
standard, or
(ii) The applicant will assume financial responsibility for the
improvements necessary to bring the level of service to said
standard and will guarantee the completion of the
improvements within one year of approval of the permit.
b. The topography of the site shall permit the construction of all driveways,
entrances or proposed streets to meet the standards of the City of
Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and
Sidewalks.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE X. CONDITIONAL USES
Lewiston Code A X:3
c. Facilities are present to assure the safety of pedestrians passing by or
through the site.
(3) Municipal or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be overburdened or
create hazards because they are inadequate. The board may not find that this
standard is satisfied unless it finds that:
a. The capacity of sewerage and water supply systems is adequate to
accommodate the proposed use;
b. The capacity of the storm drainage system is adequate to accommodate the
proposed use; and
c. The ability of the fire department to provide necessary protection services
to the site and development is adequate.
(4) The soils on the proposed site shall have adequate capacity and stability to
support all loadings, including fill, developed by the proposed use and the use will
not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold
water to the extent that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result on the site
or upon the land of abutters or the environment. In considering whether this
standard is satisfied, the board shall take into account the elevation above sea
level of the site and surrounding properties, its relation to flood plains, the slope
and vegetation of the land and their effects on drainage.
(5) The scale and design of the proposed structures with respect to materials, scale
and massing shall be compatible with existing structures within 500 feet of the
site in areas where the existing structures are of a similar scale and architectural
treatment.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 01-23, 2-7-02; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 4. Additional standards in shoreland areas.
For conditional use permit applications in shoreland areas, the board of appeals or
planning board shall grant the application only if it finds that the proposed use:
(1) Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and other
wildlife habitat;
(2) Will conserve shoreland vegetation;
(3) Will conserve visual points of access to waters as viewed from public facilities;
(4) Will conserve actual points of public access to waters;
(5) Will conserve natural beauty; and
(6) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development or use such as
erosion, increased risk of flood damage to upstream properties or increased flood
damage.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE X. CONDITIONAL USES
Lewiston Code A X:4
Sec. 5. Limitations on conditional use permits.
No conditional use permit shall be valid for a period longer than six months from the date
of issue, or such other time, up to two years, as was fixed when the permit was granted, unless
the conditional use has been commenced or construction has actually begun within that period
and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. However, one or more extensions of said time,
each not to exceed one year, may be granted by the board of appeals or planning board if the
facts which supported the granting of the permit have not materially changed. A conditional use
permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued and such
permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use is, for any
reason, discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months. In addition, a conditional use permit
authorizes only the activity expressly described in the application. Any additions to buildings or
structures, construction of new buildings or structures, or other enlargement, expansion or
intensification of the use shall require the issuance of a new conditional use permit.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89)
Sec. 6. Miscellaneous provisions.
The provisions relating to appeals contained in article IX, subsections 2(b)--(f) and
sections 5, 6, 8 and 11 are also applicable to the administration of conditional use permit
applications.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:1
*Editor's note: Ord. No. 00-19, adopted Oct. 5, 2000, added §§ 5, 9, 13, 17 and 22. Hence, §§ 5--7, 8--10, 12--14,
15--18 was renumbered as §§ 6--8, 10--12, 14--16, and 18--21, respectively. See the Code Comparative Table.
Sec. 1. Rural-agricultural district (RA).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the rural-agricultural district is to provide areas
within the city for the development of very low density residential uses while protecting
the rural character of these portions of the city. Within the rural-agricultural district the
retention of active agricultural uses is encouraged. Development which occurs within the
district should be sensitive to the rural nature of the district and should preserve open
space and agricultural land to the maximum extent possible.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord.
No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No.
98-7, 9-10-98; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 2. Low-density residential district (LDR).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the low-density residential district is to provide
areas within the city for the development of single-family homes on individual residential
lots and well planned mixed residential developments in environments which protect
them from the adverse impacts of incompatible land uses. The standards of the district
provide for residential development of up to six units per acre with the availability of
public sewerage.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord.
No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 96-6, 7-4-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No.
98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 3. Suburban residential district (SR).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the suburban residential district is to provide areas
within the city for the development of high quality single-family homes on individual
residential lots in environments which protect them from the adverse impacts of
incompatible land uses. The standards of the district provide for residential development
of up to two units per acre with the availability of public sewerage.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord.
No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 96-6, 7-4-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No.
98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 98-7, 9-10-98; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 4. Medium-density residential district (MDR).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the medium-density residential district is to provide
areas within the city for the development of good quality multifamily housing at densities
up to eight units per acre, and good quality single-family housing, at densities of up to
two units per acre, including mobile homes where appropriate, while protecting
established neighborhoods from undesirable impacts from these uses.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:2
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord.
No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 92-4, 2-20-92; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 92-31, 1-7-93; Ord. No.
96-6, 7-4-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-
10; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 5. Riverfront (RF).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the riverfront district is to promote redevelopment
of the riverfront area for recreation, employment and mixed-age and mixed-income
housing by encouraging the development of new buildings or the reuse or conversion of
existing buildings and other areas that will enhance the use of the Androscoggin River as
an amenity.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 12-04, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 6. Neighborhood conservation "A" district (NCA).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the neighborhood conservation "A" district is to
promote neighborhood stability by requiring the development of new buildings or the
reuse or conversion of existing buildings to conform to the type and density of housing
existing within the immediate neighborhood. The standards of the district restrict housing
to single-family detached dwellings unless the existing pattern of use in the immediate
neighborhood is two-family or predominantly multifamily dwellings.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord.
No. 92-25, 11-5-92; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 92-34, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 95-12, 9-14-95; Ord.
No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-18, 8-17-00; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No.
00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 03-18, 1-1-04; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 7. Neighborhood conservation "B" district (NCB).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the neighborhood conservation "B" district is to
promote the stability and improvement of older multifamily residential neighborhoods by
requiring the development of new buildings or the replacement, reuse or conversion of
existing buildings to conform to the type and density of housing existing within the
immediate neighborhood. The standards of the district allow multifamily housing while
encouraging the upgrading of this housing stock.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 89-11, 9-15-89; Ord. No. 90-6, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord.
No. 92-34, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-
27, 1-11-01; Ord. No.10-02, 3-4-2010; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-10; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at Article XI.
Sec. 8. Office-residential district (OR).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the office-residential district is to provide for the
orderly transition of older residential areas along major traffic arteries to low-intensity
nonresidential uses and multifamily housing. The conversion of existing properties from
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:3
residential to nonresidential use should occur in a manner which preserves the
architectural character of the neighborhood, provides controlled traffic access and
adequate parking and protects adjoining residential neighborhoods from undesirable
impacts.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-11, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord.
No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No.
99-9, 4-15-99; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 04-19, 7-15-04; Ord. 10-13,
12-23-10; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 9. Downtown residential district (DR).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the downtown residential district is to promote the
improvement of older residential neighborhoods within the downtown by encouraging a
transition to more mixed use neighborhoods, including owner-occupied, mixed-age and
mixed-income housing with less density where desired and appropriate, low-intensity
nonresidential uses, more open space and other neighborhood amenities, creating diverse,
mixed-use neighborhoods. The standards of the district will encourage the upgrading of
the existing neighborhoods by removing blight and vacancy, providing an opportunity for
new residential and commercial development, and fostering a sense of community and
place through neighborhood meeting, gathering and cultural places.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-10; Ord.
No. 12-04, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 10. Institutional-office (IO).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the institutional-office district is to provide areas
within the city for the location of major community facilities including hospitals, schools,
colleges and similar institutions. The standards of the district are designed to provide
these institutions with flexibility within their property limits but to establish safeguards to
protect adjoining residential areas from undesirable impacts associated with these uses.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 92-11, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord.
No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 93-8, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 95-6, 6-1-95; Ord. No. 97-2, 4-17-97; Ord. No.
97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 05-07,
3-17-05; Ord. No. 09-09, 12-31-09; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 11. Community business district (CB).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the community business district is to provide areas
within the city for the location of major shopping facilities, including shopping centers
which serve the wider community. The standards of the district are intended to encourage
well planned commercial developments which have controlled vehicular access and high
standards of site design.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-8, 8-10-90; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord.
No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 96-3, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No.
98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-10, 6-15-00; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 04-18, 7-15-04; Ord. No. 05-
07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:4
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 12. Highway business district (HB).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the highway business district is to provide areas
within the city for the location of businesses which are dependent on automobile borne
customers and which require large parking areas to be successful. The standards of this
district are intended to allow commercial uses while requiring controlled highway access,
good quality site design and protection of adjacent residential property. In addition, the
standards require the preparation of a master development plan prior to the development
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-17, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord.
No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 94-14, 10-20-94; Ord. No. 96-3, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No.
98-2, 3-19-98; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 02-07,
5-2-02; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-6-11; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at Article XI.
Sec. 13. Centreville district (CV).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the Centreville district is to encourage a
concentration of economic enterprises in the central business district that is convenient
and attractive for a wide range of retail, service, financial, government, professional,
entertainment and appropriate residential uses in a setting conducive to a high volume of
pedestrian traffic. The standards of the district will initiate economic revitalization
through increased occupancy of downtown properties, improved real estate values,
increased consumer activity, and encourage the restoration and preservation of historic
buildings and honor the rich Franco-American cultural heritage of the community.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 04-07, 4-15-04; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05;
Ord. No. 10-09, 10-7-10; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-10; Ord. No. 12-04, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 14. Office service (OS).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the office-service district is to set aside areas
within the city for the development of major economic activities which do not have
significant environmental issues associated with them. The standards of the district
provide for well-planned developments with attention to controlled traffic access and
buffering of adjacent residential areas. The standards of this district also require that a
master development plan be prepared for large parcels prior to the development of the
site.
(Ord. No. 89-16, 11-30-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92;
Ord. No. 93-1, 2-4-93; Ord. No. 96-3, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No.
00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 00-27, 1-11-01; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-6-11; Ord. No. 12-
15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 15. Industrial district (I).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the industrial district is to set aside areas of the city
for the development of major economic activities, including manufacturing and
processing, and to protect these areas from encroachment from noncompatible residential
or commercial uses.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:5
(Ord. No. 89-16, 11-30-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 90-12, 11-16-90; Ord. No. 91-6A, 7-4-91;
Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 93-1, 2-4-93; Ord. No. 96-16, 12-19-96; Ord.
No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-06, 5-2-02; Ord. No. 02-
08, 5-16-02; Ord. No. 03-16, 1-1-04; Ord. No. 06-07, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-6-11; Ord. No. 12-15,
2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 16. Urban enterprise district (UE).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the urban enterprise district is to encourage the
improvement, reuse and redevelopment of older mixed use areas of the city by allowing a
wide range of uses with appropriate development standards.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-3, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord.
No. 92-27, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 93-1, 2-4-93; Ord. No. 93-2, 2-4-93; Ord. No. 94-9, 8-18-94; Ord. No. 95-
8, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 96-3, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 97-3, 5-15-97; Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 7-2-
98; Ord. No. 99-16, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 99-18, 11-20-99; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 04-07, 4-15-
04; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. 10-13, 12-23-10; Ord. No. 10-14, 1-6-11; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 17. Mill district (M).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the mill district is to develop a major employment
center in the downtown by fostering the development of mixed use commercial
enterprises and appropriate high-density residential areas while preserving and restoring
historic buildings and properties. Developments located within this district should
enhance the commercial, cultural, educational and residential vitality of the downtown
and link the downtown to the riverfront through a series of pedestrian corridors, pocket
parks and open spaces, utilizing the historic canal system, with expanded arts and
recreational amenities.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 12-04, 04-05-12; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Sec. 18. Resource conservation district (RC).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the resource conservation district is to protect
fragile ecological systems, vulnerable areas and areas of unique natural or scenic value
from development or use which would adversely affect water quality, productive or
unique wildlife and aquatic habitat, biotic systems, ecological relationships or scenic and
natural values or which would create unreasonable risks to the public safety and welfare
due to flooding, earth movement or slides or unstable soil conditions. To accomplish this
purpose, uses are permitted which avoid disruption of the natural environment and are
compatible with the natural risks associated with development within these areas while
allowing productive use to be made of the land.
(Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 19. Groundwater conservation overlay district (GC).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the groundwater conservation overlay district is to
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:6
protect, preserve and maintain the quality and quantity of the existing and potential
groundwater supply within the city by controlling the use, storage and disposal of
potential contaminants of the groundwater in areas of the city and identified significant
sand and gravel aquifers and by assuring the groundwater recharge areas associated with
these aquifers are protected from overdevelopment.
(Ord. No. 92-5, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 20. No name pond conservation overlay district (LC).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the no name pond conservation overlay district is to
protect the water quality of no name pond by controlling the discharge of surface runoff
into the lake, thereby limiting nutrient loading to levels which will not result in
substantial degradation of the pond's water quality.
(Ord. No. 92-5, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-24, 2-6-03; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07;
Ord.No. 08-08, 10-2-08; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 21. Mobile home park overlay district (MH).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the mobile home park overlay district is to provide
for the accommodation of mobile homes in planned, integrated mobile home parks, and
mobile homes on individual residential lots, at a standard consistent with the protection of
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city while establishing
safeguards to minimize the adverse impacts on neighboring property owners.
(Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 92-31, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
Editor's note: See editor's note at article XI.
Sec. 22. Land Use Requirements.
(a) Land Use Requirements - All buildings or structures hereafter erected, reconstructed,
altered, enlarged, or relocated, and uses of premises shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this Code. No building, structures, land or water area shall be used for any
purpose or in any manner except as permitted within the District in which such building,
structure, land and water area is located. The District designation for a particular site shall
be determined and apply to all land shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of
Lewiston".
(b) Key to Table
KEYWORD DEFINITION
(P) Allowed/Permitted(the use must be in
conformance with all applicable sections of
the Zoning and Land Use Code)
(C) Allowed/Permitted only after the issuance
of a conditional use permit in accordance
with Article X of this Code (the use must be
in conformance with all applicable sections
of the Zoning and Land Use Code)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:7
Blank/Empty Column Use not allowed/permitted; space and bulk
requirement not applicable
(c) Land Use Table – uses appearing in the table are part of this Code and set forth the uses
allowed in all district.
Land Use Table: All Zoning Districts
12.19.2019
Rural
Agricultural
(RA)
Low Density
Residential
(LDR)
Suburban
Residential
(SR)
Medium
Density
Residential
(MDR)
Riverfront
(RF)
Neighborhood
Conservation
"A"
(NCA)
Neighborhood
Conservation
"B"
(NCB)
Office
Residential
(OR)
Downtown
Residential
(DR)
Institutional
Office (IO)
Community
Business (CB)
Highway
Business
(HB)
Centreville
(36) (CV)
Office
Service
(OS)
Industrial
(I)
Urban
Enterprise
Mill (M) Resource
Conservation
(RC) (18)
Groundwater
conservation
overlay
district
(GC)(28)
No Name
Pond
Conservation
Overlay
District
(NNP)(29)
Mobile Home
Park overly
district
(MH)(30)
USES(15)(33)
Accessory use or structure P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Commercial-Service
Veterinary facilities excluding kennels and humane societies P P P P
Veterinary facilities including kennels and humane societies C P P
Nursery School C C C C P C C P P P P P P P P P P
Small day care facilities C P(22) P(22) P(22) P(22) P P P P P P P P P
Day care centers C P P P P P P P P P P P
Day care centers accessory to public schools, religious facilities,
multifamily or mixed res. developments, and mobile
home parks
C(22) C(22) C(22) C(22) C(22)
Business and professional offices including research, experimental,
testing laboratories, engineering, research,
management and related services
P(9) C(31) P(9) P(9) P P(9) P P(9) P P P P(6)
Restaurants P(1) P(1) P(5) P(26) P(26) P(1) P P(6) P P(1)
Drinking places P C C P P(6) P
Adult business establishments C
Hotels, motels, inns P C P(4) P P P P P P
Movie theaters except drive-in theaters P P P P P P P P
Places of indoor assembly, amusement or culture P P P P P P P
Art and crafts studios P C P C P P P P P P
Personal Services P P P P P P P P P P(6) P P
Retail stores P P P P P P(6) P P
Neighborhood retail stores C(21) P C
Lumber and building materials dealer C P P P
Gasoline service stations P P
Gasoline service stations which are a part of and subordinate to a retail
use
P P
New and used car dealers P P (17)
Recreational vehicle, mobile home dealers P P
Equipment dealers and equipment repair C P P
Automotive services including repair P(9) P P C(9)
Registered dispensary(27) C C C C
Registered primary caregivers engaged in the cultivations of
medical marijuana for two to five registered patients.
P P P P
Tattoo Establishments C C
Marijuana store(27) P P P P P P
Industrial
Light industrial uses P(9) P(9,38) P P P P
Industrial uses P(16) P C C
Building and construction contractors P(6) P(6) P(6,7) P(6,7) P(6,7)
Fuel oil dealers and related facilities P P(6,7)
Wholesale sales, warehousing and distribution facilities and self-storage
facilities
P P P P P
Self storage facilities P P P
Commercial solid waste disposal facilities C
Junkyards and auto graveyards C
Recycling and reprocessing facilities C C P(9)
Private industrial/commercial developments(23) P P C P P P
Marijuana cultivation, manufacturing, testing, nurseries, and
registered dispensary (27)
P P P P P
Transportation
Airports or heliports C
Commercial parking facilities P C C(3) C C P P P P
Transit and ground transportation facilities P C P P
Transportation facilities P C P P P(10)
Public and Utility
Pumping stations, standpipes or other water supply uses involving
facilities located on or above the ground surface and towers for municipal
use
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Power transmission lines, substations, telephone exchanges, microwave
towers or other public utility or communications use
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Municipal buildings and facilities C C C C P C C C P C P P P P P P P C
Preservation of historic areas; emergency and fire protection activities;
bridges and public roadways
P
Dams C
Land Use Table: All Zoning Districts
12.19.19
Rural
Agricultural
(RA)
Low Density
Residential
(LDR)
Suburban
Residential
(SR)
Medium
Density
Residential
(MDR)
Riverfront
(RF)
Neighborhood
Conservation
"A" (NCA)
Neighborhood
Conservation
"B" (NCB)
Office
Residential
(OR)
Downtown
Residential
(DR)
Institutional
Office (IO)
Community
Business (CB)
Highway
Business
(HB)
Centreville
(36) (CV)
Office
Service
(OS)
Industrial
(I)
Urban
Enterprise
Mill (M) Resource
Conservation
(RC) (18)
Groundwater
conservation
overlay district
(GC)(28)
No Name Pond
Conservation
Overlay District
(NNP)(29)
Mobile Home
Park overly
district
(MH)(30)
Institutional
Religious facilities P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Cemeteries P P P P P P
Congregate care/assisted living facilities, institutions for the
handicapped, nursing or convalescent homes, group care facilities C P C P P P P P P P P P
Hospitals, medical clinics P C P C P P P P P P P
Museums, libraries, and non-profit art galleries and theaters P P P P P
Academic institutions, including buildings or structures for classroom,
administrative, laboratory, dormitories, art, theater, dining services,
library, bookstores, athletic facilities and student recreational uses,
together with buildings accessory to the foregoing permitted principal
buildings or structures
C(13) P C(13) C P P(12)(24) P P P P P P P
Civic and social organizations C P C P
Public community meeting and civic function buildings
including auditoriums
P P P P P
Residential
Single-family detached dwellings on individual residential lots P(8) P P P P P(2) P P(11) P(2)
Mobile homes on individual residential lots P(8) P(35)
Two-family dwellings P P(37) P P P(11) P(14)
Multifamily dwellings in accordance with the standards of
Article XIII
P(34) P(11) P P P(11) P P P P P
Single-Family attached dwelling in accordance with the
standards of Article XIII
C P(34) P(11) P P P(11) P
Mixed single-family residential developments in accordance with the
standards of Article XIII
C P P P
Mixed residential developments in accordance with the
standards of Article XIII
P P P P
Mixed use structures P(11) P P P(11) P P P P P P
Lodging houses P P(11)
Home occupations P P P P P P P P P C
Bed and breakfast establishments as a home occupation P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
In-law apartments in accordance with the standards of Article
XII
P P P P P P P P P P
Single family cluster development P P P P
Family day care home P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Shelters C C
Dormitories P
Natural Resource
Agriculture P(8) P
Farm Stands P
Forest management and timber harvesting activities in
accordance with the standards of Article XIII
P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Earth material removal C C C
Community gardens(20) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Water dependent uses, e.g. docks and marinas P P C
Non-residential structures for educational, scientific or nature
interpretation purposes, containing a maximum floor area of not more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
C
Recreation
Campgrounds C C
Public or private facilities for nonintensive outdoor recreation C C C C P C C C C P P
Commercial outdoor recreation and drive-in theaters P C C C P(32)
Fitness and recreational sports centers as listed under NAICS Code
713940 P P P P P P P P P
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:10
Land Use Table Notes
(1) Excludes drive-in restaurants.
(2) Allowed only on existing lot of record as of the date of adoption of this code.
(3) Limited to two (2) parking levels.
(4) Limited to less than twenty-five (25) rooms.
(5) If accessory to an allowed use.
(6) Provided there is no exterior storage of materials or equipment visible from a
public street or abutting property.
(7) Screening shall be at least eight (8) feet tall
(8) Farm housing on the premise of an agricultural operation.
(9) Must be fully enclosed with no exterior storage.
(10) Except those that include truck transportation as classified under group 484,
NAICS 2012 unless approved as a conditional use.
(11) All new residential construction shall comply with the design standards of Article
XII Sec. 22.
(12) Dormitories must be at least 125 feet from all district boundaries unless approved
as a conditional use.
(13) Excluding residential facilities and dormitories.
(14) Existing non-conforming single-family dwellings in lawful existence as of
January 9, 1988 may be converted to a two-family dwelling as long as the
conversion is done within the existing building envelope.
(15) Buildings, structures and uses accessory to permitted or conditional uses are
allowed in all districts.
(16) Limited to commercial bakeries and printing facilities including newspaper
publishers and information services.
(17) Used car dealerships may be deemed an accessory use to gasoline service station,
auto repair garages and automotive services, except repair uses, if the following
criteria are met: that all the criteria outlined in the definition of accessory use
under Article II, section 2 are adhered to; that the parking and on-site circulation
for both the existing and proposed use is reviewed and approved pursuant to
development review under Article XIII; that the maximum number of used
vehicles for sale on site, at any one (1) time, does not exceed six (6) vehicles.
Used car dealerships which are not an accessory use to gasoline service stations,
auto repair garages and automotive services, except repair uses, are permitted
only after the issuance of a conditional permit in accordance with Article X of this
Code, and the project is reviewed and approved pursuant to development review
under Article XIII.
(18) Any use involving the construction of nonresidential floor space or the conversion
of an existing structure from one (1) use to another shall be subject to the
development review requirements of Article XIII of the Code.
(19) Limited to group homes.
(20) Shall comply with Article XII, Section 4.
(21) Neighborhood stores as part of a multifamily development, mixed single-family
residential development or mixed residential development provided that the gross
floor area devoted to retail use shall not exceed ten percent of the total floor area
of the development.
(22) Accessory to public schools, religious facilities, multifamily or mixed residential
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:11
developments and mobile home parks.
(23) Shall comply with Article XIII, Section 10.
(24) Includes housing facilities on the premise of academic institutions permitted for
staff members of such institutions and service buildings or structures ancillary to
and affiliated with permitted institutional uses including but not limited to
pharmacies and medical supply outlets.
(25) Drive-in restaurants are allowed as part of and subordinate to restaurants.
(26) Includes drive-in restaurants.
(27) Must comply with Lewiston Code of Ordinances, Chapter 22, Article XV.
(28) Any land located within the Ground Water Conservation Overlay District shall
apply to the applicable criteria of Article XI, Section 19 of the Code.
(29) Any land located within the No Name Pond Conservation Overlay District shall
apply to the applicable criteria of Article XI, Section 20 of the Code.
(30) Any land located within the Mobile Home Park Overlay District shall apply to the
applicable criteria of Article XI, Section 21 of the Code.
(31) Limited to business and professional offices, not including research, experimental,
testing laboratories, engineering, research, management and related services.
(32) Excluding drive-in theaters.
(33) The performance standards of Article XII shall apply, unless otherwise specified.
(34) Only permitted if serviced by public sewerage.
(35) Placement of mobile homes on individual lots is permitted only in areas within a
mobile home park overlay district.
(36) For those historic building and structure identified in Appendix A, Article XV,
Sections 6 through 10 of this Code located in the Centreville district, a
nonconforming use may be reestablished to its original use pursuant to Article VI,
Section 4 of this Code.
(37) A parcel may be developed with a two-family dwelling, only if both of the
following criteria are met:
a. More than 50 percent of the impacted properties that are developed
contain residential structures with two or more dwelling units; and
b. More than 50 percent of the adjoining properties that are developed
contain residential structures with two or more dwelling units.
An existing single-family dwelling may be converted to a two-family dwelling
only if both of the following criteria are met:
a. Forty percent or more of the impacted properties that are developed contain
residential structures with two or more dwelling units; and
b. Forty percent or more of the adjoining properties that are developed contain
residential structures with two or more dwelling units.
(38) Limited to Food and/or Beverage Facilities. These facilities shall be restricted to
8,000 gross square feet. All store front windows at street level shall remain
unobstructed and provide two-way visibility. If facility is in the business of
producing alcohol, sales of alcohol for consumption on site shall be limited to
what is produced on site. Facilities shall contain a retail component open to all
ages.
(Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13; Ord. No. 14-12, 01-15-15; Ord. No. 15-08, 08-13-15; Ord. No. 16-02,
05-05-16; Ord. No. 19-03, 08-15-19; Ord. 19-14; 12-19-19; Ord. 19-15; 12-19-19)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:12
Sec. 23. Space and Bulk Requirements
Space and Bulk Table - Lots in each District shall meet or exceed the following minimum space
and bulk standards as noted in the Space and Bulk Standards Table.
Dimensional Requirements (13)
Rural
Agricultura
l (RA)
Low
Density
Residential
(LDR)
Suburban
Residential
(SR)
Medium
Density
Residential
( MDR)
Riverfront
(RF) (2)
Neighborh
ood
Conservati
on A (NCA)
Neighborh
ood
Conservati
on B (NCB)
Office
Residential
(OR)(12)
Downtown
Residential
(DR)(2)
Institutiona
l Office (IO)
Community
Business
(CB)(12)
Highway
Business
HB(18)
Centreville
( CV)
Office
Service
(OS) (18)
Industrial
(I) (11)
Urban
Enterprise
(UE)
Mill (M)
Resource
Conservati
on (RC)
Groundwat
er
Conservati
on Overlay
District
(GC)
No Name
Pond
Conservati
on Overlay
District
(LC)
Mobile
Home Park
Overlay
District
(MH)
additional
Minimum lot size with public sewer
Single family detached (24) 60,000 sf 10,000 sf 20,000 sf 10,000 sf 7,500 sf 7,500 sf
Single family attached 20 acres 20,000 sf 12,000 sf
Two-family dwellings 15,000 sf 12,500 sf 10,000 sf
Single family cluster development 20 acres 5 acres 5 acres 5 acres 5 acres
Mixed single family residential development (14) 20 acres 5 acres 5 acres
Mixed residential development (14) 5 acres 5 acres 5 ac
Multifamily dwellings 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 5,000 sf
Mixed use structures 7,500 sf
Agriculture 120,000 sf
Religious facilities 120,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf
Veterinary facilities 120,000 sf
Other uses 40,000 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 7,500 sf
All permitted uses 5,000 sf None 5,000 sf 10,000 sf None None None 20,000 sf 40,000 sf 5,000 sf None 10,000 sf 5 acres
Minimum lot size without public sewer (3)
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots (24) 60,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf
Single family attached 60,000 sf 60,000 sf
Two-family dwellings 80,000 sf 20,000 sf 40,000 sf
Single family cluster development (1) 20 acres 5 acres 10 acres 5 acres 5 acres
Mixed single family residential development (14) 20 acres 5 acres 5 acres
Mixed residential development (14) 5 acres 5 acres 5 ac 20,000 sf
Multifamily dwellings 60,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf
Mixed use structures 60,000 sf
Agriculture 120,000 sf
Religious facilities 120,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf
Veterinary facilities 120,000 sf 20,000 sf
Other uses 40,00 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf 10,000 sf 5 acres
Minimum net lot area per d.u. with public sewer
Single family detached 60,000 sf
Single family attached 60,000 sf 5,000 sf
Two-family dwellings 5,000 sf
Mixed single family residential development (14) 60,000 sf 7,000 sf 5,000 sf
Mixed residential development (14) 7,000 sf 5,000 sf
Multifamily dwellings 1,500
Mixed use structures 3,000 sf 3,000 sf 1,500
All permitted residential uses
1,250 sf 26 3,000 sf 1,250 sf 3,000 sf 3,000 sf None None
6,500 sf per
unit
Minimum net lot area per d.u. without public sewer
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots 60,000 sf
Single family attached 60,000 sf
Two-family dwellings 5,000 sf
Mixed single family residential development (14) 60,000 sf 20,000 sf 20,000 sf
Mixed residential development (14)
20,000 sf 20,000 sf
Multifamily dwellings 1,500 sf
Mixed use structures 3,000 sf 1,500 sf
All permitted residential uses
20,000 sf 3,000 sf
6,500 sf per
unit
Minimum frontage
Single family detached, mobile homes -
200 ft 100 ft 125 ft 100 ft 75 ft
Single family attached 200 ft 200 ft 100ft (50ft)
Two-family dwellings 125 ft 125 ft
Single family cluster development (with multiple vehicular accesses)
200 ft (50
feet)
200 ft (50 ft) 200 ft (50 ft) 200 ft (50 ft) 200 ft (50 ft)
Mixed single family residential development (with multiple vehicular accesses
200 ft (50
feet)
200 ft (50 ft) 200 ft (50 ft)
Mixed residential development (with multiple vehicular accesses) (14) 200 ft (50 ft) 200 ft (50 ft) 100ft (50ft)
Multifamily dwellings (with multiple vehicular accesses) 200 ft 100ft (50ft)
Mixed use structures
Agriculture 250 ft
Religious facilities 250 ft 200 ft 200 ft 200 ft 125 ft
Veterinary facilities
Other uses 200 100 ft 125 ft 100 ft 125 ft
All permitted uses 50 ft 50 ft 100 ft 50 ft 100 ft 100 ft 150 ft 25 ft 100 ft 100 ft 100 ft 25 ft 50 ft (9) 200 ft
Minimum front setback
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots 25 ft 20 ft 25 ft 20 ft 20 ft (21,22) None
Single family attached 50 ft 30 ft None
Two-family dwellings 20 ft 20 ft (21,22) None
Single family cluster development 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft 50 ft
Mixed single family residential development (14) 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft
Mixed residential development (14) 50 ft 30 ft None
Space and Bulk Table: All Zoning District 10.06.16
Dimensional Requirements (13)
Rural
Agricultura
l (RA)
Low
Density
Residential
(LDR)
Suburban
Residential
(SR)
Medium
Density
Residential
( MDR)
Riverfront
(RF) (2)
Neighborh
ood
Conservati
on A (NCA)
Neighborh
ood
Conservati
on B (NCB)
Office
Residential
(OR)(12)
Downtown
Residential
(DR)(2)
Institutiona
l Office (IO)
Community
Business
(CB)(12)
Highway
Business
HB(18)
Centreville
( CV)
Office
Service
(OS) (18)
Industrial
(I) (11)
Urban
Enterprise
(UE)
Mill (M)
Resource
Conservati
on (RC)
Groundwat
er
Conservati
on Overlay
District
(GC)
No Name
Pond
Conservati
on Overlay
District
(LC)
Mobile
Home Park
Overlay
District
(MH)
additional
Space and Bulk Table: All Zoning District 10.06.16
Multifamily dwellings 30 ft
Mixed use structures
Agriculture 50 ft None
Religious facilities 25 ft 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 20 ft (21,22)
Veterinary facilities 25 ft None
Other uses 25 ft 20 ft 25 ft 50 ft 20 ft (21,22)
All permitted uses None 10 ft (21,22) 20 ft (22,23) None (22) 30 ft (17, 27) 20ft 20ft none (22) 50 ft 50 ft 25ft (22) none (22) 50 ft (8) 50 ft
Minimum front yard
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots 25 ft 20 ft 25 ft 20 ft 15 ft (21)
Single family attached 50 ft 20 ft
Two-family dwellings 20 ft 15 ft (21)
Single family cluster development 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft 50 ft
Mixed single family residential development (14) 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft
Mixed residential development (14) 50 ft
Multifamily dwellings 30 ft
Mixed use structures 25 ft
Religious facilities 25 ft 20 ft 25 ft 30 ft 20 ft (21)
Veterinary facilities 25 ft
Other uses 25 ft 20 ft 25 ft 30 ft 20 ft (21)
All permitted uses None 10 ft (21,22) 10 ft (23) None (22) 10 ft (17) 15 ft 15ft none (22) 20 ft 25 ft (6) 10 ft none (22) 20 ft 25 ft
Minimum side and rear setback
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots 25 ft 10 ft 15 ft 10 ft 10 ft
Single family attached 30 ft
Two-family dwellings 30 ft 10ft
Single family cluster development 50 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Mixed single family residential development (14) 50 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Mixed residential development (14) 30 ft 30 ft
Multifamily dwellings 30 ft
Religious facilities 50 ft 50 ft 50 ft 30 ft
Mixed use structures
Veterinary facilities 50 ft
Farm structures for keeping of animals 100 ft
Other uses 50 ft 25 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft
All permitted uses 10 ft 5 ft 15 ft (23) 10 ft 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft (15) none 25 ft 25 ft 20 ft none 25 ft
Minimum side and rear yard
Single family detached, mobile homes on individual lots 10 ft 10 ft 15 ft 30 ft 10 ft
Single family attached 50 ft 30 ft
Two-family dwellings 30 ft 10 ft
Single family cluster development 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Mixed single family residential development (14) 50 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Mixed residential development (14) 50 ft 30 ft 30 ft
Multifamily dwellings 30 ft 30 ft
Mixed use structures 30 ft
Religious facilities 25ft 30 ft 30 ft (16)
Veterinary facilities 25 ft 25 ft
Farm structures for keeping of animals 25 ft
Other uses 25 ft 30 ft 30 ft 30 ft (16)
All permitted uses
25 ft 25 ft 10 ft 5 ft (16,21) 10 ft (16,23)
10 ft
(required on
one side)
10 ft (16,17) 10 ft 10 ft None 10 ft (7,10) 10 ft (10,20) 10 ft (10,16) None 15 ft
Maximum height
Agriculture 75 ft
Other permitted uses
35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 75 ft 35 ft 65 ft 35 ft 60 ft 75 ft 50 ft 65 ft
No less than
20 ft; no
greater than
150 feet(25)
75 ft 100 ft 80 ft 100 ft 35 ft
Hospital, nursing homes and medical offices 120 ft
Ratios
Maximum lot coverage 0.15 0.3 0.20 0.30 0.25 0.40 0.65 0.30 0.75(28) 0.50 0.50 1.00 0.50 0.75 0.60 1.00 0.10 0.4
Maximum impervious coverage 0.75 0.85 0.60 0.75 0.75(28) 0.75 0.75 1.00 0.75 0.75 0.80 0.90 0.10 0.25 0.1
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:15
Space and Bulk Table Notes
(1) This development shall meet the requirements set forth in Article XIII, Section 8.
(2) All new residential development shall comply with the design standards of Article
XII, Section 22.
(3) Or a larger minimum lot size based on the requirements of the Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules
(4) All uses
(5) Reference must be made Use Matrix and Use Matrix Additional Standards.
(6) Where the front yard area for uses other than residential is located across the street
from an abutting property in a residential zoning district and in residential use, a
twenty-five (25) foot buffer area shall be maintained in the front yard area meeting
the standards of Article XIII. In the Industrial district, buffer areas may not be
reduced by modification or variance.
(7) Where the side or rear yard area is located within fifty (50) feet of a residential zoning
district, a fifty-foot wide buffer strip shall be maintained in accordance with the
buffer standards of Article XIII.
(8) 75 ft minimum setback from shoreline all structures other than permitted piers, docks,
marinas, dams, bridges and other water dependent uses; 50 ft minimum shoreline and
25 ft minimum stream buffers to be maintained in natural vegetative state
(9) Minimum shoreline frontage 100 ft
(10) Any required side or rear yard area located within fifty (50) feet of a lot containing a
dwelling not in a residential zoning district shall be maintained as a buffer area
meeting the standards of Article XIII. In the Industrial district, buffer areas may not
be reduced by modification or variance.
(11) The industrially-zoned land on the east side of River Road, from Alfred A.
Plourde Parkway to the northwesterly property line of 380 River Road is subject to
the following additional standards:
a. The minimum front setback for all uses is 100 feet.
b. The minimum front yard for all uses is 100 feet, and shall be maintained as a
buffer area meeting the standards of article XIII.
c. No new vehicular access points are allowed along the frontage between 326
River Road and that portion of 9 Gendron Drive that has frontage on River
Road.
d. The above referenced setback, yard, and buffer requirements shall also apply
to the portion of 380 River Road located directly across from 367 River Road.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:16
e. Only one vehicular access point no wider than 50 feet within the 100-foot
buffer of 380 River Road shall be permitted.
(12) The land on the on the east side of Main Street from Brooks Avenue to the Russell
Street overpass, including 579 Main Street and 15-18 Pettingill Street, and the land on
the west side of Main Street to the Maine central Railroad right-of-way from
Strawberry Avenue south to the Russell Street overpass is subject to the following
additional standards:
a. Modifications of the space and bulk standards may not be granted by granted
by the board of appeals, planning board, staff review committee or code
enforcement officials, with the exception of side and rear yards where the
abutting use is nonresidential.
b. In all cases, trees on the entire site with a diameter of greater than six (6)
inches shall be preserved unless removal is necessary for development activity
as determined by the appropriate reviewing authority.
c. The front yard must be planted with deciduous street trees (not including
flowering ornamental trees) at intervals of fifteen (15) to thirty (30) feet on
center, shall have a minimum two and one-half (2 1/2) inch caliber, and shall
be at least eight (8) to twelve (12) feet high at the time of planting. Existing
impervious front yard areas must be revegetated to these standards, when a
property is subject to development review.
d. Each premises is permitted one (1) free standing ground sign not exceed
seventy-two (72) square feet. Each business entity is permitted a wall sign not
to exceed five (5) percent of the ground floor principal facade area of that
business or a minimum of sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is greater.
Ground signs are encouraged to be pedestal type ground signs not exceeding
eight (8) feet in height.
e. Access is prohibited onto Brooks Avenue, with the exception of single-family
homes.
f. The following design standards are encouraged for any project subject to
development review; however, may be waived by the appropriate reviewing
authority due to site limitations and the nature of the development:
(1) Off street parking is to be located on the side and rear of buildings;
(2) Any new development or renovations shall generally relate in design
features to the surrounding building, showing respect for the local
context of Main Street, as seen from Holland Street to Montello Street;
(3) Gable or hipped roofs should be used to the greatest extent possible
with any new development or renovations. Flat and shed style roofs
are discouraged, unless architectural features are applied to minimize
the roofs appearance from Main Street (i.e., false fronts, parapets, etc.)
(4) Shared driveway entrances shall be encouraged with adjacent sites, in
order to minimize curb cuts.
(5) Additional landscaping, buffering, and screening are encouraged to
minimize views of parking areas from streets and abutting properties.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:17
(13) Modifications (i.e. relaxation of standards) of setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage
ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios, minimum open space ratios, and
maximum building height as contained in the district space and bulk standard may be
granted by the board of appeals, planning board, staff review committee and the code
enforcement official pursuant to Articles V, VII, VIII, IX, and XIII of this Code.
(14) This development shall meet the requirements set forth in Article XIII, Section 8.
(15) Ten (10) foot minimum side and rear setback in HB District for structures measuring
less than 125 square feet accessory to residential uses
(16) Any required side or rear yard area for uses other than residential located within fifty
(50) feet of a residential zoning district or dwelling shall be maintained as a buffer
area meeting the standards of Article XIII.
(17) For the purpose of determining compliance with front, rear and side setback and yard
requirements, an enclosed walkway connecting structures on abutting lots in the
institutional-office (IO), whether it be underground, elevated or at grade, shall not be
considered a structure but shall be considered a walkway. Similarly, awnings and
canopies installed on lots in the institutional-office (IO) district that provide shelter
from the elements, whether made of permanent or non-permanent material shall not
be considered as structures and may extend into the front, side, and rear yard areas to
the extent necessary to provide adequate shelter from the elements as long as the
installation will not result in undue impact on adjacent properties, due to the
placement of the awnings or canopies, location of service, parking or storage areas, or
blocking of solar access, and shall in no way interfere with utilities or with the
convenient and safe use of the sidewalk and street right-of-way by all pedestrians and
vehicles, but in no case may the canopy be closer than two (2) feet from the property
line.
(18) Existing lots of record having 150 feet or less of frontage on a street functionally
classified as an arterial shall be limited to one point of vehicular access to the arterial
to serve all development on the lot including the division of the lot into additional
lots.
Existing lots of record having more than 150, but less than 500 feet of frontage on a
street functionally classified as an arterial shall be limited to two points of vehicular
access to the arterial to service all development on the lot including the division of the
lot into additional lots. Existing lots of record having 500 feet or more of frontage on
a street functionally classified as an arterial shall be limited to two points of vehicular
access to the arterial for up to 1,000 feet of frontage, plus one additional point of
access to the arterial for each additional 500 feet of frontage on the arterial or portion
thereof. These points of access shall service all development on the lot, including the
division of the lot into additional lots.
Prior to the division of any existing lot of record having a gross lot area of five acres
or more or 500 or more feet of street frontage on a road functionally classified as an
arterial or the submission of a development plan for all or a portion of the lot, the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:18
owner shall file a master development plan with the planning board. The master
development plan shall be conceptual in nature and shall be based upon a site
inventory plan identifying the major development opportunities and constraints
associated with the site. This inventory shall be prepared by a registered landscape
architect or registered professional engineer and shall show in a conceptual manner
natural drainage features, environmentally sensitive areas, prime development areas,
potential points of vehicular access, and other significant manmade and natural
features of the site.
The master development plan shall address the overall use of the parcel, the overall
vehicular circulation system within the parcel, the coordination of accesses onto the
arterial street, the general layout of utilities and drainage and provisions for buffering.
The master development plan shall also demonstrate how the requirements of the
office service district and the standards of article XIII will be met. Once the master
development plan has been filed with the planning board, any division of land or
application for approval shall be consistent with the plan unless a revised master
development plan is filed.
(19) The land on the on the west side of Main Street from Brooks Avenue to the Main
Central railroad right-of-way from Strawberry Avenue south to the Russell Street
overpass is subject to the following additional standards:
a. Modifications of the space and bulk standards may not be granted by granted
by the board of appeals, planning board, staff review committee or code
enforcement officials, with the exception of side and rear yards where the
abutting use is nonresidential.
b. In all cases, trees on the entire site with a diameter of greater than six (6)
inches shall be preserved unless removal is necessary for development activity
as determined by the appropriate reviewing authority.
c. The front yard must be planted with deciduous street trees (not including
flowering ornamental trees) at intervals of fifteen (15) to thirty (30) feet on
center, shall have a minimum two and one-half (2 1/2) inch caliper, and shall
be at least eight (8) to twelve (12) feet high at the time of planting. Existing
impervious front yard areas must be revegetated to these standards, when a
property is subject to development review.
d. Each premises is permitted one (1) free standing ground sign not exceed
seventy-two (72) square feet. Each business entity is permitted a wall sign not
to exceed five (5) percent of the ground floor principal facade area of that
business or a minimum of sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is greater.
Ground signs are encouraged to be pedestal type ground signs not exceeding
eight (8) feet in height.
e. The following design standards are encouraged for any project subject to
development review; however, may be waived by the appropriate reviewing
authority due to site limitations and the nature of the development:
(1) Off street parking is to be located on the side and rear of buildings;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:19
(2) Any new development or renovations shall generally relate in design
features to the surrounding building, showing respect for the local
context of Main Street, as seen from Holland Street to Montello Street;
(3) Gable or hipped roofs should be used to the greatest extent possible
with any new development or renovations. Flat and shed style roofs
are discouraged, unless architectural features are applied to minimize
the roofs appearance from Main Street (i.e., false fronts, parapets, etc.)
(4) Shared driveway entrances shall be encouraged with adjacent sites, in
order to minimize curb cuts.
(5) Additional landscaping, buffering, and screening are encouraged to
minimize views of parking areas from streets and abutting properties.
(20) Where the side or rear yard area for uses other than residential is located within fifty
(50) feet of a residential zoning district, a minimum fifty (50)-foot wide buffer area
shall be maintained along the side and rear yards in accordance with the buffer
standards of Article XIII. In the Industrial district, buffer areas may not be reduced by
modification or variance.
(21) Notwithstanding, applicable setback and yard requirements and the provisions of
Article XII, section 17(f)(3), the area between the required front yard and the front
wall of the portion of the building or structure closest to the street and running the full
width of that portion of the building shall be maintained as a yard area, except that
only one (1) of the two (2) following options may be instituted: a. Access roads or
drives in this area are permitted only when a minimum of twenty (20) feet of front
yard area can be maintained (forty (40) feet in the NCA District); or b. No more than
one (1) parking space shall be created in this area.
(22) In areas where the existing buildings have an established uniform setback relationship
to the street, any new building or modification to an existing building shall maintain
this established relationship notwithstanding the setback provisions of that district.
An established uniform setback relationship is deemed to exist when the distances
between the front face of the building and the edge of the travel way in the adjoining
street for the two adjacent parcels fronting on the same street on each side of the
subject parcel are within +/- five (5) feet of mean of this distance for the four (4)
parcels. For the purposes of this provision, lots shall be deemed to be adjacent even if
separated by a street or public easement.
(23) Fifty (50) percent of the area between the required front yard and the front wall of the
portion of the building or structure closest to the street and running the full width of
that portion of the building shall not be used for parking and shall be maintained as
additional yard area, except that access roads or drives and sidewalks are permitted in
this area.
(24) Minimum lot size may be reduced by the Planning Board for single family cluster
developments pursuant to Article XIII section 7.
(25) Building height to be measured at principal facade of the building or structure.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:20
(26) The required minimum lot area per dwelling unit for any residential use in the
neighborhood conservation "B" district shall be the average lot area per dwelling unit
of impacted properties. The maximum number of dwelling units that can be placed on
a parcel in the district shall be figured by the following procedures: The total lot area
of all developed impacted properties shall be calculated. In determining the total area
of the impacted properties, the tax records of the City of Lewiston shall be used
unless the applicant or the owner of an impacted property presents definitive evidence
to the contrary. The total number of legally existing dwelling units shall be
calculated. The total lot area shall be divided by the total number of dwelling units
existing on the impacted properties. This figure divided into the lot area of the subject
parcel yields the total dwelling units which can be placed on the lot. If less than 50
percent of the impacted properties are in residential use, the minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be the greater of: (1) One thousand five hundred square feet per
dwelling unit; or (2) The minimum area derived by the procedure outlined above.
(27) The minimum front setback and front yard requirements for hospitals, nursing homes,
medical offices and academic institutions are zero provided the lot directly across the
street is in the institutional-office (IO) district.
(28) Maximum lot coverage and impervious ration in the institutional-office (IO) for
hospitals, nursing homes and medical offices is 1.00.
(Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13; Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-16; Ord. No. 17-15, 10-19-17)
Sec. 24. Additional District Regulation Requirements
1) Groundwater conservation overlay district (GC).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the groundwater conservation overlay
district is to protect, preserve and maintain the quality and quantity of the
existing and potential groundwater supply within the city by controlling the use,
storage and disposal of potential contaminants of the groundwater in areas of the
city and identified significant sand and gravel aquifers and by assuring the
groundwater recharge areas associated with these aquifers are protected from
overdevelopment.
(b) Applicability. The standards of the groundwater conservation overlay district
shall apply to any land meeting any of the following criteria:
(1) Is located above a significant sand and gravel aquifer as identified by the
Maine Geologic Survey, Maine Department of Conservation,
"Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers," Maps 11
and 16; or
(2) Is located within 100 feet of a significant sand and gravel
aquifer; or
(3) Is located within the recharge area of a significant sand and gravel
aquifer as defined by the extent of permeable stratified sand and gravel
and recharging wetlands within them that drain into the aquifer; or
(4) Is located within the seasonal high water limits of any stream that
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:21
flows into a recharge area of a significant sand and gravel aquifer.
Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be
upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where they should properly be
located. At the request of the owner(s), the city may engage a professional geologist,
geotechnical engineer, or soil scientist to determine more accurately the location and
extent of an aquifer or recharge area, and shall charge the owner(s) for the cost of the
investigation.
These standards shall apply in addition to the standards of the underlying zoning
district in which the property is located.
(c) Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district and not
prohibited by subsection (e) shall be permitted in the groundwater conservation
overlay district.
(d) Conditional uses. Any use permitted with a conditional use permit in the
underlying zoning district and not prohibited by subsection (e) shall be permitted
as a conditional use in the groundwater conservation overlay district.
(e) Prohibited uses. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning district together
with the following uses, even if permitted in the underlying zoning district, shall
be prohibited in the groundwater conservation overlay district:
(1) The disposal of solid wastes, other than brush and stumps in accordance
with Solid Waste Disposal Rules and Regulations of the State of Maine;
(2) The storage of gasoline or other refined petroleum products except as heating
fuel stored within a building or accessory to an allowed use and in accordance
with the standards of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
for Permitting Underground Oil Storage Facilities;
(3) The storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals;
(4) The dumping of snow brought in from outside of the
district;
(5) The storage or disposal of hazardous wastes as defined by the hazardous
waste regulations promulgated by the Bureau of Land Quality Control,
Maine Department of Environmental Protection;
(6) Automotive and equipment service and repair shops;
(7) Junkyards and salvage yards;
(8) Cemeteries.
(f) Space and bulk standards. Any building, structure or use of land within the
groundwater conservation overlay district shall comply with the following
requirements in addition to the space and bulk regulations of the underlying
zoning district:
Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.25 or as otherwise
provided in
subsection
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:22
(g) Additional standards. Any building, structure or use of land within the
groundwater conservation overlay district shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Timber harvesting.
a. Over any ten-year period, harvesting shall not remove more than
50 percent of the volume of trees over four inches in diameter.
For the purpose of these standards, volume may be considered
equivalent to basal area.
b. Burning of slash is prohibited. Export of woodchips to wood-toenergy
plants or on-site chipping and broadcast application to the
land are recommended for slash disposal.
(2) Agriculture.
a. Land application of sludge and spray irrigation of industrial
wastewater or sewage are prohibited in the groundwater conservation
district.
b. Manure spreading is permitted if carried out in conformance with a
conservation plan which meets the standards of the state soil and
water conservation commission and is approved by the
Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. The
conservation plan must include provisions for control of surface water
runoff and nonpoint source pollution.
(3) Animal husbandry.
a. Animal husbandry and associated manure handling must be carried
out in conformance with a conservation plan which meets the
standards of the state soil and water conservation commission and is
approved by the Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water Conservation
District. The conservation plan must include provision for control of
surface water runoff and nonpoint source pollution.
(4) Impervious surface.
a. The impervious surface ratio for nonresidential uses may be increased
if a groundwater study prepared by a groundwater hydrologist
demonstrates that such increase will not have an adverse impact on
either the quality or quantity of groundwater or that proposed
mitigation measures will result in there being no adverse impact to
either the quality or quantity of the groundwater.
(5) Industrial and commercial uses.
a. Facilities shall be designed so that all stored, spilled or leaked
hazardous materials are contained on-site;
b. Facilities shall be designed so that no stored, spilled or leaked
hazardous materials can infiltrate into the ground;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:23
c. Permanent disposal of any waste containing hazardous materials shall
not be allowed on-site;
d. Interior floor drains shall not be directed to any stream, storm drain,
dry well or subsurface wastewater disposal system. They shall be
directed to holding tanks, treatment systems or the public sewer
system;
e. Above ground storage tanks for hazardous materials shall be
located within a diked area which is impervious to the substance(s)
being stored and large enough to contain the entire contents of the
tank(s);
f. Storage areas for drums shall be contained within a diked area
which is impervious to the substances being stored. All drums shall
be stored in product-tight containers which are protected from
leakage, accidental damage and vandalism;
g. Commercial or industrial activities which have uncovered storage
areas shall have specially designed stormwater drainage facilities
which provide for disposal of stormwater in a manner that will not
adversely affect groundwater quality;
h. Dumpsters used to store industrial or commercial wastes shall be
covered;
i. The design of storage and containment storage shall be approved by
the city engineer for conformance with standard engineering practice.
(6) Subsurface wastewater disposal systems.
a. In areas which are not served by public sewer, no more than one
dwelling unit may be connected to a subsurface waste disposal
system, and no "engineered systems" are permitted unless a full
hydrogeologic study which examines the specific groundwater
impacts of the proposed system indicates that there will be no off-site
impacts on groundwater quality. The study must be conducted by a
state certified geologist with proven experience in hydrogeology.
b. Disposal of hazardous materials to wastewater disposal systems is
prohibited.
(7) Earth material extraction.
a Extraction shall not be allowed below the average seasonal high
water table. No ditches, trenches, pumping or other methods shall be
used to artificially lower the water table to permit more gravel
extraction than could occur under natural conditions.
b. All petroleum products shall be kept out of the pit. If refueling
and oil changes must be conducted in the pit, a special area must be
constructed that would prevent the maximum possible spill from
entering the ground. Absorbent pads shall be kept onsite to be used
immediately, should any petroleum products be spilled on the soil.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:24
c. The pit shall not be used for storage or dumping of any substances
that could produce a harmful leachate.
d. Any washing or crushing operations shall be conducted in a manner
that will minimize runoff and evaporation.
e. Access and haul roads into and around the pit shall not be oiled or
salted.
f. Access to the pit shall be strictly controlled at all times with locking
gates. When the pit is permanently closed, all vehicular entrances
shall be made impassable.
g. When the pit is permanently closed, it shall be loamed and
seeded. Application of fertilizer, manure or other soil amendments
to bare soil whose topsoil has been removed is prohibited.
(8) Pesticides and herbicides. The application of pesticides and herbicides
for nondomestic or nonagricultural uses shall be carried out with all
necessary precautions to prevent hazardous concentrations of
pesticides and herbicides in the water and on the land within the
groundwater conservation district as a result of such application. Such
precautions include, but are not limited to; erosion control techniques,
the control of runoff water (or the use of pesticides having lowsolubility
in water), the prevention of volatilization and redeposition of
pesticides and the lateral displacement (i.e. wind drift) of pesticides.
(9) Development approval. All nonresidential projects requiring
development review shall prepare a groundwater protection plan which
shall identify proposed measures for protecting the groundwater from
adverse impacts from loss of recharge capacity, exfiltration from sewer
pipes and contamination by oils, chemicals or nutrients.
2) No name pond conservation overlay district (LC).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the no name pond conservation overlay
district is to protect the water quality of no name pond by controlling the
discharge of surface runoff into the lake, thereby limiting nutrient loading to
levels which will not result in substantial degradation of the pond's water
quality.
(b) Applicability. The standards of the no name pond conservation overlay district
shall apply to any land located within the watershed of no name pond which
discharges surface water either directly or indirectly to no name pond, as shown
on the Official Zoning Map, City of Lewiston. These standards shall apply in
addition to the standards of the underlying zoning district in which the property is
located.
(c) Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right in the underlying zoning district
shall be permitted in the no name pond conservation overlay district.
(d) Conditional uses. Any use permitted with a conditional use permit in the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:25
underlying zoning district shall be permitted as a conditional use in the No Name
Pond conservation overlay district.
(e) Prohibited uses. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning district shall be
prohibited in the No Name Pond conservation overlay district.
(f) Space and bulk standards. Any building, structure or use of land within the
no name pond conservation overlay district shall comply with the following
requirements in addition to the space and bulk regulations of the underlying
zoning district:
Minimum setback from shoreline (all structures other than permitted
piers, docks, marinas and similar water dependent uses) 100 feet
Minimum shoreline buffer retained in natural vegetated state 50 feet
Minimum shoreline frontage for any abutting on the pond 100 feet
Minimum buffer from perennial or intermittent stream or open
stormwater drainage course retained in natural vegetated state 50 feet
Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.1
(g) Additional standards. Any building, structure or use of land within the no
name pond conservation overlay district shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Fertilizer use:
a. The use of fertilizers within the required shoreline, stream or
drainage course buffers is prohibited.
b. The use of solid chemical fertilizers for agricultural or other
nondomestic purposes is prohibited.
c. The use of liquid chemical fertilizers or manure for agricultural
or other nondomestic purposes shall be done in accordance with a
fertilizing plan approved by the District Conservationist of the
Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. This
plan shall be filed with the code enforcement official at least 48
hours prior to application of any fertilizer. A plan for a year-long
or similar time period may be submitted to the code enforcement
official to avoid having to file a separate plan for each
application.
(2) The total area of any lot devoted to lawns and gardens shall not exceed 30
percent of the total area of the lot. Any lot exceeding this requirement
as of January 9,1988 shall be permitted to retain all existing lawn and
garden areas. No new lawn or garden area shall be established within the
required shoreline, stream or drainage course buffers.
(3) Private sewage disposal systems:
a. For all proposed on-site sewage disposal systems within the no
name pond conservation overlay district and within 250 feet of
the shoreline of no name pond, the minimum separation distance
required by the applicable state subsurface wastewater disposal
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:26
rules, between the disposal area bottom and the most limiting
soil or groundwater condition (seasonable high groundwater
table, restrictive layer or bedrock), must be increased by a factor
of 1.5.
b. For all proposed on-site sewage disposal systems within the no
name pond conservation overlay district within 1,000 feet but
greater than 250 feet of the shoreline of no name pond, the
minimum separation distance required by the applicable state
subsurface wastewater disposal rules, between the disposal area
bottom and the most limiting soil condition, must be
increased by a factor of 1.25.
c. The installation of any on-site sewage disposal system within 250
feet of the shoreline of no name pond, any perennial or
intermittent stream tributary to no name pond or any open
stormwater drainage course shall comply with the above standard
and all the other requirements of the applicable state subsurface
wastewater disposal rules without variance.
d. The installation of any on-site sewage disposal system with a
design capacity in excess of 1,000 gallons per day shall be
permitted only if a detailed groundwater hydrology study,
acceptable to the city engineer, demonstrates that the system will
not have an adverse impact on the water quality of no name pond.
e. Replacement or reconstruction of lawfully-existing private
residential sewage disposal systems in existence and in use on
the effective date of this ordinance and systems on lots in
subdivisions approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
shall not be subject to the requirements of subsections (3)a and
(3)b, but shall be required to comply with the applicable
requirements of the state subsurface wastewater disposal rules.
(4) Proposals for the development of all new or existing lots within the no
name pond conservation overlay district, including single-lot residential
development, shall comply with the following additional requirements as
part of the approval of the project:
a. The applicant shall demonstrate, using methodology approved in
advance by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
that the proposed development will incorporate appropriate
stormwater best management practices based on standards to
assure that development within the watershed will not increase
the total phosphorous concentration of no name pond by more
than 0.75 part per billion. If the analysis demonstrates that this
standard will not be met, the applicant shall propose
modifications to the plan to bring the project into conformance
with the standard.
b. The applicant shall demonstrate, using the soil conservation
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:27
service methodology for small urban watersheds for a 25-year, 24-
hour storm, that the total volume of stormwater discharged from
the site in its post development condition shall not exceed the
total runoff in its predevelopment condition by more than 20
percent. If this analysis demonstrates that this standard will not be
met, the applicant shall propose modifications to the plan to
retain runoff on the site to bring the project into conformance
with the standard.
c. The applicant shall prepare an erosion and sedimentation control
plan to minimize, to the maximum extent possible, the discharge
of sediments to no name pond. This plan shall be consistent with
the practices set forth in the most recent edition of the
Environmental Quality Handbook - Maine, published by the
Maine Soil and Water Conservation Service and shall be reviewed
and approved by the District Conservationist of the
Androscoggin County Soil and Water Conservation District.
(5) Projects within the no name pond conservation overlay district that
include one acre or more of disturbed area, must comply with the Maine
Stormwater Management Law, 38 MRSA Section 420-D, and any
regulations issued thereunder, specifically Rules 500 and 502, having an
effective date of December
31, 1997, repealed and replaced on November 16, 2005, and further
amended on December 21, 2006. Furthermore, all projects within 250
feet distance from the normal high water line from no name pond must
meet the standard under article XII, shoreland area standards.
(h) Conflicts. In any case in which a provision of article XI, section 20
conflicts with provisions contained in other articles of this Code, the more
stringent standard shall apply.
3) Mobile home park overlay district (MH).
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of the mobile home park overlay district is to
provide for the accommodation of mobile homes in planned, integrated mobile
home parks, and mobile homes on individual residential lots, at a standard
consistent with the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the city while establishing safeguards to minimize the adverse
impacts on neighboring property owners.
(b) Applicability. The standards of the mobile home park overlay district shall
apply to all land shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Lewiston" as being
located within the mobile home park overlay district.
(c) Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be
permitted in the mobile home park overlay district. In addition the following
uses shall be permitted whether or not they are permitted in the underlying
district:
(1) Mobile home parks consisting of:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:28
a. Residential mobile homes and accessory buildings or
structures;
b. Facilities for the operation and maintenance of the mobile home
park including:
1. A dwelling for the owner or manager;
2. Laundry and restroom facilities;
3. Offices and common areas for the management of the park;
4. Indoor recreation facilities, meeting rooms and common
facilities for the exclusive use of park residents and their guests;
5. Outdoor recreation facilities for the exclusive use of park
residents and their guests;
6. Service and utility buildings for the storage and repair of
equipment used in the operation and maintenance of the park; and
7. Storage facilities for the exclusive use of ark tenants.
c. Facilities for the sales of mobile homes including a sales office and
not more than five model units for parks having 50 or fewer sites
plus one additional model for each 25 additional approved sites in
excess of 50 to a maximum of 12 model units.
(2) Mobile homes on individual residential lots.
(d) Conditional uses. Any use permitted with a conditional use permit in the
underlying zoning district shall be permitted as a conditional use in the mobile
home park overlay district unless such use is made a permitted use by subsection
(c) above.
(e) Prohibited uses. Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning district which is
not a permitted or conditional use in the mobile home park overlay district shall
be prohibited in the district.
(f) Space and bulk standards. Any use other than a mobile home park shall
comply to the space and bulk standards of the underlying district. Mobile home
parks shall comply with the following requirements:
Minimum lot size 5 acres
Minimum street frontage 200 feet
Minimum net lot area per dwelling unit 6,500 sq. feet
Minimum setback of mobile home from the perimeter
of the site 50 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum side and rear yard 50 feet
Minimum side and rear buffer 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage ratio .040
(g) Additional standards.
(1) The general standards of performance of article XII shall apply.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Lewiston Code A XI:29
(2) The expansion or development of a mobile home park shall be subject to
the development review requirements of article XIII of this Code.
(3) The mobile home park shall conform to the off-street parking
requirements of article XII.
(4) The layout, design and construction of individual mobile home sites and
related facilities shall conform to the standards set forth in article XII of
this Code.
(5) No development which is approved under this section as a mobile home
park may be converted to another use without the approval of the
planning board, and meeting the appropriate lot size, frontage, setbacks
and other requirements. The plan to be recorded at the registry of deeds
and filed with the city shall include the following restrictions as well as
any other notes or conditions of approval:
a. The land within the park shall remain in a unified ownership and the
fee to lots or portions of lots shall not be transferred.
b. No dwelling unit other than a manufactured housing unit shall be
located within the park.
c. The owner or operator of a mobile home park shall be responsible
for ensuring the maintenance of the park and code compliance with
all provisions of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lewiston for all park owned structures, including recreation and open
space areas and mobile home sites.
(Ord. No. 12-15, 2-7-13)
4) Neighborhood conservation “B” preservation overlay district (NCBP)
(a) Statement of purpose: The purpose of the neighborhood preservation overlay
district is to promote the stability and improvement of older multifamily
residential neighborhoods by prohibiting the development of new lodging houses
or the replacement, reuse or conversion of existing buildings into lodging houses
in areas in which said uses would result in an adverse impact on the intended uses
of properties in the area impacting residents’ quality of living and the ability of
property owners to improve and increase the values of their properties.
(b) Applicability. The standards of the neighborhood preservation overlay district
shall apply to all land shown on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Lewiston" as
being located within the neighborhood conservation “B” overlay district.
(c) Prohibited uses. Any use permitted by right in the underlying zoning district shall
be allowed in the neighborhood preservation overlay district with the exception of
lodging houses, which are a prohibited use in the NCB overlay district.
(d) Space and bulk standards. The space and bulk requirements of the underlying
zoning district shall apply in the neighborhood conservation “B” overlay district.
(Ord. No. 17-20a, 12-21-17)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:1
Sec. 1. Applicability.
The performance standards contained in this article shall apply to all uses and activities in the
city, unless otherwise specified, whether or not specific approval or a permit is required.
Sec. 2. Shoreland area standards.
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to further maintain the safe and
healthful conditions of the city and neighboring communities; to prevent and control water
pollution, to protect aquatic life, bird and other habitat; to protect buildings and lands from
accelerated erosion and flooding; to protect historic resources; to protect wetlands; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual, as well
as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to
anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in the shoreland areas.
(b) Applicability. Unless otherwise specified, the standards of this section shall apply to:
(1) All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high watermark of the
Androscoggin River, No Name Pond, and to all areas included within the Resource
Conservation District, as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Lewiston,
Maine"; all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
No Name Brook, No Name Brook Tributary B, Stetson Brook and Salmon Brook
(beginning at the confluence of Moody and Salmon Brook to the Androscoggin River).
(2) All land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the defined upland edge of all ten
acre or greater wetlands, located in the City of Lewiston, as shown on the City of
Lewiston Fresh-Water Wetland Maps prepared by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, dated 1989, and identified by the following wetland
identification numbers: 56 through 62.
(3) Any structure, existing or proposed, built on, over, or abutting a dock, wharf, or pier, or
other structures extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland.
(4) All land areas within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
Salmon Brook, Moody Brook, No Name Brook Tributary A, Hart Brook and Jepson
Brook.
(5) The perimeters of the above referenced shoreland areas shall be superimposed over the
underlying zoning districts. The provisions of the underlying zoning district shall be
adhered to subject to compliance with the provisions of the shoreland area. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of shoreland area boundary lines, the Board of
Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
(c) Land use standards.
(1) All land use activities within the Shoreland area shall conform with the space and bulk
standards of the zoning district in which they are located, and the standards set forth in
this section.
(2) Nothing in this section shall permit uses in districts where such uses are not otherwise
permitted.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:2
(3) Whenever a provision of this section conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this section, other sections, or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the
more restrictive provision shall be adhered to.
(d) Principal and accessory structures.
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least: 100 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of No Name Pond; 75 feet, horizontal distance,
from the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this
section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this
section; and 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line, from those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section and in general development
areas. This minimum setback distance for all new principal and accessory structures shall
not be reduced by variance. These standards shall not apply to structures which require
direct access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining
walls, or other functionally water-dependent uses.
(2) The maximum impervious surface ratio for all land areas within the Shoreland area shall
not exceed 20 percent. However, if the standard is more stringent for the zoning district
in which the land area is located, then the stricter standard shall apply.
For all subdivisions, where all or a portion of the subdivision is located within the
Shoreland area, this maximum impervious surface ratio shall be based on the entire
portion of the subdivision which is located within the Shoreland area and shall not be
computed on an individual lot basis. However, no individual lot, whether totally or
partially within the Shoreland area shall exceed the maximum impervious surface ratio
for the zoning district in which the lot is located. In some cases, the maximum
impervious surface ratio that is allowed in a zoning district may need to be reduced on a
lot-by-lot basis for those lots located totally or partially within a Shoreland area in order
to meet the 20 percent maximum impervious surface ratio for the entire portion of the
subdivision located within the Shoreland area. Deed covenants for those impacted lots
must be submitted to the planning board limiting the maximum impervious surface ratio
in order to meet the required standard.
These maximum impervious surface ratios shall not be reduced by modification or
variance.
(3) Notwithstanding the aforementioned requirements, stairways or similar structures may be
allowed with a permit from the code enforcement director, to provide shoreline access in
areas of steep slopes or unstable soils, provided that all of the following are met:
a. The applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the
property.
b. The structure is limited to a maximum of four feet in width.
c. The structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water
body, or beyond the defined upland edge of a wetland unless permitted by the
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to Natural Resources Protection
Act, Title 38, Sec. 480-C.
(4) Nonconforming structures shall adhere to the standards outlined under article VI, section
3 of this Code.
(e) Minimum lot size and shore frontage.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:3
(1) For the purposes of this subsection, shore frontage shall be defined as follows; the length
of a lot bordering on a great pond, river or stream, measured in a straight line between the
intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline at normal high-water elevation or the
length of a lot bordering the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection
(b)(2) of this section.
(2) The minimum lot size for all residential uses located in a shoreland area shall be 40,000
square feet per dwelling unit. If the lot abuts No Name Pond, the Androscoggin River, or
those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or abuts the upland edge
of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section, then the lot must also
have 200 feet of shore frontage. This standard shall also apply to all public and private
recreational facilities.
The minimum lot size for all governmental, institutional, commercial, or industrial uses
located in a shoreland area shall be 60,000 square feet per principal structure. If the lot
abuts No Name Pond, the Androscoggin River, or those "brooks" as listed under
subsection (b)(1) of this section, or abuts the upland edge of those wetlands as listed
under subsection (b)(2) of this section, then the lot must also have 300 feet of shore
frontage.
(3) Two or more existing lots of record which do not meet the minimum lot size and shore
frontage requirements outlined in subsection (2) above shall adhere to the standards as
outlined under article VI, subsection 2(g) of this Code.
(4) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and
land beneath roads serving more than two lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
(5) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line if a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or
greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(f) Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall meet the setback requirements for new principal and accessory
structures.
(2) Parking areas that service public boat launching facilities or other functionally dependent
uses may be reduced to no less than 50 feet from the normal high-water line or upland
edge of a wetland by the reviewing authority if it finds that no other reasonable
alternative exists. If no review is required, the code enforcement director shall approve
the reduction request.
(g) Agriculture.
(1) Agricultural practices shall be conducted in such a manner as will minimize soil erosion
and contamination of surface waters by sedimentation, nutrient enrichment and fecal
bacteria.
(2) All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the
"Maine Standards for Manure and Manure Sludge Disposal on Land," issued by the
University of Maine and the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission in 1972, as
amended.
(3) An untilled filter strip of no less than 25 feet in width, measured as horizontal distance, of
natural vegetation shall be retained between existing tilled ground and/or the normal
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:4
high-water line of the surface waters or the upland edge of those wetlands protected by
this section, in accordance with a plan approved by the Androscoggin Valley Soil and
Water Conservation District for compliance with the standards of the district's technical
guide for preventing erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the highwater
line of No Name Pond, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the high-water
line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of
this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this
section, nor within 25 feet horizontal distance, of the high-water line of those "brooks" as
listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section. Within five years of the effective date of
this ordinance [October 21, 1999], all manure storage areas within the Shoreland area
must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent
or contaminated stormwater. Existing facilities which do not meet the setback
requirement may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision within the above fiveyear
period.
(5) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface
area, or the spreading, disposal or storage of manure within the Shoreland area shall
require a soil and water conservation plan to be filed with the code enforcement director.
Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of
this appendix.
(6) There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance of the normal
high-water line of No Name Pond, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the highwater
line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection
(b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection
(b)(2) of this section, nor within 25 feet horizontal distance, of the high-water line of
those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section. Operations in existence on
the effective date of this ordinance [October 21, 1999] and not in conformance with this
provision may be maintained.
(7) After the effective date of this appendix, newly established livestock grazing areas shall
not be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of No
Name Pond, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the high-water line of the
Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section,
or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section, nor
within 25 feet horizontal distance, of the high-water line of those "brooks" as listed under
subsection (b)(4) of this section. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm
activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may
continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a soil and water
conservation plan.
(h) Archaeological sites. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or
soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to
action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
(i) Erosion and sedimentation control. The applicant shall implement erosion and
sedimentation control measures in compliance with Maine Law, 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-C, and
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:5
regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended. In addition, the applicant shall implement
specific erosion and sedimentation measurers consistent with those identified in the Maine
Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMP's Pub. No. DEPLW0588, published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Land and Water Quality, (March 2003).
(1) On slopes greater than 25 percent, there shall be no grading or filling within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of No Name Pond, nor within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of the high-water line of the Androscoggin River, and those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those
wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section, nor within 25 feet horizontal
distance, of the high-water line of those "brooks"" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this
section, other than for road construction or water crossings, except to protect the
shoreline and prevent erosion.
(2) All activities which involve filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, earth-moving,
excavation, or other similar land use activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions
shall be conducted in such manner to prevent, to the maximum extent possible, erosion
and sedimentation of surface waters. Activities which require a permit, whether or not in
conjunction with development review, shall require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the review and/or permitting
authority for approval and shall meet the requirements of Maine Law, 38 M.R.S.A. §
420-C, and regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended. In addition, the plan shall
be consistent with the standards identified in the Maine Erosion and Water Quality,
(March 2003).
(j) Soils, buffers and wetland alteration.
(1) All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures
can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts,
including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution,
whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal
and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses, shall
require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified
professionals. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine
Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons
who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The
report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding
land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils
report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations
where they exist. Based on the results of the soils report, additional reports or studies may
be required, such as wetland delineations and high-intensity soil surveys.
(2) No filling, dredging or other earth-moving shall be carried out within the limits of a
wetland as identified by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection except in conjunction with road
construction as set forth in subsection (l).
(3) Within 75 feet horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of No Name Pond
and 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the Androscoggin River and those "brooks" as
listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section, on the upland edge of those wetlands as
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:6
listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and 25 feet, horizontal distance, from other
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands within the Shoreland area, the land shall be
maintained in a natural vegetative state.
All existing buildings and structures which do not meet this standard shall adhere to the
nonconformance section of this appendix and subsection (d)(2) of this section, unless
otherwise provided for under subsection (t). All other impervious surfaces shall meet the
standard set forth in subsection (d)(2) of this section, unless otherwise provided for under
subsection (t). If the current impervious surface ratio is in excess of this standard, the
impervious surfaces shall not be expanded, unless other provided for under subsection (t).
(k) Mineral exploration and extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent
of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring or other methods
which create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit from
the code enforcement officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above
limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures, so as to restore disturbed areas and to protect the
public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the planning board (for major
projects), development review committee (for minor projects), or code enforcement
director (if no review is required) before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in
detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of subsection (4) below.
(2) Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38 M.R.S.A.
Section 480-C, no part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control
features shall be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of No Name Pond, nor within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the high-water line of
the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this
section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this
section, nor within 25 feet horizontal distance, of the high-water line of those ""brooks"
as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section. Extraction operations shall not be
permitted within 75 feet of any property line, without written permission of the owner of
such adjacent property.
(3) Developers of new gravel pits along the Androscoggin River shall demonstrate that no
reasonable mining site outside the Shoreland area exists. When gravel pits must be
located within the Shoreland area, they shall be set back as far as practicable from the
normal high-water line and no less than 100 feet, horizontal distance, and screened from
the river by existing vegetation. This standard shall not be reduced by variance.
Existing, legally established gravel pits that do not meet the 100-foot setback shall not
expand their earth removal activities which are located within the 100-foot setback.
(4) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction
site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than 100 cubic yards of
materials are removed in any consecutive 12-month period, ground levels and grades
shall be established in accordance with the following:
a. All debris, stumps and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:7
Note: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, Title 38 M.R.S.A. section 1310 and Chapter 404 of the Department of
Environmental Protection's regulations may contain other applicable provisions regarding disposal of such
materials.
b. The final graded slope shall be two to one slope or flatter.
c. Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization
project.
(5) In keeping with the purposes of this ordinance, the planning board (for major projects),
development review committee (for minor projects), or code enforcement director (if no
review is required), may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to minimize the
adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and
resources.
(l) Roads, driveways, and water crossings. The following standards shall apply to the
construction and maintenance of roads, driveways, water crossings, drainage systems, culverts
and other related features. In addition to these standards, roads shall be constructed in accordance
with the City of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks,
adopted by the city council pursuant to chapter 66, article IV, section 66-96 of this Code.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of No Name Pond, 75 feet from the horizontal distance, of the
high-water line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection
(b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection
(b)(2) of this section, unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
planning board (for major projects), staff review committee (for minor projects), or code
enforcement director (if no review is required). If no other reasonable alternative exists,
the planning board (for major projects), staff review committee (for minor projects), or
director of planning and code enforcement (if no review is required) may reduce the road
and/or driveway setback requirement to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon
clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body. All techniques used shall comply with Maine Law, 38
M.R.S.A. § 420-C, and regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended, and shall be
consistent with measurers identified in the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control
BMPs Pub. No. DEPLW0588, published by the Maine Department of Environment
Protection, Bureau of Lane and Water Quality, (March 2003).
Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 25 feet horizontal distance, from the highwater
line of those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section.
On slopes of greater than 20 percent, the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased
by ten feet, horizontal distance, for each five percent increase in slope above twenty
percent. This subsection shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads
or driveways that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to
the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of
its setback from a water body.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited within the resource conservation district except:
a. To provide access to structures or facilities within the zone; or
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:8
b. As by the planning board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or
location is available out side the resource conservation district, in which case the road
and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream or up land edge of a wetland and screened from
the river by existing vegetation.
(4) Road banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two horizontal to one vertical, and shall be
graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in subsection (i).
(5) Road grades shall be no greater than ten percent except for short segments of less than
200 feet.
(6) In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, roads shall
be designed and constructed using appropriate techniques used to prevent sedimentation
of the water bodies. All techniques used shall comply with Maine Law, 38 M.R.S.A. §
420-C, and regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended, and shall be consistent with
measurers identified in the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs Pub. No.
DEPLW0588, published by the Maine Department of Environment Protection, Bureau of
Lane and Water Quality, (March 2003).
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed
in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow
in the road or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road or ditch. To
accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced
along the road at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Road Grade
(percent)
Spacing
(feet)
0--2 250
3--5 200--135
6-10 100--80
11--15 80--60
16--20 60--45
21 + 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the road grade
is ten percent or less.
c. On road sections having slopes greater than ten percent, ditch relief culverts shall be
placed across the road at approximately a 30-degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow
for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with
appropriate materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other stormwater runoff control
installations associated with roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning.
(m) Subsurface sewage disposal.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:9
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (hereinafter referred to as "rules"), and
the following:
(2) The minimum setback for new subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be no less than
100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of No Name Pond, the
Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section;
or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and
50 feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands
within the Shoreland area. The minimum setback distances for new subsurface sewage
disposal systems shall not be reduced by variance, and in no case, shall be any less than
50 feet.
(3) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located in areas of suitable soil of at
least 1,000 square feet in size.
(4) The conversion of cottages or camps from seasonal to year-round use shall comply with
the terms of the rules, including article XII, section 2(m), subsections (2) and (3) above,
for such conversion.
(5) Replacement systems shall be allowed only in conformance with the provisions and
procedures of the rules, including article XII, section 2(m), subsections (2), (3) and (4)
above, for such systems.
(n) Stormwater runoff and water quality.
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize stormwater runoff
from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions and shall meet the
requirements described in article XIII, section 4.
(2) All methods for erosion and sedimentation control shall comply with Maine Law, 38
M.R.S.A. § 420-C, and regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended. In addition, the
applicant shall implement specific erosion and sedimentation measures consistent with
those identified in the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs Pub. No.
DEPLW0588, published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau
of Land and Water Quality, (March 2003).
(o) Campgrounds and individual private campsites.
(1) Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under state licensing
procedures and the following:
a. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land, not including
roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetations, and land
below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating
land area per site.
b. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility
and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of No Name Pond, 75 feet horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of the Androscoggin River and those "brooks" as listed
under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed
under subsection (b)(2) of this section, and 25 feet horizontal distance, of the highwater
line of those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:10
(2) Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
a. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or 30,000 square
feet of lot area within the Shoreland area, whichever is less, may be permitted.
b. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle
or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of No Name Pond, 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1)
of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2)
of this section, and 25 feet horizontal distance, from the high-water line of those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section.
c. Recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except
for a gravel road, and no structure(s) except canopies shall be attached to the
recreational vehicle.
d. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar
shelter in a resource conservation district shall be limited to 1,000 square feet.
e. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of
sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the
local plumbing inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the
receiving facility or land owner is required.
f. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than 120
days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the
installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage
facilities.
g. These standards shall not be reduced by variance.
(p) Structures related to water bodies. In addition to state or other permits which may be
required for piers, docks, floats, ramps and other structures lying in or projecting into water
bodies, such structures shall meet the following standards:
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed
so as to reasonably control erosion.
(2) The location shall not unreasonably interfere with other established uses.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(q) Essential services.
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public
ways and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services is not permitted in a resource conservation (RC)
district, except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except where
the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(r) Timber harvesting.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:11
(1) Timber harvesting activities in Shoreland areas shall conform with the following
provisions:
a. Timber harvesting, other than for road building and water crossings or in
conjunction with approved development activities, shall not remove, in any tenyear
period, more than 40 percent of the volume on each acre involved of trees
four inches in diameter and larger, measured at four and one-half feet above
ground level, applied equally to all size classes (six-inch, eight-inch, ten-inch,
etc.) within the area being harvested. Removal of trees less than four inches in
diameter, measured as above, is permitted if otherwise in conformance with the
standards of this section. For the purpose of these standards, volume may be
determined as being equivalent to basal area. A stand means a contiguous group
of trees, sufficiently uniform in species, arrangement of classes and condition to
be identified as a homogeneous and distinguishable unit.
Timber harvesting operations proposing to exceed the 40 percent limitation must
submit a forest management plan signed by a state licensed professional forester
and approved by the code enforcement director. The management plan must
clearly show that an exception for exceeding the 40 percent rule is necessary for
good forest management and will be carried out in accordance with the purposes
of this section. The code enforcement director shall notify the commissioner of
the department of environmental protection within 14 days of the decision to
allow an exception.
b. Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of No Name
Pond; and 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the Androscoggin River and those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section or the upland edge of
those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and 25 feet,
horizontal distance from the high-water line of those "brooks" as listed under
subsection (b)(4) of this section the land shall be maintained in a natural
vegetative state and timber harvesting activities are prohibited.
c. Within the area between the required buffer referred to in subsection b., above
and 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of No Name Pond,
and 75 feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of the Androscoggin
River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the
upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section;
and 25 feet, horizontal distance from the high-water line of those "brooks" as
listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section, no clear cutting shall be allowed,
and timber harvesting activities shall be conducted in such a manner that a welldistributed
stand of trees is retained so as to maintain the aesthetic and
recreational value and water quality of the area, and to reasonably avoid
sedimentation of surface waters.
d. At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of No Name Pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under
subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed
under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and 25 feet, horizontal distance from the
high-water line of those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section,
timber harvesting activities shall not create single openings greater than 10,000
square feet in the forest canopy. In such areas single canopy openings of more
than 5,000 square feet shall be no closer than 100 feet apart. Such clearcut
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:12
openings shall be included in the calculation of total volume removal. For the
purposes of these standards, volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal
area.
e. No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of No Name Pond, the Androscoggin River, and those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section. At distances greater than
50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of such waters, and
extending to the limits of the shoreland area, all slash shall be disposed of in such
a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends more than four feet
above the ground. Any debris or slash that falls below the high-water line of a
water body shall be removed.
f. Skid trails, log yards, and other sites where the operation of logging machinery
results in the exposure of substantial areas of mineral soil shall be located such
that an unscarified filter strip is retained between the exposed mineral soil and the
normal high-water line of No Name Pond, the Androscoggin River, and those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of
those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of this section; and from other
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands within the shoreland area. The width
of this strip shall vary according to the average slope of the land as follows:
Average Slope of Land
Between Exposed Mineral Soil
and Normal High-Water Mark
(percent)
Width of Strip Between Exposed
Mineral Soil and Normal High-Water
Mark (feet along surface of the
ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
This standard shall not apply to road building and water crossings.
g. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except
when:
1. Surface waters are frozen;
2. The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
h. All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas
with low banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar
hard surface which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
i. Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to
prevent water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream.
Upon completion of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be
removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
j. Timber harvesting activities conducted within the shoreland area must meet the
notification requirements outlined in subsection 3(f) of this article.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:13
(2) Clearing of vegetation for development:
a. Within the shoreland area zoned resource conservation abutting No Name Pond,
there shall be no cutting of vegetation with the strip of land extending 75 feet,
horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except to remove
safety hazards.
Elsewhere in the resource conservation district the clearing of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for use expressly authorized in that district.
b. Except in areas as described above in subsection a., within a strip of land
extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of No
Name Pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of the
Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(1) of this
section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed under subsection (b)(2) of
this section and 25 feet, horizontal distance from the high-water line of those
"brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section a buffer strip of
vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
1. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest
canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown. However, a
footpath not to exceed ten feet in width as measured between tree trunks is
permitted provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the
buffer strip is not created.
2. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that
a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the
purposes of this section, a "well-distributed stand of trees and other
vegetation" adjacent to No Name Pond shall be defined as maintaining a
rating score of 12 or more in any 25-foot by 25-foot square (625 square
feet) area as determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of tree at 4
1/2 feet above ground
level (inches) Points
2--4 1
4--12 2
> 12 4
Within the buffer strip, adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams,
and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation" is
defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of eight, per 25-foot
square area.
3. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, within the buffer
strip, adjacent to No Name Pond and the portion of No Name Brook that
flows to No Name Pond, existing vegetation under three feet in height and
other ground cover shall not be removed, except to provide for a footpath
or other permitted uses as described in subsections (3) and (3)a. of this
subsection.
4. Pruning of tree branches, within the buffer strip, on the bottom one-third (
1/3) of the tree is permitted.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:14
5. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of
storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of
cleared openings, these openings shall be replaced with native tree species
unless existing new tree growth is present.
c. At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of No Name Pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of the Androscoggin River, and those "brooks" as listed under
subsection (b)(1) of this section, or the upland edge of those wetlands as listed
under subsection (b)(2) of this section and 25 feet, horizontal distance from the
high-water line of those "brooks" as listed under subsection (b)(4) of this section a
buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows, selective tree cutting is
permitted provided that not more than 40 percent of the volume of existing trees
four inches or more in diameter, measured at four and one-half feet above ground
level, applied equally to all size classes (six-inch, eight-inch, ten-inch, etc.) within
the area being harvested, are removed from any contiguous stand or grouping of
trees in any ten-year period. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of
permitted uses shall be included in the 40 percent calculation. For the purpose of
these standards, volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no case shall contiguous cleared openings for development including, but not
limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways, walkways, patios,
swimming pools and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25 percent
of the lot area (or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater), including land
previously developed. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date
of this Code may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by
this Code. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody
vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section.
(s) Exemptions. In areas where the "brooks" mentioned in subsection (b)(1) of this section
have undergone channelization, the planning board (for major projects), development review
committee (for minor projects), or code enforcement director (if no review is required) may
exempt all, or portions of, the shoreland area standards deemed nonapplicable due to the existing
conditions associated with said "brooks."
As each determination of nonapplicability will be done on a case-by-case basis, the burden of
proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of proof shall include the production of evidence
sufficient to warrant a finding that some or all of the standards are not applicable due to existing
manmade straightening, deepening and surfacing of the "brook" (channelization).
(t) General development areas.
(1) For land areas located in the highway business, community business, centreville,
riverfront, mill, urban enterprise, office service, office residential, and industrial districts,
which are also located in the shoreland area, setbacks for new principle and accessory
structures and parking areas, shall be no less than 25 feet. In addition, all land area
between the high-water line and the setback line shall be maintained in a natural
vegetative state.
The maximum impervious surface ratio for all land areas located in the aforementioned
zoning districts shall not exceed 70 percent.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:15
These setback and impervious surface ratio standards shall not be reduced by
modification or variance.
(Ord. No. 92-5, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 92-19, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 99-17, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 00-11, 6-15-00;
Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 06-18, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 11-15, 01-19-12)
Sec. 3. Timber harvesting standards.
(a) In Resource conservation districts.
(1) Clear-cutting, and timber harvesting, other than for road building and water crossings for
which all required city, state or federal permits have been obtained, or in conjunction
with approved development activities, pursuant to article XIII of the Code, is prohibited.
(b) In shoreland areas, as defined in article XII, section 2, not within a resource
conservation district. No clear-cutting is permitted within a shoreland area and timber harvesting
activities shall comply with the standard set forth in article XII, section 2, subsection (r), timber
harvesting.
(c) In lake conservation overlay district (LC). Except for approved construction and
landscaping projects, timber harvesting shall not remove, in any ten-year period, more than 40
percent of the volume on each acre involved of trees six inches in diameter and larger, measured
at four and one-half feet above ground level, applied equally to all size classes (six-inch, eightinch,
ten-inch, etc.) within the area being harvested. Removal of trees less than six inches in
diameter, measured as above, is permitted if otherwise in conformance with the standards of this
Code. No clear cutting shall be allowed and harvesting operations shall be conducted in such a
manner that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained so as to maintain the aesthetic and
recreational value and water quality of the lake conservation overlay district. For the purpose of
these standards, volume may be determined as being equivalent to basal area. A stand means a
contiguous group of trees, sufficiently uniform in species, arrangement of classes and condition
to be identified as a homogeneous and distinguishable unit.
(d) Within all districts. Timber harvesting shall comply with the state department of
conservation standards for forest regeneration, established pursuant to 12 M.R.S.A., ch. 805,
subchapter III-A, as amended. Clear-cutting, except in resource conservation, shoreland areas,
and lake conservation overlay districts, is permitted only if an accepted forest management plan
is filed with the code enforcement official at least seven days prior to the commencement of
clear-cutting activities. Except for approved construction and landscaping projects, for which all
required city, state or federal permits have been obtained, timber harvesting operations shall
maintain a continuous natural buffer of at least fifty feet from all property lines and streams,
except for roads required to gain access to the land to be harvested.
Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well-distributed
stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this section, a welldistributed
stand of trees and other vegetation shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of
six or more in any 25-foot by 25-foot square (625 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system:
Diameter of tree at 4
1/2 feet above ground
level (inches) Points
2--4 1
4--12 2
> 12 4
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:16
Storm damaged, diseased, unsafe or dead trees may be removed at the landowner's discretion.
However, when their removal results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be
replaced unless existing new tree growth is present, with native species in order to maintain a
buffer strip of vegetation.
Pruning of tree branches within the buffer strip, on the bottom one-third of the tree is permitted.
However, existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover shall not be
removed, except for safety reasons, where the removal of vegetation immediately surrounding a
tree to be cut is permitted. Cleared openings legally in existence within the required buffer area,
as of the effective date of this Code, may be maintained but not enlarged.
There shall be no cutting of trees for any reason within 50 feet of a stream, whether the stream is
located within the required 50-foot buffer or anywhere else on the property.
Clear-cutting within the required buffer area is permitted only if the landowner secures a written
agreement from the abutting landowner(s) stating that the abutter(s) is(are) aware that the
required buffer area is to be clear-cut and has agreed to its elimination. Written notification shall
be presented to the code enforcement official at least seven days prior to clear-cutting of the
buffer area. The notification shall indicate the proposed location of the buffer area on a map,
drawn to scale, of the property under consideration; the names, addresses and telephone numbers
of both the landowner and all abutting property owners; and all original, signed agreements from
any abutters who have agreed to the elimination of the buffer area.
(e) Notification requirement. Except for approved construction and landscaping projects for
which all required city, state or federal permits have been obtained, written notification shall be
made to the code enforcement official at least seven days prior to the commencement of timber
harvesting operations. The notification shall indicate the proposed location, nature, number of
acres to be harvested and time period of the operations, and shall contain the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of both the land owner(s) and operator(s) and any licensed forester
involved. The notification shall also include a map drawn to scale indicating the required buffers
and extent of any clear cutting, and to what use, if any, the site will be converted to after
completion of harvest activities. For all timber harvesting operations which require notification
to the state, a properly completed "Notification of Intent to Harvest Forest Products" may be
submitted to meet this requirement.
(Ord. No. 92-5, 3-5-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord. No. 96-11, 9-12-96)
Sec. 4. Community garden standards.
The following standards shall apply to the establishment or creation of any community garden in
City of Lewiston:
1. A community garden may be located in any zoning district with the exception of the
Resource Conservation district.
2. Unless located in the Rural Agricultural district, a community garden may be no larger
than 20,000 square feet.
3. Unless permitted by the underlying zoning district, on-site sale of community garden
products shall be prohibited.
4. The site shall be designed and maintained to prevent any chemical pesticide, fertilizer or
other garden waste from draining on to streets or adjacent properties.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:17
5. Accessory structures including buildings or signs shall comply with requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
6. Cultivated areas shall be prevented from encroaching onto adjacent properties.
7. The property shall be maintained free of high grass, weeds, and debris. Dead garden
plants shall be removed by no later than November 30th of each year. This is not
intended to prohibit composting or soil enhancing cover crops.
8. Use of mechanical equipment shall be limited to that customarily identified as household
lawn and garden equipment. Use of said equipment shall be restricted to the hours 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
9. The community garden shall be subject to applicable odor provisions contained in article
XII, section 19(4).
10. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner that uses a lot or a portion thereof as a
community garden meets the above referenced performance standards. If leased or used
by other individuals or organizations, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner
to ensure the above referenced performance standards are met.
11. It shall be the responsibility of any person, including, but not limited to, the property
owner, their agent, individuals, organizations, or other person having an interest in
establishing a community garden on a lot(s) or a portion thereof for a community garden
to obtain a Use Permit from the City prior to commencing said use of land.
(Ord. No. 12-04, 04-05-12)
Sec. 5. Earth material removal standards.
(a) Applicability. The standards and procedures of this section shall apply to the removal of
topsoil, sod, loam, peat or other organic materials, clay, sand, gravel, stone or other earth
products from a parcel of land for removal from the site except as otherwise provided for in this
section. These standards shall apply to:
(1) The commencement of a new earth material removal activity;
(2) The expansion of an existing earth removal activity onto a parcel of land not undergoing
removal activities as of the date of adoption of this Code; and
(3) The creation of a new removal site on a parcel of land undergoing removal activities as of
the date of adoption of this Code.
The standards and procedures of this section shall not apply to the following earth material
removal activities:
(1) Removal incidental to any lawful use of land or of a building or incidental to, and
necessitated by, any building construction for which a building permit has lawfully been
issued under this Code prior to such earth removal;
(2) Removal necessitated by the construction or installation of utilities or other engineering
works for public service on such lot or in such way, or as may be necessitated in
constructing ways;
(3) Removal, grading or transforming from one part of a lot, tract or parcel of land to another
part of the same lot, tract or parcel of land in the same ownership.
(4) Removal incidental to the construction of driveways or private ways,
(5) Removal from a site in operation as of the date of adoption of this Code, provided that it
does not involve expansion onto another parcel of land or the creation of a new removal
site and has been in continuous operation as a removal site.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:18
(b) Development approval required. Any earth removal activity involving more than 1,000
cubic yards of material shall commence only after a development plan has been reviewed and
approved according to the standards and procedures of article XIII.
(c) Additional submission requirements. In addition to the submission requirements set forth
in article XIII, section 3, applications for review for earth removal activities shall contain the
following additional information:
(1) Copies of soils tests, test borings, other field tests, laboratory studies and similar
information to identify the type and amount of material available for removal and the
depth to the seasonal high-water table over the area proposed for removal activities;
(2) A management plan setting forth the operating procedures and monitoring protocol for
the site including, but not limited to, hours of operation, control of noise, blasting
vibration, dust and particulate emissions, site security, limits on work areas, etc.
(3) A restoration plan setting forth the final grades of the restored site together with
provisions for re-establishment of vegetative cover when the site involves overburden
extraction.
(d) Conditions of approval. In approving development plans for earth removal activities in
accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in article XIII, the planning board may
impose conditions on the approval including, but not limited to the following if necessary to
meet the standards of subsection (e):
(1) Method of removal;
(2) Type and location of temporary structures;
(3) Hours of operation;
(4) Policing of traffic entering and leaving site;
(5) Routes of transporting the material through the City of Lewiston;
(6) Area and depth of excavation;
(7) Distance of excavation to street and lot lines;
(8) Steepness of slopes excavated;
(9) Re-establishment of ground levels and grades;
(10) Provisions for temporary and permanent drainage;
(11) Disposition of boulders and tree stumps;
(12) Replacement of topsoil over the area of removal;
(13) Planting of the area to suitable cover;
(14) Buffering and fencing;
(15) Control of noise, vibration and dust and particulate emissions.
(e) Standards for removal activities. All earth removal activities shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) Traffic. Provisions for access to and into the site shall conform to the following
standards:
a. Public roads providing access to the site shall be capable of accommodating the
additional traffic without reducing traffic safety or the level of service of roads and
intersections within one-quarter mile of the site. If streets functionally classified as
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:19
local streets are used to provide access to the site, the applicant shall demonstrate by a
traffic impact study that these streets can safely accommodate the increased use
without a reduction in the level of service.
b. Truck traffic to and from any removal site shall use the most direct travel route
between the arterial road system and the site unless an alternative route is approved as
part of the development approval process.
c. The sight distance where the access road(s) to the site intersects with a public street
shall meet the minimum sight distance requirements of the Maine Department of
Transportation.
d. All access roads shall have a maximum road slope of three percent for a distance of
100 feet from the intersection with a public street.
e. The roads providing access to the site shall be capable of supporting the loadings
imposed by trucks servicing the removal site. If the roads are not capable of
supporting the loads, the planning board may require, as conditions of approval, that
gross vehicle weights be limited and/or a financial guarantee posted to provide for the
repair of any damage resulting from the site traffic.
(2) Buffering. The removal activity shall conform to the following standards:
a. A natural vegetative strip at least 50 feet in width shall be maintained around the
perimeter of the site. This buffer strip shall be treated with a combination of
landscaping, fencing or earth berming sufficient to screen the removal operation from
view from public streets or abutting properties. The planning board may modify this
requirement where the topography of the site makes screening impractical.
b. If written permission of the abutter is obtained, a buffer strip of no less than 25 feet
may be allowed.
c. The buffer strip may be entirely eliminated between abutting properties when both
properties are used in similar excavation activity provided a written agreement
between both parties is furnished.
(3) Excavations. Any excavation involving the removal of materials to a final elevation
which is lower than the surrounding land shall be carried out in accordance with the following
standards:
a. No excavation shall occur within 100 feet of any property line or street line.
1. Overburden extraction. For excavation in excess of 50 feet in depth, this
unexcavated area shall be increased one foot in width for each one foot in depth in
excess of 50 feet.
2. Bedrock quarries. Bedrock quarry operations will retain a minimum buffer strip of
150 feet from all property lines. The working edge of an extractive activity will be
no closer than 150 feet to any public road or way.
b. No excavation shall extend below the seasonal high-water table for the site unless
provisions are made to lower the water table through manmade means.
c. Except for bedrock quarries, no standing water shall be permitted to accumulate in
any site either during or after extraction operations.
d. Slopes.
1. Overburden extraction. No slopes steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot
vertical shall be permitted at any removal site during or after excavation
operations except that during active operations, steeper working slopes shall be
permitted provided that in any location where the slope exceeds two to one for a
height of more than 15 feet, a fence shall be erected to limit access to the site.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:20
2. Bedrock quarry. The applicant shall submit a report by a qualified geotechnical
engineer or certified geologist recommending appropriate rock slope and bench
configurations. The report should be based on appropriate field and laboratory
study and analysis to establish the stability of the cut slopes both during the
extraction period and after use of the site has been terminated. Rock quarries must
be enclosed by a fence.
e. No portion of any ground area disturbed by extraction activity on a face sloping
toward a body of water shall be closer to the normal high-water mark of the body of
water than is indicated by the following table, provided, however, that no portion of
such ground area on a back face shall be closer than 50 feet:
Average Slope of
Land Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and Normal High-Water Mark
(percent)
Width of Strip
Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and Normal High-
Water Mark (feet along
surface of the ground)
0 50
10 90
20 130
30 170
40 210
50 250
60 290
70 330
f. Within 250 feet of any water body, the extraction area shall be protected from soil
erosion by ditches, sedimentation basins, dikes, dams or such other control devices
which are effective in preventing sediments from being eroded or deposited into such
water body.
(4) Operations. The operation of any earth removal activity shall conform to the following
standards:
a. The operation shall be conducted in a manner to minimize dust.
b. Loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling
or blowing from the load, and all trucking routes and methods shall be subject to
approval by the chief of police for minimizing the impact on traffic flow and safety.
c. All access roads leading from the extraction site to public ways shall be treated with
suitable materials to reduce dust and mud, unless the site is located in a groundwater
conservation overlay district.
d. No equipment, debris, junk or other materials shall be permitted at an extraction site
except those directly relating to active extraction operations, and any temporary
shelters or buildings erected for such operations and equipment used in connection
therewith shall be removed within 30 days following completion of active extraction
operations.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:21
e. The pit shall not be used for storage or dumping of any substances that could produce
a harmful leachate both during operation of the pit and following its permanent
closure.
f. Storage of hazardous materials and petroleum products in the pit is prohibited.
g. Any washing and crushing operations shall be conducted in a manner that will
minimize runoff.
h. Noise levels at the property line shall be limited to 75 decibels, as measured on a
scale by a sound level meter and frequency weighting network manufactured in
accordance with the standards of the American Standards Association.
i. Any topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of revegetation shall, to the extent
required for restoration, be stripped from the location of extraction operations and
stockpiled for use in restoring the location after extraction operations have ceased.
(5) Reclamation. Within two years of the cessation of removal activities for the site or
portions of the site for operations exceeding five acres in size, the following standards shall
apply:
a. Following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site or at any one
or more locations within an extraction site, ground levels and grades shall be
established in accordance with the approved plans filed with the planning board; all
debris, stumps, boulders and similar materials shall be removed and disposed of in an
approved location or, in the case of inorganic material, buried and covered with a
minimum of two feet of soil.
b. Retained topsoil and subsoil shall be respread over the disturbed area with any
additional loam required to create a minimum seed bed depth of four inches, and the
soil shall then be limed, fertilized and seeded with a grass or legume mixture which
will meet the minimum standards of the technical guide, as amended from time to
time, adopted by the Androscoggin Valley Soil and Water Conservation District; the
foregoing restoration measures shall be completed within such period not exceeding
eight months following completion of extraction operations as may be determined by
the planning board, and the planted area shall be protected from erosion during the
establishment period using good conservation practices.
c. The proposal will adequately control erosion and stormwater runoff, and upon
completion of active extraction operations, the land shall be left so that natural storm
drainage and water courses leave the location at the original natural drainage points
and in a manner such that the amount of drainage at any point is not increased.
d. A depleted bedrock quarry may be allowed to fill naturally with precipitation and
groundwater provided the following conditions are met:
1. Physical access for the general public is to be prevented by continuous fencing of
the entire perimeter at least six feet high.
2. Any gates shall be locked at all times when the site is not in operation.
3. Earthern berms shall also be created along all public ways where the natural
contours of the land do not impede vehicular traffic.
(6) Use of explosives. The use of explosives and blasting agents for earth removal activities,
as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall comply with the following standards:
a. Prior to the commencement of blasting activity at a permitted site, a preblast survey
shall be conducted on all off-site buildings not owned by the applicant within 500 feet
of the excavation boundaries to document the existing condition of these buildings.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:22
Alternative building locations may be chosen when the maximum effects from the
blast are expected to occur at those locations. Any structural defects, cracks,
displacement, etc. shall be described in written and pictorial form. A copy of the
survey shall be provided to the property owner, the code enforcement officer, and
kept on file by the applicant throughout the active life of the excavation activity.
b. Blasting shall be prohibited between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and all day
on Sunday.
c. The storage, transport and use of explosives shall be conducted in compliance with all
applicable state and federal regulations, including, but not limited to those
promulgated by the U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration and the Maine Fire
Marshal's Office.
d. Prior to each blast a blasting plan shall be made showing the drilling pattern and
depth; the amount and placement of explosives and blasting agents; and the time
delays used, if any, for detonation. Adherence to the plan shall be verified by the onsite
person responsible for the safe use of explosives as shown by his or her signature
on the plan. The plans shall be kept on file, for inspection by the code enforcement
officer, for three years following the blast.
e. Every blast shall be monitored for ground vibration and airblast overpressure (noise)
at the nearest off-site building or at an on-site location along a straight line between
the blast and the nearest off-site building. An alternate building may be chosen when
the maximum effects from the blast are expected to occur at that location.
Instrumentation used for blast monitoring shall be capable of measuring and
recording peak particle velocity (in inches/second) and frequency (in cycles/second)
along three axes, airblast overpressure (in dBL), and internal calibration checks.
Monitoring records shall be kept on file, for inspection by the code enforcement
officer, for three years following the blast.
f. Blasting shall be designed and conducted in a manner to ensure compliance with the
following standards:
1. Ground vibrations shall not exceed the frequency dependent peak particle
velocities indicated by Figure 1.
2. Airblast overpressure (noise) shall not exceed the levels indicated in the table
below depending on the specification of the microphone used:
Microphone
Maximum
Overpressure
(dBL)
0.1 Hz high-pass system 134
2 Hz high-pass system 133
5-6 Hz high-pass system 129
C-Slow (<2 sec. duration) 105
The ground vibration and noise levels associated with the use of explosives shall be exempt from
the standards in article XII, subsection 19(b) and (c).
(Ord. No. 89-16, 11-30-89)
Sec. 6. Swimming pool standards.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:23
(a) Placement requirements. No swimming pool shall be constructed closer than ten feet
from the side or rear lot line to the waterline of said swimming pool. If said swimming pool is
located on the street side, it shall not be so located closer than 25 feet from the front lot line to
the water's edge of said swimming pool.
(b) Enclosures.
(1) There shall be erected and maintained around every outdoor swimming pool, a good
quality fence or wall, no less than four feet in height and of a character to exclude
children. The exterior walls of an aboveground pool may serve as the required fence, if
the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The resulting enclosure shall be of sturdy construction and meet the intent of this
section;
b. All stairs, ladders and ramps shall be secured, removed, fenced or otherwise made
inaccessible when not in actual use; and
c. The pool wall shall be free of any construction feature or appurtenance which could
be used to facilitate access to the pool.
Required fencing shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger
than four square inches, except for fences constructed of vertical posts or louvers, in
which case, the openings shall not be greater than four inches in width to a height of
four feet, with no horizontal members between the top and bottom plates. Doors and
gates are excluded from the minimum dimension requirements. A dwelling house or
accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
(2) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-latching
device for keeping the gate or door securely locked at all times when not in actual use.
(3) Any view-obstructing fence shall not be closer than 15 feet from any street lot line.
(c) Electrical connections and outlets. All electrical connections to the swimming pool and
to electrical fixtures or outlets within the enclosed area established in subsection (b) shall meet
the requirements of the national electrical code, as amended, for use in swimming pools.
(d) Pools under construction. No swimming pool under construction shall be left unattended
without a fence or cover.
(e) Other pools. Any other outdoor pool not covered by this section must be fenced, drained
or covered when not in use.
(f) Construction permit and approval.
(1) Before work is commenced on the construction of swimming pools, or on any alteration,
addition, remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool, an application for a
permit to construct and the plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall
be submitted to the code enforcement official for his approval, and no part of the work
shall be commenced until the code enforcement official has granted such approval by a
written permit to construct and has further evidenced his approval by a suitable
endorsement upon such plans and specifications. No department of the city charged with
the duty of issuing permits for plumbing or electrical work, for sewer connections or for
other work in connection with the construction of a swimming pool or the construction or
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:24
any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a swimming pool shall issue
a permit for a swimming pool until the plans and specifications therefore have been thus
endorsed and approved by the code enforcement official. The code enforcement official
shall review such plans and specifications to determine whether they comply with the
provisions of this Code and with reasonable standards of swimming pool construction for
the protection of the public safety, health and morals.
(2) The application to the code enforcement official for a permit to construct a swimming
pool or to construct any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool shall be submitted in such forms and be supported with such information
and data, as well as plans, specifications and pertinent explanatory data, as the code
enforcement official may require.
(g) Pool occupancy permit. After construction of a pool, a pool occupancy permit must be
obtained from the code enforcement official prior to the use of the pool, and said permit must be
displayed near the swimming pool.
Sec. 7. Walls and fences.
(a) Maximum height of walls and fences:
(1) Front yards. No wall or fence in a required front yard may exceed three and one-half feet
in height, except as provided below.
(2) Side and rear yards. No wall or fence in a required side or rear yard may exceed eight feet
in height, except as provided below.
(3) Corner cutbacks. No wall, fence, building, landscaping or other visual obstruction more
than three feet in height is permitted within a corner cutback, except that part of a
building more than eight feet in height, which is not otherwise prohibited, and except as
provided below.
(4) Height measurement. For purposes of this section, the height of walls, fences, buildings,
landscaping and other structures shall be measured from the top of the existing curb grade
or the crown of the abutting street, whichever is lower.
(b) Retaining walls. Retaining walls may be constructed, altered, added to or changed
anywhere on a lot to the lot line provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Retaining wall exceeding six feet in height shall be designed by a registered professional
engineer in accordance with the requirements of the BOCA code, as amended, and shall
be approved by the code enforcement official prior to the start of construction.
(2) A wall or fence may be required by the code enforcement official in accordance with
subsection (c) if a potential safety hazard will be created by a retaining wall.
(3) The retaining wall shall be located and constructed in a manner that will not create a
barrier or undue impediment to public safety officers in performing their function in
connection with the premises or adjacent properties.
(4) Retaining walls may be located in the corner cutback area of any lot provided the height
of the wall does not exceed three feet.
(c) Hazardous areas. The code enforcement official may require walls or fences not less than
six feet in height along the perimeter of any area that, by reason of the existence on the property
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:25
of physical hazards, such as frequent sudden inundation, erosion, excavation or grade
differential, he determines to be dangerous.
(d) Barbed wire. No barbed wire fencing is permitted below a height of six feet, except in the
rural-agricultural district in conjunction with an agricultural use.
(e) Other requirements.
(1) Corner cutbacks. Fences not more than three and one-half feet in height are permitted in a
corner cutback, provided the vertical surface is not more than ten percent solid.
(2) Automobile graveyards and junkyards. Walls, fences or other screening surrounding an
automobile graveyard or junkyard may exceed the maximum height permitted in front,
side or rear yards, but not in corner cutbacks, if necessary to meet the requirements of
applicable state law.
(3) Mobile home parks. Walls, fences or other screening surrounding a mobile home park
may exceed the maximum height permitted in front, side or read yards, but not in corner
cutbacks, if necessary to meet the requirements of this Code.
(4) Tennis courts. A fence enclosing a tennis court located within the rear half of a lot may
exceed the maximum height permitted in side or rear yards, provided the vertical surface
of that part of such fence more than eight feet in height is not more than ten percent solid.
(5) Security fencing. Security fencing may exceed the maximum height permitted in front,
side or rear yards if required by a governmental agency.
(f) Modifications. The code enforcement official may allow a modification in the
requirements of this section if he finds, following an on-site inspection of the premises, that the
modification will neither create, nor aggravate a safety hazard. The owner(s) of the property(ies)
which is(are) directly impacted by the proposed modification and is(are) abutting to the subject
property will be notified by the code enforcement official of said determination.
If an abutter feels that the code enforcement official erred in his determination, he may request
an administrative appeal in writing within ten days of the mailing date of the notification in
accordance with article VIII, section 4(1) of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of
Lewiston [appendix A].
(Ord. No. 93-15, 8-19-93)
Sec. 8. Wind energy conversion systems.
(a) Purpose. The regulation of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) is intended to
permit the location of such devices within the community while ensuring that the public health,
safety and welfare are not adversely affected.
(b) Requirements.
(1) WECS shall be set back from all lot lines a minimum distance equivalent to the distance
between the ground level elevation and the highest point on the WECS plus ten feet.
(2) All WECS shall be protected against unauthorized access by one or more of the
following:
a. Anti-climbing shroud;
b. Removal of tower climbing apparatus to a height of at least ten feet;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:26
c. Fence of at least six feet in height; or
d. Other device approved by the code enforcement official to prevent unauthorized
access.
(3) All WECS shall utilize a clutch, feathering device, brake, overspeed control or similar
device, either single, or in combination, to automatically shut down the WECS when
wind speed exceeds 45 miles per hour.
(4) A WECS shall not be installed upon or attached to any building or structure, except a
tower integral to the WECS, except when the board of appeals determines under the
miscellaneous appeal provisions of this Code, that said building or structure is capable of
safely supporting a WECS and that a WECS installed or attached in such a manner shall
not present a safety hazard to the neighborhood.
(5) One WECS shall be permitted per lot.
(6) All plans for the design and installation of a WECS shall be certified by an engineer or
architect registered in the State of Maine to perform such analyses as to the safety and
integrity of design and installation and compliance with the requirements of this section.
(7) A WECS shall be installed only upon issuance of a building permit. The code
enforcement official shall perform periodic inspections during the installation of a
WECS, which shall include, but not be limited to, inspection of all tower anchorage prior
to backfilling, inspection of the tower installation prior to attachment of the energy
conversion device, and upon completion of the WECS installation. The applicant shall
ensure that each required inspection is completed prior to proceeding with the next stage
of installation.
(8) Noise created by the action of a WECS shall not exceed the levels set forth in article XII,
section 19 of this article.
(c) Location. WECS shall be permitted in all districts except the neighborhood conservation
"B" district, centreville district and urban enterprise district.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00)
Sec. 9. Adult business establishment, tattoo establishment, and drinking place standards.
The regulation of the density of adult business establishments, tattoo establishments, and
drinking places is intended to permit the location of such establishments within the community,
yet ensure that they will not become overly concentrated in neighborhoods or areas to the
detriment of other uses. Therefore, in addition to the regulations of article XI, adult business
establishments, tattoo establishments, and drinking places shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) The minimum distance between an adult business establishment, tattoo establishments,
and/or drinking place and any two other adult business establishments, tattoo
establishments, and/or drinking places in the same or adjoining zoning district shall be
300 feet for businesses located within the Centreville district as measured along the
ordinary course of travel between the main entrance of each premises.
(a) Drinking places with 5,000 square feet or greater on the first floor are exempt from
the above referenced standard. Drinking places of 5,000 square feet or greater shall
not be included in the locational criteria determinations for drinking places of less
than 5,000 square feet or adult business establishments.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:27
(2) The minimum distance between an adult business establishment, tattoo establishments,
and/or drinking place and any two other adult business establishments, tattoo
establishments, and/or drinking places in the same or adjoining zoning district shall be
500 feet for businesses located in any other district as measured along the ordinary course
of travel between the main entrance of each premises.
(3) An adult business establishment, or drinking place may not be located within 300 feet, as
measured along the ordinary course of travel between the main entrance of each
premises, of a public or private school, school dormitory, church, chapel or parish house,
or legally-established dwelling in a residential zoning district, in existence prior to the
establishment of the business.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-07-89; Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 02-21, 1-9-03; Ord. No. 04-10, 5-6-04; Ord.
No. 05-07, 3-17-05 Ord. No. 13-10, 10-17-13)
Sec. 10. Frontage right-of-way provisions.
The required frontage for a lot whose sole principal use is a single-family detached dwelling may
be the linear distance between the sidelines of the lot, measured along the line that borders upon
a right-of-way (R.O.W.) a minimum of 40 feet in width, upon the following criteria being met:
(1) The R.O.W. must be approved pursuant to the applicable provisions of article XIII;
(2) The R.O.W. must utilize existing curb cuts to access the property, unless the applicant
can demonstrate that doing so unduly impacts the existing or proposed lot;
(3) No more than two lots gain frontage from the R.O.W.;
(4) The R.O.W. is the principal means of access to the lot;
(5) The area within the R.O.W. cannot be used to satisfy the required minimum lot size for
the particular district or the required front setbacks and yards for existing buildings on the
existing lot or those proposed on the new lot;
(6) The R.O.W. does not create any nonconformance with respect to lot size or structures;
neighboring lots will be required to meet front yard and front setbacks from the R.O.W.;
(7) The travel surface within the R.O.W. must be twenty feet wide with surface thickness of
at least 18 inches.
(8) The R.O.W. shall include a cul-de-sac, T-shaped or hammerhead turnaround. A cul-desac
shall have a radius of 50 feet measured from the center line of the travel surface. A tshaped
or hammerhead turnaround shall be 50 feet long measured from the center line of
the travel surface.
(9) Grades, intersections, access and sight distances shall be in accordance with the City of
Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(10) Only one R.O.W. may be created per lot.
(11) The driveway within the R.O.W. must be unobstructed and permit vehicle access at all
times.
(12) No part of a proposed street(s) shall be used for the above referenced R.O.W. provisions.
(13) A paved apron must be constructed a minimum length of 15 feet from the edge of the
R.O.W.s intersection with the street.
(14) Stormwater management standards must be met or waived in accordance with article
XIII, Section 4(f) of this Code.
(15) A note must be added to the plan stating it is the responsibility of the owners of those lots
from which frontage is obtained off the R.O.W. to assure the long-term maintenance,
repair, and replacement of and improvements within the R.O.W.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:28
(16) The final approved plan must be recorded in the Androscoggin County Registry of
Deeds.
(17) The R.O.W. width may be reduced to 30 feet in width, provided that any necessary
easements are provided for stormwater, drainage, snow storage, etc.
(Ord. No. 07-01, 3-8-07)
Sec. 11. In-law apartment standards.
An in-law apartment meeting the following standards shall be considered to be part of a singlefamily
detached dwelling and shall not be considered to be a dwelling unit in terms of the space
and bulk standards of article XI. In-law apartments shall be permitted only in those districts
where they are allowed uses. Apartments not meeting these requirements shall be considered to
be separate dwelling units and shall meet the use and space and bulk requirements of article XI:
(1) The in-law apartment shall be accessory to the use of the premises as a single-family
detached dwelling and only one in-law apartment shall be created as part of a singlefamily
dwelling.
(2) The in-law apartment shall be created within or attached to a single-family detached
dwelling.
(3) The person(s) occupying the in-law apartment must be a family member of the principal
occupant(s) of the single-family home and the burden of proof of this relationship shall
be on the homeowner.
(4) The creation of the in-law apartment unit shall not alter the single-family character of the
property. The following standards shall be met in creating the unit:
a. The in-law apartment must share a joint entrance with the single-family home and
the in-law apartment shall not have a separate front entrance from the outside. A
joint entrance shall consist of an enclosed structure with access to the in-law
apartment and the single-family dwelling. Any second-story side entrance must
be contained within the building envelope; and
b. Provisions for one (1) additional parking space shall be made in conformance
with article XII, section 17. However, no additional curb cuts or driveways may
be created to facilitate the creation of the in-law apartment and any new or
expanded driveway entrance curb cut on the property must not exceed twentyfour
(24) feet in width.
c. The habitable area of the in-law apartment shall not exceed 900 square feet and
shall not contain more than two (2) bedrooms.
(5) One of the units must be owner-occupied.
(6) All applicable fire safety and egress laws must be observed in the creation of the in-law
apartment.
(7) There shall not be separately metered electric or water service for the in-law apartment.
(8) In-law apartments on properties with private sewer shall comply with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules for new or expanded systems, as applicable.
(9) Evidence of documentation recorded in the Androscoggin Registry of Deeds identifying
that the in-law apartment and the use of the in-law apartment must conform to the
performance standards of Appendix A, article XII, section 11 of the Zoning and Land
Use Code. Said evidence must be provided to the City prior to issuance of an occupancy
permit for said in-law apartment.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:29
(Ord. No. 94-15, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 98-7, 9-10-98; Ord. No. 10-11, 11-18-10; Ord. No. 12-03, 04-05-12;
Ord. No. 17-20a, 12-21-17)
Sec. 12. Campground standards.
The following standards shall apply to the establishment or expansion of any campground or
travel trailer park in the City of Lewiston in addition to any requirements of the State of Maine:
(1) The plans for the construction or expansion of any facility shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning board under the development review provisions of article XIII
prior to the start of construction and the occupancy of any site.
(2) Camping areas located within shoreland areas, as defined in section 2 of this article, shall
contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of suitable land, not including roads and
driveways, for each site. Camping areas located outside shoreland areas shall contain a
minimum of 2,500 square feet of suitable land, not including roads and driveways, for
each site.
(3) All recreational vehicles, tents, or shelter and utility and service buildings, shall be set
back a minimum of 75 feet from the normal high-water mark of any water body or
stream.
(4) All recreational vehicles, tents, utility and service buildings and other structures shall be
located at least 75 feet from all property and street lines.
(5) A buffer area at least 50 feet in width meeting the requirements of article XIII shall be
maintained along all property and street lines.
(6) Sanitary and recreational facilities shall be located to conveniently and safely service the
occupants of the facility.
Sec. 13. Standards for the installation of mobile homes on individual lots.
The installation of mobile homes on individual residential lots shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) The installation of a mobile home on an individual lot shall be a permitted use in the
district where it is located.
(2) The unit shall be located on the lot in conformance with the space and bulk requirements
of the district in which it is located.
(3) The unit shall have its wheels, axles and tongue removed and shall be placed on a
permanent foundation meeting the requirements of the BOCA Building Code.
(4) The area under the unit shall be fully enclosed by a wall consisting of one of the
following materials:
a. Loose laid or mortared masonry blocks;
b. A poured concrete wall;
c. Approved vinyl or metal mobile home skirting; or
d. Painted wood or similar materials.
The area under the unit shall be provided with a suitable accessway and ventilation.
(5) The unit shall be connected to a public sewer or an approved private sewage disposal
system meeting the requirements of the Maine State Plumbing Code, as amended.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:30
(6) The mobile home shall be anchored in accordance with the standards of article XII,
section 4 if it is located in an area of special flood hazard as identified by the flood
insurance rate map of the city.
Sec. 14. Standards for the installation of mobile homes in mobile home parks.
The creation of mobile home lots in mobile home parks and the installation of mobile homes on
those lots shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Lot development standards.
a. Utilities. Each lot shall be serviced by public water and sewer and provided with
electrical and telephone service, all in accordance with the standards contained in
article XIII, section 4(j) of this Code.
b. Stand. Each lot shall be developed with a suitable stand for the mobile home. This
stand may consist of any one of the following systems:
1. A four-inch reinforced concrete slab. This slab shall be located on soils
which are not susceptible to frost action or shall be located on a 12-inch
gravel base with appropriate underdrains; or
2. A pair of reinforced concrete grade beams designed in accordance with the
BOCA Building Code, as amended; or
3. A series of columns and footings in which the footings are a minimum of
two feet on a side and extend below the frost line.
c. Off-street parking. Each site shall contain two off-street parking spaces meeting
the requirements of article XII, section 17. This parking shall be surfaced with a
minimum of two inches of bituminous paving on a 12-inch gravel base or
equivalent as approved by the city engineer.
d. Drainage. Each site shall be graded to provide positive surface water drainage
away from the stand and into the overall stormwater system.
e. Landscaping. All areas of the lot not covered by buildings, structures, paving or
other improvements shall be maintained in a vegetated state.
(2) Installation standards.
a. Placement of units. The mobile home shall be placed on the lot so that it is located
no closer than 15 feet to the front lot line and ten feet to the side and rear lot lines.
b. Skirting. The area between the ground or stand and the bottom of the unit shall be
fully enclosed by skirting. This skirting shall provide for access and adequate
ventilation of the space under the unit. This skirting may consist of one of the
following materials:
1. Approved vinyl or metal mobile home skirting; or
2. A poured concrete wall; or
3. A mortared or loose laid masonry wall.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:31
c. Fuel tanks. Any fuel tank shall be installed so that it is not visible from the road or
an abutting lot. Tanks may be located beneath the steps to the unit if permitted by
applicable fire and safety codes. If the tank is located adjacent to the unit, it shall
be fenced and landscaped to screen it from view.
d. Accessory buildings. Freestanding buildings such as storage sheds or garages may
be located on a mobile home lot provided that all of the following standards are
met:
1. The building is not located between the street and a line parallel to the
front line of the mobile home; and
2. If located in a side or rear setback area, is at least ten feet from the lot line;
and
3. Is installed on a suitable foundation in accordance with the building code.
e. Additions to units: Additions may be made to mobile homes including, but not
limited to, porches, decks, attached garages, "bump-outs" and similar attached
structure provided that all of the following standards are met:
1. The addition is located at least 15 feet from the front lot line and ten feet
from side and rear lot lines; and
2. The architectural style of the addition is similar to the mobile home; and
3. The addition is located on a foundation that is frost protected to the same
extent as the mobile home.
f. All units shall have a pitched, shingled roof and exterior siding that is residential
in appearance.
(Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90)
Sec. 15. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to further maintain the safe and
healthful conditions of the city and neighboring communities; to prevent and control water
pollution, to protect aquatic life, bird and other habitat; to protect buildings and lands from
accelerated erosion; to protect historic resources; to protect wetlands; to control building sites; to
conserve ground cover; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond
to the impacts of development in the City of Lewiston.
(b) Applicability. The standards of this section shall apply to all activities which involve
filling, grading, development, earth-moving, excavation, removal of topsoil, sod, loam, peat or
other organic materials, clay, sand, gravel, stone or other earth products or other similar land use
activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions. This section shall apply if the activity does
or does not require a permit under this Code. Lawfully established agricultural fields shall be
exempt from this section.
(c) Standards. Any person, entity or property owner who conducts, causes or allows to be
conducted, an activity which results in unstabilized soil conditions shall take measures to prevent
unreasonable erosion of sediment or soil beyond the project site or into a protected natural
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:32
resource as defined by M.R.S.A, Title 38 § 480-B. Erosion control measures must be in place
before the activity begins and remain in place and be maintained until the site is permanently
stabilized. All erosion control and stabilization measures required by this section shall be in
accordance with the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs Pub. No. DEPLW0588,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Land and Water
Quality, (March 2003), or other measures determined to be appropriate by the Lewiston Director
of Planning and Code Enforcement.
(Ord. No. 05-06, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07)
Sec. 16. Signs.
(a) General provisions.
(1) For the purposes of this Code, a sign shall be any structure, device, letter, banner,
symbol, or other representation which is used as or is in the nature of an advertisement,
announcement, or direction; which is erected, assembled, affixed out of doors, or painted
on the exterior of a building or structure and which is visible from a public way. "Visible
from a public way" means capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal
visual acuity, from a way designated for vehicular use and maintained with public funds.
(2) The area of a sign shall equal the area of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or
combination thereof, which encompasses the facing of a sign, including copy, insignia,
background and borders, but not including structural supports of the sign. A sign's area is
the sum of the areas of each of its sides. A wall sign's area shall be based on the area of a
freestanding sign as calculated above that would be required to accommodate the same
features, or in the case of individual graphics added to walls, or other architectural
features of a building, the sum of the areas of each of the graphic elements displayed.
(3) No signs shall be erected or altered unless in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations. Signs must be kept clean, legible and free from all hazards, such as, but not
limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, or deterioration, and must be maintained at all
times in such condition so as not to be detrimental to the public health or safety, detract
from the physical appearance and the natural beauty of the community, or constitute a
distraction or obstruction that may impair traffic safety.
(4) No sign shall be permitted which causes a traffic, health, or safety hazard or creates a
nuisance due to its illumination, placement, display, or manner of construction. No sign
shall be located so as to obstruct views of traffic.
(5) All signs must conform to the building and electrical codes as adopted by the City of
Lewiston, except as specifically provided to the contrary herein.
(6) Any legally existing nonconforming sign to be relocated or altered shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this Code except when relocation or alteration is
pursuant to a violation order issued by the code enforcement official. Except for
prohibited signs as listed in subsection (g), changes in the content of a nonconforming
sign including names, words, logos or similar information shall not constitute an
alteration requiring conformance with this section, as long as the changes do not make
the sign more nonconforming and a permit is obtained for the changes from the code
enforcement official.
(7) All such signs must be properly maintained by the owner thereof or the owner of the
premises on which they are located, and any such sign that becomes a nuisance or a
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:33
hazard to public safety must be promptly removed from the premises if so ordered by the
code enforcement official.
(b) Signs permitted in all districts.
(1) The following types of signs may be erected in all zoning districts without obtaining a
permit from the code enforcement official:
a. Public safety signs. Governmental bodies may erect and maintain signs necessary
for the public safety and welfare, or as required by law, ordinance or government
regulation.
b. Posting private property. Signs permitted to post private property shall only be
for the following or similar conditions: no hunting, no fishing, no snowmobiles,
no trespassing. Posted signs shall not exceed two square feet per private property
sign.
c. Temporary signs. Temporary signs listed below shall not be placed in a position
that will impair vision, obstruct traffic, or in any manner create a hazard or
nuisance to the general public.
1. Organization signs. Signs and banners advertising charitable functions,
notices of meetings, and similar noncommercial signs. These may be
placed for a period not exceeding ten days prior to the event and shall be
removed within two days after the event or meeting.
2. Real estate signs. Two temporary real estate signs including temporary
open house directional signs and advertising the sale, lease or rental of a
parcel or structure may be placed on any property. Within a farming or
residential district the maximum sign size shall be six square feet. Within
a commercial or industrial district the maximum sign size shall be 32
square feet. Such signs shall be removed by the owner or his agent within
ten days of such sale, lease, or rental, or for the open house directional
signs within 24 hours after the open house is over. The sign(s) may be
attached to a building or be freestanding.
3. Construction. A temporary construction sign, providing a general
identification of a project and those responsible therefor, may be erected
on the construction site provided it shall not exceed 32 square feet and
shall be removed within ten days after project completion.
4. Home sales. A sign advertising a temporary home, yard, garage, barn or
basement sale on the premises may be placed for no more than three days
prior to said sale and shall be removed within 24 hours of the end of the
sale.
5. Political signs. Signs of a temporary nature bearing political messages
relating to an election, primary or referendum may be placed within the
public right-of-way of any street or highway in accordance with the
timelines established in M.R.S.A. Title 23, (1913-A, Section 1(H).
Political signs outside of the public right-of-way are not subject to time
limits. Political signs located within or outside the public right-of-way of
any street or highway are prohibited on or in front of City owned property
including schools, parks, cemeteries and municipally owned buildings.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:34
Notwithstanding article V, section 7, the code enforcement official may
remove any political signs erected contrary to this section.
6. Temporary signs, banners, decorations. Upon approval of the city council,
temporary signs, banners, flags and other decorations may be erected in
the public right-of-way when in relation to a special event.
d. Occupant signs. Any residential property may contain one sign not exceeding two
square feet in area and being only property numbers, post box numbers, names of
occupants of the premises or other noncommercial identification. These signs may
be freestanding or attached to a building or structure.
e. Flags. Flags or insignia of any government.
f. Public notices. Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies.
g. Architectural features. Integral, decorative or architectural features of buildings,
except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
h. Memorials. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection,
when cut into masonry, bronze or other noncombustible material.
(2) The following types of signs may be erected in all zoning districts following the
obtaining of a permit from the code enforcement official. The application shall indicate
the type, size and location of the sign:
a. Identification signs. A sign identifying a lawfully existing home occupation or
family day care homes operated in conjunction with a residential use, is allowed
on the premises, providing the sign does not exceed six square feet in display
area.
b. Institutional signs. Signs may be erected for noncommercial purposes in
connection with any church, museum, library, school or similar public structure.
In residential districts, such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in display area
and not more than one sign shall be permitted per property. In nonresidential
districts, not withstanding the provisions of article XII, subsection
16(c)(2)(a)(1)(iii), permanent or temporary projecting wall banner(s) and
associated structural supports may not extend above the level of a flat roof or the
eves of any other type of roof, may not be lower than ten feet above the adjacent
grade and may not extend farther than 36 inches beyond the face of the wall to
which they are attached, the total sign area shall not exceed ten percent of the
gross area of the principal facade of the structure and no part of the sign and/or
supports shall encroach into the travel way.
c. Driveway signs. Entrance and exit signs may be placed at driveways and shall not
obstruct view of traffic. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet per side in
display area per driveway sign.
d. Farm products. Not more than two signs advertising the sale of farm or forestry
products available on the premises. Each sign may not exceed 16 square feet.
e. Building directory. A sign may be attached at the entrance to a building to
identify the occupants for pedestrians entering the building and shall be in
addition to any other signs permitted by this Code. A building directory shall not
exceed 16 square feet.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:35
(3) The following types of signs shall be permitted for any legally existing business subject
to issuance of a permit:
a. Advertising and promotional signs. Signs, banners and similar specialty
advertising devices used temporarily in conjunction with special events or sales
provided they are used for 30 days or less and are located on or attached to the
premises where the sale or event is occurring. Such signs shall not be permitted
more than four times in any 12-month period.
(4) The following types of signs shall be permitted for any retail grocery store subject to the
issuance of a sign permit:
a. Beverage signs. Each establishment may display one illuminated malt beverage
display sign in addition to one other illuminated or nonilluminated display sign.
(c) Permitted signs. The following standards shall govern the erection of signs throughout
the City of Lewiston. Any permitted sign shall be erected, changed or relocated only after a
permit is obtained from the code enforcement official in accordance with the provisions of the
building code. Permitted signs shall be considered to be accessory to the principal use of the
premises and shall pertain only to activities or products available on the premises.
Notwithstanding the above, permits are not required for the placement of temporary day and
window signs as identified in article XII, subsection 16(c)(2)a.2. of this Code.
(1) Rural, residential and resource conservation districts.
a. The following signs shall be permitted in the rural, residential, resource
conservation and neighborhood conservation districts:
1. A single sign, not over 15 square feet in area, attached to a building or
detached and located in the front yard, describing an apartment house,
residential development or other legally existing residential use.
2. A single sign, not over 32 square feet in area, attached to a building or
freestanding and located in the front yard describing a legally existing
nonresidential use.
b. The following standards shall govern the installation of signs in rural, residential
and neighborhood conservation districts:
1. Any sign attached to a building shall be a wall sign;
2. Any freestanding sign shall have a maximum height to the highest point
on the sign area of eight feet above adjacent grade.
3. Signs may be illuminated by a shielded external light source. Internally
illuminated signs and/or changeable message signs shall not be permitted
in residential districts.
(2) Nonresidential districts. All signs within the riverfront, office residential, downtown
residential, institutional office, community business, highway business, centreville, office
service, industrial, urban enterprise and mill districts shall conform to the standards of this
section.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:36
a. Permitted signs. The following types of signs shall be considered necessary to the
principal use of the premises on which they are located, provided they are
maintained in a safe, neat and clean condition.
1. Permanent signs, including:
(i) Awning signs;
(ii) Single-faced or multiple-faced ground signs, provided no
permanent ground sign shall have less than four-foot clearance
above grade and no permanent ground sign or structural support
shall extend higher than 25 feet above grade. Ground signs with
less than four-foot clearance above grade shall be permitted if it is
determined by the code enforcement official, following an on-site
inspection of the premises, that the sign and its structural support
will not create or aggravate a safety hazard;
(iii) Single-face or multiple-faced projecting signs, provided no
projecting sign may extend higher than 25 feet above grade, lower
than ten feet above grade, and shall not encroach into the right-ofway
or nearer than five feet from any other lot line. In the
centreville district and in the riverfront district, limited to
properties with frontage on Main Street, no sign shall extend
farther than six feet beyond a street line (no sign shall encroach
into the travel way), or nearer than five feet from any other lot line
and signs may extend to a maximum height of 40 feet, but shall not
extend above a flat roof or the eves of any other type of roof;
(iv) Wall signs, provided no wall sign or structural support may cover
any portion of a visible window or window detail above the first
story;
(v) Window signs.
(vi) Changeable message signs. Changeable message signs are
permitted provided that each message remains fixed on the display
surface, but "which may be changed at reasonable intervals by
electronic process or remote control", and do not "include any
flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights". (23 U.S.C. § 131)
and in accordance with subsection M.R.S.A. 1914, subsection 11-
A., Title 23. For the purposes of this section, signs whose
text/numeric messages change by mechanical or electronic means
are not prohibited as long as the intermittent lighting is used to
change messages and not solely to attract attention.
Those provisions of M.R.S.A. 23, § 1914 that are applicable to
changeable message signs as they apply to controlled-access
highways or ramps remain in effect.
A "flashing" sign or messages with graphic, pictorial, animated, or
photographic images will continue to be prohibited except as
described below:
Changeable message signs shall be permitted only with the
approval of the code enforcement officer and the sign shall meet
the following requirements in addition to the dimensional
requirements set forth in this ordinance.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:37
Static display with a five-second hold rate of change minimum
between changes including the use of subtle transitions such as
fade, dissolve, travel and scrolling or similar transitions and with
frames that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed
sequentially rather than at once including the movement of
illumination or the scintillation or varying of light intensity. Time
and temperature signs are allowed to change display with a twosecond
message hold rate.
Changeable message signs shall be limited to either one
changeable sign with two sides or two single-sided signs per lot of
record where allowed by subsection 16(b)(2)(b) of this ordinance.
2. Temporary day signs:
(i) Day signs, such as: sandwich signs, easel signs, and other similar day signs are
permitted for the advertisement of specific products, daily specials, or for special
events. They shall be made of durable materials (i.e., not of cardboard or paper)
and shall not be placed to impede public access nor create a traffic hazard and
shall also not exceed eight square feet per side. One sign per 50 linear feet of
street frontage is permitted, not to exceed four such signs per property. Such signs
can only be placed outside while the business is open.
b. Sign area. The total area of all signs on a parcel shall conform to the following maximum
aggregate sign area requirements. For multiple-faced signs, the area of each face shall be
included in the computation of the aggregate sign area. Allocation of the maximum
allowable sign area is to be determined by the property owner/agent.
1. Community business, institutional office, highway business, downtown,
centreville, office service, industrial, urban enterprise, mill and riverfront
districts.
(i) Each business entity is permitted sign area not to exceed ten percent of the
gross wall area of the principal facade of the building or structure or a
minimum of 54 square feet, whichever is the greater, in the form of
awning, projecting, wall, or window signs attached to the building or
structure in which the business is located. Supplemental to the above
building signage, a building or structure with frontage on two or more
accepted city streets is permitted additional signage not to exceed a total of
54 square feet in area to be attached to a secondary facade of the building
or structure.
(ii) In addition, each premises shall be permitted one freestanding ground sign
up to 168 square feet. Single parcels developed with multiple uses are
permitted an additional 32 square feet of sign area per business use, up to
an additional maximum of 216 square feet of sign area. Movie theaters
where allowed shall be permitted additional sign area up to 36 square feet
per cinema screen not to exceed a maximum of 360 square feet in total
freestanding ground sign area per premises, not withstanding article XII,
subsection 16(a)(6). All signage permitted under this subsection shall be
located at or near the principal vehicular entrance on one freestanding
ground sign.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:38
(iii) For single parcels developed with multiple uses, an additional freestanding
ground sign of up to 168 square feet identifying the development, and an
additional 32 square feet of signage per business or use, up to an
additional maximum of 216 square feet of sign area, all to be located on
the same freestanding ground sign, is permitted at other major vehicular
entry points located on arterial streets, provided such signs are not readily
concurrently visible with any other freestanding ground signs located on
the premises.
(iv) For single parcels developed with multiple uses, an additional freestanding
ground sign area of a maximum of 168 square feet is permitted at other
major vehicular entry points not located on arterial streets, provided such
signs are not readily concurrently visible with any other freestanding
ground signs located on the premises.
(v) Single parcels developed with multiple uses where there are separate
principle vehicular entrances for the uses, concurrently visible ground
signs not to exceed 40 square feet may be placed at such entrances to
direct traffic to specific uses. No more than one freestanding ground sign
is allowed at an entrance.
2. Office residential, and downtown residential districts. The aggregate sign area per
premises may not exceed 72 square feet.
3. Properties with frontage on the interstate system. One additional one-sided
ground sign visible from any portion of the interstate system including ramps and
interchange areas, not to exceed 20 feet in length, width, or height or 150 square
feet in area, including borders and trim, but excluding supports, may be permitted
more than 50 feet from the principal building or structure where the business,
facility or point of interest is carried on, provided such signs are not readily
concurrently visible with any other freestanding ground signs located on the
premises.
c. Special requirements. For the purposes of this section, the following special requirement
applies:
1. Awnings with graphic displays exceeding ten percent of the awning area
(measuring from the outer most points) shall meet the applicable sign standards.
2. Roof signs are not permitted and no part of any wall or projecting sign may
extend above the level of a flat roof or the eaves of any other type of roof, with
the following exceptions:
(i) Wall signs may project no more than five feet above the level of a flat roof
or the eaves of any other type of roof as long as that portion of the sign
does not exceed 20 percent of that signs total area. Wall signs on mansard
roofs, the lower portion of gambrel roofs, false fronts, facades, parapets or
other significant architectural features may not exceed the height of the
architectural feature.
(ii) Roof signs not exceeding 54 square feet and wall and projecting signs may
be located on or above the roofs of vestibules, canopies, porticos, loading
docks, and similar single-story, attached structures, provided that the
proposed sign is in compliance with article XII, section 16 (c)(2)(c)(2)(i)
of this ordinance with regard to the roof of the principal building.
d. Development entrance signs. Parcels of land subdivided for purposes of nonresidential
development, are permitted one development entrance sign at the primary vehicular entry
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:39
point, to identify the development and the business entities therein, provided the
following requirements are met:
1. Such signs shall not exceed 168 square feet in total sign area;
2. Such signs shall be sited on common land within the subdivision and shall not be
located within the right-of-way of any public street or highway, nor create or
aggravate a traffic hazard;
3. For a nonresidential subdivision with secondary vehicular entry points, one
additional development entrance sign, not to exceed 100 square feet in total sign
area, may be sited at each secondary vehicular entry point, provided such signs
are not readily concurrently visible with any other development entrance signs
located on the same subdivided parcel.
e. Campus-type signs. Parcels of land developed in a campus-type environment, as defined
as larger parcels of land with multiple buildings including hospitals, mill complexes or
public or private educational facilities, are permitted the following additional signage:
1. Main entrance signs. A freestanding ground sign to be located at the main
vehicular entrance and unless otherwise permitted, such signs shall be limited to a
symbol and/or name identifying the campus; and, if desired, the street address. In
addition, the following standards must be met:
(i) Such signs shall not exceed 168 square feet in total sign area and exceed a
height greater than 25 feet above the immediately adjacent finished grade.
(ii) Such signs shall be sited within the private land boundaries of the campus
and shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway nor create or aggravate a traffic hazard.
(iii) For a campus-style parcel with secondary vehicular entry points, one
additional main entrance sign, not to exceed 168 square feet in total sign
area, may be sited at each secondary vehicular entry point, provided such
signs are not readily concurrently visible with any other main entrance
signs located on the same campus parcel.
2. Primary facility/campus directional signs. Exterior boundary signs providing
basic directional information to destinations within the campus boundary.
(i) Such signs shall not exceed 75 square feet in total sign area and exceed a
height greater than 14 feet above the immediately adjacent finished grade.
(ii) Such signs shall be sited within the private land boundaries or the campus,
should typically be limited to general destination names rather than
specific destinations, and shall not be located within the right-of-way of
any public street or highway, nor create or aggravate a traffic hazard.
(iii) Whenever possible, such signs should be incorporated onto a main
entrance sign which may be located in the immediate vicinity and/or at the
same street intersection.
(iv) Quantities shall be based on an established overall message sequence and
across campus preferred routes; displaying the required information only
at the location of decision or identification.
3. Secondary campus directional signs. Interior boundary signs providing more
detailed directional and/or informational assistance.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:40
(i) Such signs shall not exceed 25 square feet in total sign area and exceed a
height greater than eight feet above the immediately adjacent finished
grade.
(ii) Such signs shall be sited within the private land boundaries of the campus
and shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway, nor create or aggravate a traffic hazard.
(iii) Quantities shall be based on an established overall message sequence and
across campus preferred routes; displaying the required information only
at the location of decision or identification.
4. Campus directory. Map directions graphically identifying the various destinations
across the campus.
(i) Such signs shall only be located along private vehicular or pedestrian
access ways or parking areas to prevent unsafe conditions along public
ways.
(ii) Such signs shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street
or highway.
(iii) Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in total sign area and exceed a
height greater than seven feet above the immediately adjacent finished
grade.
5. Site identification signs. A sign, located as close as practical to the vehicular
entrance of a freestanding building within the campus (medical office, clinic,
library, etc.). The sign shall display the name of the facility (XYZ Surgery
Associates) and include the street address (1234 Main Street).
(i) Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in total sign area and exceed a
height greater than eight feet above the immediately adjacent finished
grade.
(ii) Such signs shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street
or highway, nor create or aggravate a traffic hazard.
6. Exterior building signs. Wall, projecting, awning, or window signs, installed upon
the exterior portion of a building displaying the functional name of the facility.
(i) Each building is permitted exterior building sign area not to exceed a total
of 54 square feet or ten percent of the gross wall area of the principal
facade of the building, whichever is greater.
(ii) Supplemental to the above exterior building signage, a building with
frontage on two or more accepted city streets is permitted additional
signage not to exceed a total of 54 square feet in area to be attached to a
secondary facade of the building.
(iii) The placement of exterior building signs must comply with subsection
(c)(2)a. of this section.
7. Miscellaneous campus signs. Signs displaying circulation, directional or
regulatory information not exceeding a total sign area of six square feet, are
exempt from the requirement of obtaining a sign permit. However, such signs
shall be installed in accordance with all applicable requirements of article XII,
section 16 and shall not be located within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway, nor create or aggravate a traffic hazard.
(d) Portable signs.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:41
(1) Defined. A portable sign is one which is designed for and intended to be moved from
place to place and not be permanently affixed to land, buildings or other structures.
(2) Portable signs permitted. Any use located in a business or industrial district, other than
the centreville district, shall be permitted one portable sign of not more than 64 square
feet in sign area for a maximum of 60 days in any 12-month period in addition to other
signs permitted by this Code.
(3) Permit required. A sign permit shall be obtained from the code enforcement official prior
to installing a portable sign. The application shall specify the location of the sign and
time of use, and shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from time to time by the
city council.
(4) Location. A portable sign shall be located outside of the street right-of-way in such a
manner that it will not obstruct or impair vision or traffic or in any way create a hazard or
nuisance to the public. The electrical service [is] to be approved by the inspector upon
installation.
(e) Official business directional signs.
(1) Authority. The provisions of this section shall govern the installation and maintenance of
official business directional signs authorized by the Maine Traveler Information Services
Act, 23 M.R.S.A. sections 1901 through 1925, as amended.
(2) Qualifying uses.
a. Uses include public accommodations, facilities, commercial services for the
traveling public, and points of scenic, historical, cultural, recreational, educational
and religious interest.
b. Uses with existing, off-premises signs that have been, or will be, removed
pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. sections 1901 through 1925, as amended, provided that
such signage is owned and maintained by the affected use for a continuous period
of at least 12 months prior to said removal.
c. Qualifying uses must be located within the City of Lewiston.
(3) Location.
a. An official business directional sign may be installed in any district except the
centreville district (CV).
b. In the centreville district (CV), signs located therein on December 31, 1982, may
be replaced, but new directional signs shall not be erected.
c. Official business directional signs shall only be located in those vicinities where
the traveler must change direction from one public way to another to reach the
business, facility or point of interest.
d. Official business directional signs are not permitted within the right-of-way of the
interstate highway or Alfred A Plourde Parkway from Webster Street to
Challenger Drive.
(4) Additional requirements.
a. Official business directional signs shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of the Maine Traveler Information Act, 23 M.R.S.A. §§
1901--1925, as amended, and any other regulations adopted pursuant to said
statutes.
b. The following additional requirements shall apply:
1. The minimum distance between official business directory sign posts shall
be at least 300 feet as measured along the shortest straight line;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:42
2. No official business directory sign shall be placed closer than 200 feet
from the property line of a commercial business offering directly
competing goods or services;
3. An official business directory sign shall be located no closer than 200 feet
or further than 2,500 feet from an intersection where a change in direction
as indicated on said sign is required;
4. No more than three official business directional signs may be attached to
an individual sign post assembly. No new sign post assembly shall be
installed until existing sign post assemblies suitable for any newly
proposed official business directional sign contain the maximum number
of permitted signs.
(5) Number of signs.
a. Uses as identified in subsection (2)a. shall be limited to a maximum of six official
business directional signs.
b. Uses as identified in subsection (2)b. shall be limited to the number of sign faces
that have been or will be removed pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A., sections 1901 through
1925, as amended.
c. Uses as identified in subsection (2)b. shall be limited to the number of sign faces
that have been or will be removed pursuant to 23 M.R.S.A. sections 1901 through
1925, as amended.
(f) Special intracommunity service signs. Special service signs for local information within
Lewiston may be erected on state or state aid highways provided the following conditions are
met:
(1) Requests. Requests for signs must be made by the Municipal Officers of Lewiston.
(2) Eligible facilities. Signs shall be limited to directing traffic to locations of special interest
which include the following:
(a) Hospitals which provide emergency service 24 hours a day.
(b) Public transportation facilities including airports, railroad stations, bus terminals
and ferries.
(c) Public recreational facilities such as beaches, parks, sport arenas, scenic areas and
historical areas.
(d) Municipal subdivisions such as central business districts and villages within
municipal boundaries.
(e) Governmental buildings or agencies such as city halls, county buildings, schools,
armories and fire or police stations. Signs for specific commercial establishments
shall not be permitted.
(3) Designs of signs. Signs shall be rectangular in shape with a white legend on a blue
background. The maximum length shall be 48 inches and the maximum letter size shall
be four inches. No more than three lines or copy shall be permitted on one sign.
(4) Installation of signs. Signs shall be provided and installed by the local municipal
officials. The vertical and lateral clearances of such signs shall conform with Sections
1A-22 and 1A-23 of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways". The signs shall not be erected in conjunction with, nor be in conflict with,
nor interfere with official highway signs.
(5) Restrictions. Special intracommunity service signing shall not be permitted on interstate
highways or on expressway systems.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:43
(g) Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all areas of the city, except as
otherwise provided in these regulations:
(1) Off-premises signs. An outdoor sign bearing a commercial or business name, symbol,
logo or message, located on any premises other than where the project, service or activity
is located, except publicly erected information kiosks, special intra-community services
signs, official business directory signs in accordance with subsection (e), above, and as
provided in subsection (a), below.
(a) In the event an existing nonresidential use does not have frontage and the
principal vehicular access is by easement, a single off-premises ground sign is
permitted within said easement, pursuant to the standards contained in subsections
(c)(2)(b)(1)(ii) through (v).
(2) Moving or flashing signs. Signs, other than barber poles, time and weather devices,
changeable message signs and similar public service signs, that have visible moving parts
or blinking illumination.
(3) Signs in street right-of-way. No sign except political signs, traffic and similar public
safety signs, erected in accordance with the Code of Ordinances, official business
directional signs erected in accordance with subsection (e) of these regulations, and
publicly erected information kiosks, special intracommunity service signs, or sign boards
and signs approved by the city council advertising civic events and function shall be
located in the public right-of-way of any street or highway.
(4) Terminated businesses. Signs relating to any business which has been out of business for
more than 180 days. The owner of the property or his agent shall be responsible for
removing all mountings, brackets, poles, sign faces and other sign material.
(5) Signs on natural features. No signs shall be permitted which are erected, painted or
maintained upon trees, rocks and other natural features.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 92-16, 8-13-92; Ord. No. 93-5, 3-18-93; Ord. No. 93-6, 5-6-93; Ord.
No. 94-4, 7-7-94; Ord. No. 95-7, 6-1-95; Ord. No. 95-9, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 95-10, 9-14-95; Ord. No. 95-
11, 9-14-95; Ord. No. 97-8, 10-16-97; Ord. No. 99-3, 3-4-99; Ord. No. 00-1, 2-17-00; Ord. No. 00-19,
10-5-00; Ord. No. 01-1, 2-15-01; Ord. No. 03-02, 3-20-03; Ord. No. 04-08, 4-15-04; Ord. No. 05-15, 9-8-
05; Ord. No. 05-16, 11-3-05; Ord. No. 05-20, 1-19-06; Ord. No. 08-04, 5-15-08; Ord. No. 12-01, 3-5-12;
Ord. No. 12-05, 5-3-12; Ord. No. 12-14, 1-03-13)
Cross references: Advertising, ch. 6.
Sec. 17. Off-street parking and loading.
(a) Applicability. The following minimum off-street parking and loading requirements except
as provided for in subsections (e)(3) and (e)(4) shall be met for:
(1) The use of any parcel of land;
(2) The construction of any building or structure;
(3) The conversion of an existing building, structure or portion thereof to a new use;
(4) The enlargement of an existing building or structure; or
(5) The modification of an existing building or structure to create additional floor area,
dwelling units, seats or similar measures of parking demand set out in the standards of
subsection (d).
Modifications, enlargements or conversions of buildings or structures or the change in or
intensification of use shall not be permitted unless off-street parking and loading is provided for
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:44
an additional number of spaces representing the difference between what this Code requires for
the existing building or structure and what this Code requires for the proposed building or
structure.
(b) Classification of use. Off-street parking or loading which is provided to serve an allowed
use or legally existing nonconforming use shall be considered to be an accessory use if it is
provided on the same lot or on another lot in the same zoning district in accordance with the
standards of this section.
Off-street parking provided in one zoning district to serve a use in another zoning district or offstreet
parking not associated with a particular use shall not be considered to be an accessory use
and shall be permitted only in those zoning districts where commercial parking facilities are
allowed as a principal use.
(c) Parking facilities. Parking required by this section may be provided in open air parking
spaces or by spaces located in a garage. Parking spaces shall be so arranged so that each space
can be used without another vehicle having to be moved except for single-family detached and
two-family detached dwellings and for assigned parking for an individual dwelling unit in an
attached single-family or multifamily dwelling, or assigned employee parking in nonresidential
projects that are classified as minor developments under this code when reviewed in connection
with development review pursuant to article XIII hereof.
(d) Off-street parking required. The following minimum off-street parking shall be provided
and maintained for each situation identified in subsection (a). In computing the number of spaces
required, lots with two or more uses shall meet the combined requirement for all of the uses. In
calculating the parking requirement, major fractional spaces (0.5 or greater) shall be rounded up
to the next whole space. Employee parking is based on the largest shift.
Single-family detached dwellings two spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family dwellings two spaces per dwelling unit
Single-family attached or multifamily
dwellings with
one space per dwelling unit plus 0.1 spaces per
dwelling unit for visitor parking for all singlefamily
attached or multi-family dwellings
Housing for the elderly one-half space per dwelling unit
Types "A" and "B" group care facilities one space per three bedrooms, plus one space
per employee
Tourist homes two spaces plus one space per lodging unit
Motels, hotels and inns three spaces plus one space per sleeping room
(accessory eating and drinking establishments
or other facilities shall provide additional
parking as required).
Rooming houses, boarding houses, lodging
houses
one space per three bedrooms
Bed and breakfast establishments one space per guest sleeping room and two
spaces per dwelling unit plus one space per
every two employees on the largest shift;
establishments approved by development
review pursuant to article XIII for meeting
facilities for non-guests or for special outdoor
functions shall provide one space per two seats
in any meeting facilities and one space per two
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:45
special outdoor function guests based on the
approved capacity; if such additional off-street
parking is provided off the site, it shall comply
with the requirements of article XII section
17.e except that, notwithstanding the
provisions of subsection e, the planning board
shall have the authority to approve such offsite
parking.
Hospitals one space per patient bed plus one space per
three employees
Medical clinics two spaces per treatment room or patient bed,
whichever is greater
Nursing or convalescent homes one parking space per five resident beds and
one space per employee
Schools
Elementary schools one and a half spaces per classroom
Secondary schools five spaces per classroom
Residential colleges, universities and
institutions of higher education, including
accessory facilities athletic and assembly
facilities designed primarily for student use
one space per 7 seats in classroom facilities
Business colleges and schools one space per 4 seats in classroom facilities
Retail and personal service establishments one space per two hundred fifty square feet of
gross floor area. For retail stores which are part
of a gasoline service station complex, one-half
of the service spaces at the pump islands may
be applied to meet not more than one-half of
the required parking demand
Eating and drinking establishments one space per three seats
Drive-in restaurants ten spaces plus one additional space per one
hundred feet of gross floor area
Professional and business offices one space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Construction contractors, tradesman, offices,
laboratories and similar uses
one space per 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Adult business establishments, drinking place one space per 3 seats or 200 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater
New and used car dealers five spaces plus one space per 3,000 square
feet of display area (indoor and outdoor)
Auto repair garages and gasoline service
stations
two spaces per service bay plus one space per
employee
Light industrial uses, industrial uses,
wholesale, storage and distribution facilities
one space per 500 square feet of gross floor
area up to 3,000 sq. ft. plus one space for each
1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in excess of
3,000 square feet
Community centers, libraries, museums, civic
clubs, theatres, places of indoor assembly,
amusement or culture, religious facilities, and
one space per 4 seats where fixed seating is
provided plus 1 space per 200 square feet of
area otherwise available for assembly
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:46
similar uses
Auditoriums, stadiums, sport arenas, race
tracks, skating rinks, gymnasiums, convention
halls or similar uses
one space per each 4 seats; where individual
seats are not provided, each 24 inches of bench
or other similar seating, or eight sq. ft. of
seating or standing space shall be considered as
one seat for the purpose of determining
requirements thereof
Self storage facilities five spaces
Uses not specifically listed or able to be placed
into one of the above categories, or listed uses
which can be clearly shown to have a differing
parking need (either fewer or greater) than
otherwise required
Sufficient spaces to accommodate the normal
parking demand of the use without requiring
on-street parking. The number of required
spaces shall be determined by the planning
board for major project development review or
by the staff review committee for minor project
development review or by the planning director
if no review is required in accordance with
accepted standards.
(e) Location of off-street parking facilities. Required or provided off-street parking in all
districts shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or use, except as provided
below:
(1) In residential districts, required or provided off-street parking, serving permitted
or conditional uses, may be located off the site, provided it is located within 1,320
feet of the principal building or use measured along lines of public access and
cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot. Such off-street parking shall be
held in fee simple by the owner of the principal use served, or in such other tenure
as assures continued availability for parking as long as the particular land will be
needed for such use, provided that if tenure is other than ownership in fee simple,
the form of tenure shall be approved by the planning director before the request is
considered by the appropriate deciding body. Evidence of fee simple ownership or
approved tenure shall be required.
(2) In all zones other than residential, required or provided off-street parking may be
located off the site, provided it is located within 1,320 feet of the principle
buildings or use measured along lines of public access and cannot be provided on
the same lot. Such off-street parking shall be held in fee simple by the owner of
the use served, or in such other tenure as assures continued availability for
parking as long as the particular land will be needed for such use, provided that if
tenure is other than ownership in fee simple, the form of tenure shall be approved
by the planning director before the request is considered by the appropriate
deciding body. Evidence of fee simple ownership or approved tenure shall be
required, and such lots shall be located within nonresidential districts.
(3) Required off-street parking in all districts may be substituted by parking facilities
which, in the public's interest, may be provided by the municipality. Such
substitution shall be shown to be representative of the off-street parking turnover
or requirements of the particular use in question and shall take into consideration
the needs of other uses with similar demands upon such public space. No such
public off-street parking spaces shall be considered as a substitute unless located
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:47
within 1,320 feet of the principal building or use measured along lines of public
access.
(4) No additional parking spaces shall be required for any structure that has been
designated as significant for historic preservation under article XV, section 3 of
this Code that is proposed for reuse. Any expansion to the building will need to
provide the required additional parking. All modifications to the building must be
done in accordance with the criteria established under article XV, section 5 of this
Code.
(f) Design of off-street parking facilities.
(1) Parking space dimensions.
a. Except as provided below, each parking space shall contain a rectangular area at
least 18 feet long and nine feet wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be
drawn at various angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces
so created contain within them the rectangular area required by this section.
b. Up to 40 percent of required parking spaces need contain a rectangular area of
only eight feet in width by 15 feet in length. If such spaces are provided, they
shall be conspicuously designated as reserved for small or compact cars only.
c. Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel parking, the
dimensions of such parking spaces shall be not less than 22 feet by nine feet.
(2) Parking aisle and driveway dimensions.
a. Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the
width requirement according to the angle of parking.
Parking Angle (in degrees)
Aisle Width 0 30 45 60 90
One-Way Traffic 12 10 12 16 22
Two-Way Traffic 18 19 20 22 22
b. Driveways providing access to parking aisles shall be not less than ten feet in
width for one-way traffic and 18 feet in width for two-way traffic, except that tenfoot-
wide driveways are permissible for two-way traffic when; (i) the driveway is
not longer than 50 feet; (ii) it provides access to not more than six spaces; and (iii)
sufficient turning space is provided so that vehicles need not back into a public
street.
(3) Design requirements.
a. Unless no other practicable alternative is available, parking areas shall be
designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit
such areas without backing onto a public street. This requirement does not apply
to parking areas consisting of driveways that serve one- or two-family dwellings,
although backing onto arterial streets is discouraged.
b. Parking areas of all developments shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency,
and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without the
necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or
hazardous turning movements.
c. Every parking area shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend beyond the
perimeter of such area onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such
areas shall also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend
to bump against or damage any wall, vegetation or other obstruction.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:48
d. Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without
posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with
parking areas.
e. The standards of the City of Lewiston's Site Plan Review and Design Guidelines
shall apply to design and layout of parking areas.
f. Parking space and aisle and driveway dimensions for nonresidential projects that
are classified as minor developments under this Code may be modified in
connection with development review pursuant to article XIII hereof if no
practicable alternative is available and all other provisions of this subsection are
met.
(g) Construction of off-street parking facilities.
(1) Parking areas that; (a) include lanes for drive-in windows; or (b) are required to have
more than six parking spaces and that are used regularly at least five days per week shall
be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material that will provide
equivalent protection against potholes, erosion and dust. The base of parking areas and
driveways shall consist of a minimum of 12 inches of gravel. If bituminous surfacing is
used, it shall consist of one and one-half inches of B mix and one inch of C mix laid in
two courses or equivalent as approved by the city engineer.
(2) Parking areas that are not provided with the type of surface specified in subsection (g)(1)
shall be graded and surfaced with crushed stone, gravel, or other suitable material to
provide a surface that is stable and will help to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of
such parking areas shall be defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar
devices. In addition, whenever such a parking area abuts a paved street, the driveway
leading from such street to such area shall be paved as provided in subsection (1) for a
distance of 15 feet back from the edge of the paved street. This subsection shall not apply
to single-family or two-family dwellings or other uses that are required to have only one
or two parking spaces.
(3) Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with subsection (g)(1) shall be
appropriately demarcated with painted lines or other markings. Parking spaces in areas
surfaced in accordance with subsection (g)(2) shall be demarcated whenever practicable.
(4) Parking areas shall be properly maintained in all respects. In particular, and without
limiting the foregoing, parking area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from
potholes, etc.) and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly visible and
distinct.
(5) When it has been determined under article XII, section 17(d) that a specific use requires
less parking spaces than otherwise required, the additional parking spaces based on the
listed use may be just shown as reserved on the plans. In addition, a developer may
implement transportation demand management programs to reduce the need for off-street
parking. The programs could involve strategies to involve more interurban transit use, car
and van pooling, employee pick-up plans, flexible workhour schedules, subscription bus
service and other similar incentives. These programs must be approved by the reviewing
body prior to implementation and may not reduce the number of required spaces by more
than 25 percent.
For projects classified as major under this Code utilizing the transportation demand
management program provisions, or projects classified as minor under this Code that are
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:49
proposing expansion, the reduced number of spaces must also be shown as reserved on
the plans. Reserved parking spaces for all projects shall not be used for any purpose other
than open space, and the reserved area may not be used to meet the minimum open space
ratio. If the use changes with respect to the need for the additional spaces, or if the
transportation demand management program is not successfully implemented, the
additional number of spaces shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable design
standards within 60 days of the change of use or determination that the transportation
demand management program has not been successfully implemented.
For projects classified as minor under this Code utilizing the transportation demand
management program, but not proposing any expansion, the occupancy permit shall be
contingent on the satisfactory implementation of program. The required additional spaces
shall be provided within 60 days of a determination that the program has not been
successfully implemented. Otherwise, the use must cease or be converted to one that
meets the required parking standards.
(h) Joint use of parking facilities.
(1) One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but
except as otherwise provided in this section, the required space assigned to one
use may not be credited to any other use.
(2) To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking
spaces operate at different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses.
For example, if a parking lot is used in connection with an office building on
Monday through Friday but is generally 90 percent vacant on weekends, another
development that operates only on weekends could be credited with 90 percent of
the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church parking lot is generally occupied only to 50
percent of capacity on days other than Sunday, another development could make
use of 50 percent of the church lot's spaces on those other days.
(i) Other use of parking facilities. Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only,
with no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. The required
parking areas shall be permanently available for use by patrons and employees of establishments
providing such space.
(j) Off-street loading.
(1) Subject to subsection (5), whenever the normal operation of any development requires
that goods, merchandise or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that
development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in
accordance with this section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a
safe and convenient manner.
(2) The loading and unloading area must be of sufficient size to accommodate the numbers
and types of vehicles that are likely to use this area, given the nature of the development
in question. The following table indicates the number and size of spaces that,
presumptively, satisfy the standard set forth in this subsection. However, the planning
board may require more or less loading and unloading area if reasonably necessary to
satisfy the foregoing standard.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:50
Gross Leasable Area of Building Number of spaces*
5,000-- 79,999 1
80,000--127,999 2
128,000--191,999 3
192,000--255,999 4
256,000--319,999 5
320,000--391,999 6
Plus one space for each additional 72,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
*Minimum distance of 12 feet times 55 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet from street
grade required.
(3) Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended
to use them can; (a) maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way;
and (b) complete the loading and unloading operations without obstruction or interfering
with any public right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle.
(4) No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area
requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be
used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
(5) Whenever; (a) there exists a lot with one or more structures on it constructed before the
effective date of this Code; and (b) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement
of a structure is proposed for such lot; and (c) the loading area requirements of this
section cannot be satisfied because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can
practicably be used for loading and unloading, then the developer need only comply with
this section to the extent reasonably possible, except as provided for in the district
regulations of the urban enterprise district.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 91-8, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 05-07, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 06-04, 4-20-06; Ord.
No. 10-03, 03-04-10; Ord. 18-11, 11-15-18)
Sec. 18. Improvement standards.
The following standards shall apply to the design and construction of public and private
improvements as part of any project requiring development review:
(1) Public streets. Any street, governed by this Code, which is proposed to be dedicated to
the city as a public street shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City of
Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks, adopted by
the city council pursuant to chapter 66, article IV, section 66-96 of this Code.
(2) Private/mobile home park roads. Private roads may be constructed as part of a
residential, commercial, or industrial development, and mobile home park roads may be
constructed as part of a mobile home park upon approval of the planning board. The
planning board shall approve a private/mobile home park road only if it finds that all of
the following have been met:
a. The development served by the private/mobile home park road has direct access
onto a public street;
b. The private/mobile home park road will not serve property outside of the
development and it is unnecessary to provide for the extension of the street
system to provide access to unsubdivided or undeveloped property;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:51
c. The developer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning board that
satisfactory legal arrangements exist to assure the long-term maintenance, repair
and replacement of the private infrastructure, including roads, sanitary and storm
sewer systems, and water supply systems;
d. The private/mobile home park road is constructed in accordance with the
standards of the City of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of
Streets and Sidewalks and;
e. All approved plans contain a note that reads "the roads shown on this plan as
private/mobile home park roads shall not be maintained by the City of Lewiston".
(3) Sanitary sewers. Any sanitary sewer constructed as part of a project requiring
development approval shall conform to the following standards:
a. The design and construction shall conform to the City of Lewiston's Department
of Public Services Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and
Sidewalks.
(4) Water supply system. Any water supply system constructed as part of a project requiring
development approval shall conform to the following standards:
a. The design and construction shall conform to the City of Lewiston's Department
of Public Services Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(5) Stormwater system. Each stormwater system constructed as part of a project requiring
development approval shall conform to the City of Lewiston's Department of Public
Services Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 01-23, 2-7-02; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 19. Environmental performance standards.
The following standards shall apply to all nonresidential uses in the city:
(1) Smoke.
a. For the purposes of determining the density of equivalent opacity of smoke, the
Ringlemann Chart, as adopted and published by the United States Department of
Interior, Bureau of Mines Information Circular 8333, May 1967, shall be used.
The Ringlemann number referred to in this section refers to the number of the
area of the Ringlemann Chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of
equivalent opacity of the emission of smoke observed. For example, a reading of
Ringlemann No. 1 indicates a 20 percent density of the smoke observed.
b. All measurements shall be taken at the point of emission of the smoke.
c. In all residential districts and the OR district, no nonresidential use may emit from
a vent, stack, chimney, or combustion process any smoke that is visible to the
naked eye.
d. In the IO, CB, HB, D, OS and UE districts, no nonresidential use may emit from a
vent, stack, chimney, or combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or
equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 1, except that an emission that does not
exceed a density or equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 2 is permissible for a
duration of not more than four minutes during any eight-hour period if the source
of such emission is not located within 250 feet of a residential district.
e. In the I District, no nonresidential use may emit from a vent, stack, chimney, or
combustion process any smoke that exceeds a density or equivalent capacity of
Ringlemann No. 2, except that an emission that does not exceed a density or
equivalent capacity of Ringlemann No. 3 is permissible for a duration not more
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:52
than four minutes during any eight-hour period if the source of emission is not
located within 500 feet of a residential district.
(2) Noise.
a. A decibel is a measure of a unit of sound pressure. Since sound waves having the
same decibel level "sound" louder or softer to the human ear depending upon the
frequency of the sound wave in cycles-per-second (i.e., whether the pitch of the
sound is high or low) an A-weighted filter constructed in accordance with the
specifications of the American National Standards Institute, which automatically
takes account of the varying effect on the human ear of different pitches, shall be
used on any sound level meter taking measurements required by this section. And
accordingly, all measurements are expressed in dB(A) to reflect the use of this Aweighted
filter.
b. The standards established in the table set forth below are expressed in terms of the
Equivalent Sound Level (Leq), which must be calculated by taking 100
instantaneous A-weighted sound levels at ten-second intervals and computing the
Leq.
c. Except as provided in subsections d. and e., the following table establishes the
maximum permissible noise levels for nonresidential uses. Measurements shall be
taken at the boundary line of the lot where the nonresidential use is located, and,
as indicated, the maximum permissible noise levels vary according to the zoning
of the lot adjacent to the lot on which the use is located.
Table of Maximum Permitted
Sound Levels, dB(A)
Zoning of Adjacent Lot
Residential
and OR
Business IO,
OS and UE
I
Maximum sound level 50 60 70
d. In cases where measurements taken in accordance with subsections a. and b.
demonstrate that the existing Leq exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels
established in subsection c., then the nonresidential use may not generate sound
levels greater than the measured existing sound levels.
e. Impact noises are sounds that occur intermittently rather than continuously.
Impact noises generated by sources that do not operate more than one minute in
any one-hour period are permissible up to a level of ten dB(A) in excess of the
figures listed in the table, except that this higher level of permissible noise shall
not apply from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. when the adjacent lot is zoned residential.
The impact noise shall be measured using the fast response of the sound level
meter.
f. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(3) Vibration.
a. No nonresidential use in any residential, business, OR or IO district may generate
any ground-transmitted vibration that is perceptible to the human sense of touch
measured at; (a) the outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:53
enterprise generating the vibration if the enterprise is one of several located on a
lot; or (b) the lot line if the enterprise generating the vibration is the only
enterprise located on a lot.
b. No nonresidential use in an OS, UE or I district may generate any groundtransmitted
vibration in excess of the limits set forth in subsection (3)e. Vibration
shall be measured at any adjacent lot line or residential district line as indicated in
the table set forth in subsection (3)e.
c. The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a three-component measuring
system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three mutually
perpendicular directions.
d. The vibration maximums set forth in subsection (3)e. are stated in terms of
particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or
computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the
following formula shall be used:
PV = 6.28 F × D
Where:
PV = Particle velocity, inches-per-second
F = Vibration frequency, cycles-per-second
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches.
The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three (3) components
recorded.
e. Table of maximum ground-transmitted vibration.
Particle Velocity,
Inches-Per-Second
Adjacent Lot
Line Residential District
0.20 0.02
f. The values stated in subsection e. may be multiplied by two for impact vibrations,
i.e., discrete vibration pulsations not exceeding one second in duration and having
a pause of at least one second between pulses.
g. Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7
a.m. and 7 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(4) Odors.
a. For purposes of this section, the "odor threshold" is defined as the minimum
concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter than can be detected by
the olfactory systems of a panel of healthy observers.
b. No nonresidential use in any district may generate any odor that reaches the odor
threshold, measured at the lot line of the enterprise generating the odor.
(5) Air pollution.
a. Any nonresidential use that emits any "air contaminant" as defined by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection shall comply with applicable state
standards concerning air pollution.
b. No zoning or conditional use permit may be issued with respect to any
development covered by subsection a. until the Maine Department of
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:54
Environmental Protection has certified to the city that the appropriate state
permits have been received by the developer, or that the developer will be eligible
to receive such permits and that the development is otherwise in compliance with
applicable air pollution laws.
(6) Electrical disturbance or interference. No use may:
a. Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or
equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance; or
b. Otherwise cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals
(including television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the
operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is
adversely affected.
(Ord. No. 89-16, 11-30-89)
Sec. 20. Child care facility standards.
The following standards shall apply to the establishment and operation of all child care facilities
in the City of Lewiston in addition to any Maine Department of Human Services licensing
requirements.
(a) Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that all child care facilities
operate in a safe and convenient manner; to maintain adequate care and protection for
those children who attend these facilities; to minimize the potential impact of these
facilities upon the value and quiet possession of surrounding properties; and to maintain
the general health, safety and welfare of the city. For the purposes of this section, a child
care facility shall be defined as a house, dwelling unit, building, structure or other place
in which a person, or combination of persons provides child care for three or more
children under 13 years of age.
(b) Standards for establishing a child care facility. The code enforcement official shall grant
all necessary permits for the establishment of a child care facility provided that the
following standards for operating a child care facility have been met:
(1) Buffering. All day care centers that abut a residential zoning district or a property
in residential use shall provide buffering in accordance with the site plan review
and design guidelines, as amended.
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian access. All proposed child care facilities shall provide
safe and convenient access to, into and within the site. Existing driveways shall be
enlarged and/or relocated when the code enforcement official determines that the
existing driveway does not provide safe and convenient access into the site.
Pedestrian walkways and child drop-off and pick-up areas shall be separated from
vehicular access ways whenever possible to minimize potential conflicts.
Vehicles backing into a city street shall be discouraged whenever possible. In
those instances where additional maneuvering room is not available on site, and
vehicles must back into a city street, the code enforcement official may grant a
waiver to this requirement provided that there is adequate sight distance available
for exiting the site. However, for all proposed child care facilities located along
the following streets, vehicles shall be prohibited from backing into these streets:
Central Avenue (from Sabattus Street to Montello Street);
College Street;
East Avenue;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:55
Lisbon Street;
Main Street;
Montello Street;
Old Greene Road;
Pleasant Street;
Pond Road;
Russel Street;
Sabattus Street;
Webster Street.
The code enforcement official may grant a waiver to this prohibition if the
applicant submits a report from a traffic engineer stating that backing into the
aforementioned streets, from the property under consideration, shall not create
any unsafe conditions.
(3) Off-street parking/drop-off and pick-up areas. All proposed child care facilities shall
provide adequate off-street parking for all full and/or part time employees.
i. For family day care homes, parking spaces may be arranged in a stacked manner,
no more than two vehicles deep, where one vehicle is parked behind the other as
long as the maneuvering on-site is safe and convenient. For small day care
facilities and day care centers, only staff parking may be arranged in a stacked
manner where one vehicle is parked behind the other as long as the maneuvering
on-site is safe and convenient. The required front, side and rear yards for the
zoning district in which the child care facility is proposed must be maintained,
unless modified pursuant to article IX. If the child care facility will operate with
more than one shift, the number of parking stalls shall reflect the greatest number
of employees in any one shift.
ii. The parking requirements for all child care facilities shall be as follows:
Family day care homes: In addition to the existing on-site parking required for the
residential use, one additional on-site parking stall shall be required for each staff
person.
Small day care facilities: One on-site parking stall for each staff person.
Day care centers: One on-site parking stall for each staff person.
iii. All proposed child care facilities shall also provide adequate drop-off and pick-up
areas. These areas shall be safe and convenient, and shall not conflict with on-site
pedestrian and vehicular movements. All drop-off and pick-up shall occur on-site
unless otherwise permitted pursuant to article XII, section 17 (e). One parking
space shall be provided for drop-off and pick-up purposes based on a ratio of one
space per six children. These spaces shall not be arranged in a stacked manner.
iv. In the event that the code enforcement official determines that a proposed child
care facility has less demand for drop-off, pick-up and parking due to interurban
transit use, car and van pooling, bus service, foot traffic, etc. the above
requirements may be reduced to reflect the anticipated demand. The code
enforcement official may also reduce the above referenced parking requirements
upon the applicant submitting a report from a licensed traffic engineer
demonstrating the parking demand based on a comparison to at least three other
comparable sized child care facilities, including, but not limited to the number of
children attending the facility; the number of children licensed for the facility;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XII:56
location of the facility, etc. This report may be subject to a peer review conducted
by the City at the applicant’s cost.
v. Notwithstanding the above, there are no parking requirements for drop-off, pickup
and staff parking for family day care homes located on streets other than those
identified in the above subsection.
vi. Off-street parking for child care facilities must meet the off-street parking and
loading provisions contained in article XII, section 17 (e), (f), and (g) (1-4) of the
Zoning and Land Use Code.
(4) Licensing requirements. All child care facilities shall be licensed by the department of
human services.
(5) Outdoor play area requirements. Child care facilities shall meet satisfy the requirements
for outdoor play area as prescribed by the department of human services.
(Ord. No. 97-7, 9-11-97; Ord. No. 03-18, 1-1-04; Ord. No. 06-12, 8-24-06; Ord. No. 15-09, 9-10-15)
Sec. 21. Reserved.
Editor's note: Ord. No. 06-17, effective Feb. 8, 2007, repealed art. XII, § 21, in its entirety. Formerly,
said section pertained to additional standards for stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control.
Sec. 22. Residential design standards for the downtown residential and riverfront districts.
(a) New residential development in the downtown residential (DR) and riverfront (RF)
districts shall be reviewed for compliance with the following development standards. The
general intent of these standards is to achieve an attractive city neighborhood environment,
fostering a sense of community and place. Varied and human-scaled building facades are key to
making a place "pedestrian-oriented", as well as friendlier and safer. Building designs should
provide a high level of visual interest and include design elements that enhance the streetscape.
(1) Porches and bays should face the street;
(2) Primary ground floor residential entries to multifamily building must orient to streets, not
to interior blocks or parking lots. Secondary and upper-floor entries from the interior of a
block are acceptable. The front door to single-family homes, duplexes and townhouses
must be visible from the street;
(3) The design approach shall provide an architecture that will be a visible and permanent
expression of the character of the neighborhood through appropriately scaled entries,
porches, fenestration, landscaping and architectural details;
(4) The facade shall be varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians;
(5) Each project must provide visual and acoustical privacy between units and shall
maximize natural light and ventilation within units.
(Ord. No. 00-19, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 09-08, 12-31-09)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:1
Sec. 1. Purpose.
The purpose of development review is to provide for the review and approval of development
plans for nonresidential and residential developments including, but not limited to, subdivisions
and mobile home parks to insure that the development of both private and public land occurs in a
manner which minimizes the adverse impact on public facilities, the natural environment and
neighboring uses, and to otherwise protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people.
(Ord. No. 99-11, 5-20-99; Ord. No. 99-15, 8-12-99)
Sec. 2. Applicability.
(a) The requirements of this article shall apply to the following:
(1) The creation of a subdivision as defined under 30-A M.R.S.A., § 4401, as amended;
(2) The construction of any new, nonresidential building or structure;
(3) The expansion of an existing nonresidential building or structure provided such
expansion involves at least 1,000 square feet of total floor area. However, expansions of
buildings or structures reviewed and approved under development review, may be
determined by the planning director or designee to be of a de minimis nature and can be
processed in accordance with the procedures under subsection 3(k) below;
(4) The conversion of an existing building from residential to nonresidential uses unless the
planning director or designee determines the conversion does not constitute an
intensification and/or will have minimal impacts on adjacent residential properties;
(5) The construction of any new residential structure, conversion of an existing building into
a residential use, the creation of a bed and breakfast establishment with five or six rooms,
or the modification of an existing residential structure that results in the net creation of
three or more dwelling units;
(6) Earth moving, removal, grading, or filling activities which involve more than 5,000 cubic
yards of material which is not associated with a building construction project and for
which no permit is required pursuant to chapter 66 or 74 of the Code of Ordinances;
(7) The development or expansion of a mobile home park;
(8) The change of an existing nonresidential building or structure from one use to another use
where the proposed use is more intensive than the existing use; or the intensification of
any use;
(9) The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings or structures are
proposed;
(10) The amendment or reconfiguration of an approved subdivision as defined by 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4401, as amended or the amendment of any other development, as defined
herein, for which development approval was previously obtained under this article or the
amendment to any plan approved by the planning board under the Code of Ordinances in
effect prior to January 9, 1988, unless determined by the planning director or designee to
be a de minimis change and therefore can be processed in accordance with the procedures
under subsection 3(k) below;
(11) The creation of a right-of-way for the purpose of allowing a residential lot to gain
required frontage pursuant to article XII, section 10; or
(12) The modernization modifications of existing gasoline service stations that involve
existing nonconforming pump island replacement.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:2
(13) The City of Lewiston has also been granted the authority to substitute their review and
approval for the following kinds of projects that require a permit from the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP):
a. Subdivisions as described in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 482, subsection 5, as amended,
of more than 20 acres but less than 100 acres;
b. Structures as described in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 482, subsection 6, Paragraph B, as
amended, in excess of three acres, but less than seven acres of nonrevegetated
ground area;
c. Projects requiring a permit under the State Stormwater Management Law, as
described in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 420-D.
(14) The City of Lewiston has also been granted the authority to substitute their review and
approval for the following kinds of projects that require a permit from the Maine
Department of Transportation (MDOT):
a. A project generating 100 to 200 passenger car equivalents at peak hour as
described in 23 M.R.S.A., Section 704-A subsection 2 and 4. [For the purposes of
this article, passenger car equivalents at peak hour means the number of passenger
cars, or, in the case of nonpassenger vehicles, the number of passenger cars that
would be displaced by nonpassenger vehicles, that pass through an intersection or
on a roadway under prevailing roadway and traffic conditions at that hour of the
day during which the traffic volume generated by the development is higher than
the volume during any other hour of the day. A one tractor-trailer combination is
the equivalent of two passenger cars. (See 23 M.R.S.A. Section 704-A subsection
1-B.]
b. A project generating 200 or more passenger car equivalents at peak hour
(provided there is no impact in any other municipality other than Lewiston as
described in 23 M.R.S.A., Section 704, subsections A(2) and (4)).
(b) This section does not apply to the construction of single-family homes or two-family
homes, the placement of manufactured housing or mobile homes on individual lots, agricultural
buildings or structures, agriculture and forest management and timber harvesting activities.
(c) No building permit, plumbing permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a
development within the scope of this article unless and until a final plan of the development has
been approved in accordance with the procedures set forth in article XIII, section 3.
(d) The city council may from time to time establish reasonable application fees to defray the
costs of reviewing major and minor site plans.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-4, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 91-1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 99-15, 8-12-99; Ord.
No. 03-09, 7-17-03; Ord. No. 06-04, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 07-01, 3-8-07; Ord. No.
08-08, 10-2-08)
Sec. 3. Procedure.
(a) Classification of project. Projects subject to development review shall be divided into two
classes, minor developments and major developments:
(1) Minor development.
a. A minor development shall be those projects involving the construction or
addition of less than 5,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area, the conversion
of a residential structure with less than 5,000 square feet of total floor area to a
nonresidential use, the change of use of an existing nonresidential building or
structure, the separate conveyance of attached and detached principal residential
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:3
structures, the construction or alteration of a multifamily residential structure, or a
conversion of a nonresidential building which involves the creation of 12 or less
additional dwelling units, (unless required to be reviewed under state subdivision
law), earth moving, removal, filling or grading activities involving greater than
5,000 cubic yards of material, the creation of a right-of-way for the purpose of
allowing a residential lot to gain required frontage, the establishment of a new
nonresidential use when no buildings or structures are proposed; and the
modernization modifications of existing gasoline service stations that involve
existing nonconforming pump island replacement.
b. Projects otherwise meeting the minor development classification, but requiring
issuance of a conditional use permit, shall be classified as a major project.
c. The planning director or designee may also determine that projects otherwise
meeting the minor development classification be classified as major projects due
to such issues as expected significant public input, impacts to neighborhoods,
natural resources or government services, or other significant potential effects to
public health, welfare or safety.
(2) Major development. Major developments include the following:
a. Projects requiring development review and not classified as minor developments
including those projects that are determined to be applicable under subsections
3(a)(1)(b) and (c) above;
b. Projects which generate 100 or more passenger car equivalents at peak hour; or
c. Projects that require a permit under the State Site Location of Development Act
and/or Stormwater Management Laws.
(b) Review authority. The responsibility for reviewing and approving developments shall rest
with the planning board or the staff review committee depending on the classification of the
project.
(1) Planning board authority. The planning board is authorized to review and act on all
development plans for major developments.
(2) Staff review committee authority. The staff review committee is authorized to review and
act on all development plans for minor developments.
(c) Planning board actions. In considering development plans under this section, the
planning board may act to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove development
applications based on the applicable criteria set forth in this article.
The board shall hear and decide requests for the reduction of the provisions under article
XI, sections 1 through 14, district regulations, with respect to space and bulk standards
for setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum impervious surface ratios,
minimum open space ratios, and maximum building height, where the development is a
major development as defined in article XIII, subsection 3(a)(2) of this Code. In order for
the board to grant the aforementioned relief, it must find that the standards contained in
article IX, sections (3) (9),(10) and (11), as applicable, are met.
(d) Staff review committee actions. In considering development plans under this section, the
staff review committee may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny site plan
applications based on the applicable criteria set forth in this article.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:4
The staff review committee shall consist of the planning director, or designee, who shall
serve as chairman and a representative from the following departments; public services,
planning and code enforcement, police and fire.
Actions by the staff review committee to approve an application or approve an
application with conditions shall require the unanimous consent of the members of the
committee. The disapproval of two or more members of the committee shall constitute
denial of the application.
The staff review committee shall hear and decide requests for the reduction of the
provisions under article XI, sections 1 through 14, district regulations, with respect to
space and bulk standards for setbacks, yards, maximum lot coverage ratios, maximum
impervious surface ratios, minimum open space ratios, and maximum building height,
where the development is a minor development as defined in article XIII, subsection
3(a)(1) of this Code. In order for the committee to grant the aforementioned relief, it must
find that the standards contained in article IX, section 3(9), (10) and (11), as applicable,
are met.
The staff review committee shall hear and decide requests for the separate conveyance of
attached and detached principal residential structures. In order for the committee to grant
such requests, it must find that the standards contained in article V (3)(w) are met.
(e) Pre-application procedures. The applicant for any development approval shall meet with
the planning director or designee prior to the submission of a development plan to generally
discuss the proposal and to obtain guidance in the development of the plan.
The planning director or designee, shall review materials in terms of the requirements of
this Code and shall provide direction to the applicant on the overall suitability of the
proposal, questions or issues to be addressed in the development plan and act on any
modifications or waivers requested by the applicant pursuant to subsection 3(h)(5) of this
article. Modifications or waivers will be granted when the size of the project or
circumstances of the site are such that the requirements would not be applicable or would
be an unnecessary burden upon the applicant and that such modification or waiver would
not adversely affect the abutting landowners or the general health, safety and welfare of
the city, and must be confirmed by the reviewing authority at the meeting.
(f) Application procedures. Applications for development review shall be submitted on
application forms provided by the city. The completed application form, appropriate fee and the
required copies of a complete site plan for the proposed development and any related information
shall be submitted to the office of the planning director.
(g) Application requirements. The application for development review, the site plan and
related submissions shall contain at least the following exhibits and information:
(1) A fully executed and signed copy of the application for development review.
(2) One original of all maps and drawings on durable, permanent transparency material.
(3) Fifteen copies (seven for minor developments) of written materials plus 15 sets (seven for
minor developments) of maps or drawings containing the information listed below. The
written materials shall be contained in a bound report. The maps or drawings shall be at a
scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under approval criteria, but in no case
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:5
shall be more than 50 feet to the inch for that portion of the tract of land being proposed
for development:
a. General information.
1. Record owner's name and address and applicant's name and address if
different.
2. The name of the proposed development.
3. Sketch map showing general location of the site within the city.
4. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or
applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time.
5. The tax map number and street or parcel number of the parcel or parcels.
6. A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the property or
other documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property
on the part of the applicant.
7. The name, registration number and seal of the land surveyor, architect,
engineer and/or similar professional who prepared the plan.
b. Existing conditions.
1. Zoning classification(s) of the property and the location of zoning district
boundaries if the property is located in two or more zoning districts or
abuts a different district.
2. The bearings and distances of all property lines of the property to be
developed and the source of this information.
3. Location and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and
drains on the property to be developed and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land.
4. Location, names, and present widths of existing streets and rights-of-way
within or adjacent to the proposed development.
5. The location, dimensions and ground floor elevations of all existing
buildings on the site.
6. The location and dimensions of existing driveways, streets, parking and
loading areas and walkways on the site.
7. Location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the site.
8. The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, stands of trees and other
important natural features, with a description of such features to be
retained.
9. The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site.
10. The location, front view and dimensions of existing signs.
11. Location and dimensions of any existing easements and copies of existing
covenants or deed restrictions.
c. Proposed development activity.
1. The location of all building setbacks, yards and buffers required by this
Code.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:6
2. The location, dimensions, and ground floor elevations of all proposed
buildings on the site.
3. The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking and loading
areas, and walkways.
4. The location and dimensions of all provisions for water supply and
wastewater disposal.
5. The direction of proposed surface water drainage across the site.
6. Location of all proposed signs.
7. Location and type of exterior lighting.
8. Proposed landscaping and buffering.
9. Copies of applicable state approvals and permits, provided, however, that
the board or staff review committee may approve development plans
subject to the issuance of specified state approvals and permits where it
determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to obtain them at the
time of development review.
10. A schedule of construction, including anticipated beginning and
completion dates.
Space shall be provided on the plan for the signature of the chair of the reviewing
body and dates of the meeting and the signature together with the following
words, "Approved: City of Lewiston".
(4) Additional information that may be required due to the nature of the project:
a. Existing and proposed topography of the site at two-foot contour intervals.
b. A stormwater drainage and erosion control plan showing:
1. The existing and proposed method of handling stormwater runoff.
2. The direction of flow of the runoff through the use of arrows.
3. The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, dry wells, drainage
ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers, and all other
stormwater management structures.
4. Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements as
specified by subsection 4(f) of this article.
5. Methods of controlling erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction.
c. A groundwater impact analysis prepared by a groundwater hydrologist for
projects involving common on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities with
a capacity of 2,000 gallons per day or greater or for projects located within the
groundwater conservation overlay district.
d. A utility plan showing, in addition to provisions for water supply and wastewater
disposal, the location and nature of electrical, telephone and any other utility
services to be installed on the site.
e. A planting schedule keyed to the site plan and indicating the general varieties and
sizes of trees, shrubs and other plants to be planted on the site.
f. A traffic impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the proposed project on the
capacity, level of service and safety of adjacent streets.
g. A written statement as to the adequacy of the water supply in terms of quantity
and pressure for both domestic and fire flows.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:7
h. The location, width, typical cross-section, grades and profiles of all proposed
streets and sidewalks.
i. Construction drawings for streets, sanitary sewers, water and storm drainage and
management systems, designed and prepared by a professional engineer registered
in the State of Maine.
j. Proposed lot lines with their dimensions and the location of required setbacks. If
the development involves a subdivision consisting of principal buildings on the
same lot, the locations, building outlines, and dimensions of all buildings, with
setback dimensions, shall be shown.
k. Lots and blocks within a subdivision numbered in accordance with local practice.
l. The location of any pedestrian ways, lots, easements, open spaces and other areas
to be reserved for or dedicated to public use and/or ownership. For any proposed
easement, the developer shall submit the proposed easement language with a
signed statement certifying that the easement will be executed upon approval of
the development. In the case of any streets or other ways dedicated to public
ownership, the developer shall submit a signed statement that he will maintain
such streets or ways year-round until they are accepted by the city.
m. Sufficient data acceptable to the city engineer to determine readily the location,
bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, easement, and boundary line and
to reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practical, these should be tied to
reference points previously established and the data transferred in an appropriate
electronic file format.
n. A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions, if any, as are intended to cover all
or part of the tract. Such covenants or deed restrictions shall be referenced on the
plan.
o. Written offers of dedication or conveyance to the municipality, in a form
satisfactory to the city attorney, of all land included in the streets, highways,
easements, parks, or other open space dedicated for public use, and copies of
agreements or other documents showing the manner in which spaces, title to
which is reserved by the developer, are to be maintained.
p. If the development is a condominium or a clustered development, evidence that
all requirements relative to establishment of a homeowners' association or
condominium owners' association have been met. If the development is a
clustered development, evidence shall be presented that all other requirements of
this Code pertaining to clustered development have been met. The submission
shall include copies of the by-laws of any homeowners' or condominium
association charged with maintaining common spaces and lands. Homeowners'
association or condominium documents shall clearly state that the association or
condominium shall properly maintain private roadways and stormwater
management systems serving the development after the developer has legally
relinquished that responsibility and until such time as the city may accept them as
public ways.
q. A performance guarantee in a form and amount meeting the requirements of
article XIII, section 12 to secure the completion of all public improvements
required by the planning board in a form acceptable to the city. The guarantee
need not be submitted as part of the application, but must be submitted before the
plan is signed. The plan shall not be deemed approved until the performance
guarantee has been filed. Cost estimates of the proposed public improvements
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:8
obtained by the applicant from a licensed professional engineer who, in the
planning board's judgment, is qualified to make such estimates, shall be submitted
as part of the final plan application. If a conditional agreement is to be filed in lieu
of the performance guarantee, it must be endorsed by the planning board on the
plan and meet the requirements under article XIII, section 12.
r. Cost of the proposed development and evidence of financial capacity to complete
it. This evidence should be in the form of a commitment letter from a bank or
other source of financing indicating the name of the project and amount of
financing proposed.
(5) The planning board or staff review committee shall confirm the modification or waiver of
any of the submission requirements in article XIII, subsection 3(g) recommended by the planning
director or designee, when it determines that because of the size of the project or circumstances
of the site such requirements would not be applicable or would be an unnecessary burden upon
the applicant and that such modification or waiver would not adversely affect the abutting
landowners or the general health, safety and welfare of the city.
(h) Review procedures. The following procedures shall be used for the review of
development applications:
(1) Minor developments. Upon receipt of an application for a minor development, the
planning director shall, within five working days, determine substantial completeness of
the application and, if so determined, notify the applicant in writing that the application is
substantially complete, additional information necessary to complete the application the
date, time and place on which the staff review committee will consider the application.
Staff shall notify all abutting property owners and the appropriate municipality when a
development review project abuts or is in close proximity to an adjacent municipality's
border, by mail sent no less than seven days prior to the meeting, of: the pending
application, the opportunity to submit written comments on the application to the office
of the planning director, and the date, time and place of the staff review committee
meeting at which the application will be considered. If the application is not substantially
complete, the planning director shall notify the applicant of the additional information
necessary to complete the application. Upon determination of substantial completeness,
the planning director shall also transmit copies of the plans and related information to the
following departments; public services, planning and code enforcement, police and fire.
The staff review committee shall meet to review the application and the committee shall
approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. A written record of the staff
review committee's meeting shall be maintained and shall be available for public
inspection. The committee shall act on each application within 30 days of the date on
which said application was determined by the planning director to be complete so long as
the required notice to abutters has been given, or at its next regularly scheduled meeting
after said required notice has been given, whichever occurs later.
Within five working days of the date of the committee's action, the office of the planning
director shall notify the applicant in writing thereof.
(2) Major developments. Upon receipt of an application for a major development, the
planning director shall review said application for substantial completeness and if so
determined, schedule a review of said application before the planning board and notify
the applicant and all abutting property owners, by mail, sent no less than seven days prior
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:9
to the meeting, of the pending application, the opportunity to submit written comments
on the application to the planning board on or before the date of said review and the date,
time and place of the planning board meeting at which the application will be considered.
All reviews of applications for development review shall be public hearings, and shall be
held within 30 days of the date the planning director determined the application to be
substantially complete and shall advertise said public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least six
days prior to the date of the hearing.
The planning board shall take final action on said application within 30 days of the public
hearing.
Except for developments which involve the creation of a subdivision as defined by 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 4401 as amended, the limits provided for in this subsection may be
extended by mutual agreement between the planning director and the applicant. For those
developments which involve the creation of a subdivision as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 4401 as amended, the limits provided in this subsection may be extended only by
mutual agreement between the planning board and the applicant.
(i) Building permit. One copy of the notice of approval of the application shall be included
in the application for a building permit and shall become part of the permit.
(j) Appeals of staff decisions. The applicant or any participating abutter may appeal the
action of the staff review committee to the board of appeals within 15 days of the committee
action.
(k) De minimis changes to development plans. The planning director or designee may
determine amendments to a development plan are "de minimis," that is of a minor nature, and do
not require a formal review process. Accordingly, the amended plan can be signed directly by the
planning director or designee. However, amendments to developments which involve the
creation of a subdivision as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4401, as amended, will require
signature of the amended plan by the planning board chair, who may request that the de minimis
change be brought before the board for their review and approval prior to the signing of the
permanent copy of the plan (mylar.) A report of all approved de minimis changes will be
submitted to the planning board or staff review committee as appropriate at their next available
meeting.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-4, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 94-18, 12-1-94; Ord. No. 95-10, 9-14-95; Ord.
No. 98-6, 7-2-98; Ord. No. 98-12, 11-19-98; Ord. No. 99-15, 8-12-99; Ord. No. 03-09, 7-17-03; Ord. No.
03-17, 1-1-04; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07)
Sec. 4. Approval criteria.
The following criteria are to be used by the staff review committee and the planning board in
judging applications for development review and shall serve as minimum requirements for
approval of the application. The application shall be approved unless the staff review committee
or the planning board determines that the applicant has failed to meet one or more of these
standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such burden of proof
shall include the production of evidence sufficient to warrant a finding that all applicable criteria
have been met.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:10
(a) Utilization of the site. The plan for the development will reflect the natural capabilities of
the site to support development. Buildings, lots and support facilities will be clustered in those
portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development. Environmentally
sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains and unique natural features will be
maintained and preserved to the maximum extent. Natural drainage areas will be preserved to the
maximum extent.
(b) Traffic movement into and out of the development area. The developer has made
adequate provision for traffic movement of all types into and out of the development area.
Vehicular access to the site will be on roads which have adequate capacity to accommodate the
additional traffic generated by the development. Intersections on major access routes to the site
within one-half mile of any entrance road which are functioning at a level of service of C or
better prior to the development will function at a minimum at level of service C after
development. If any intersection is functioning at a level of service D or lower prior to the
development, the project will not reduce the current level of service. If a development is located
in the highway business (HB), community business (CB), centreville (CV), mill (M), riverfront
(RF), urban enterprise (UE), office service (OS), office residential (OR), and industrial (I)
districts, which are designated as growth areas within the comprehensive plan, and the plan has
been found by the state to be consistent with the growth management program under Title 30-A,
Chapter 187, the planning board or staff review committee shall require improvements to the
level of traffic service only if the level of service adjacent to or in the vicinity of the development
is or would be level of service E or F, as determined by the City of Lewiston's Engineering
Department and/or LACTS. In these cases, improvements shall be required so as to bring the
traffic service to, at minimum, level of service D. All level of service determinations shall be
made in accordance with the "Highway Capacity Manual" (3rd Ed. 1994), and as described in the
site plan review and design guidelines.
Before granting approval for any development, the planning board or staff review committee
shall determine that any traffic increase attributable to the proposed development will not result
in unreasonable congestions or unsafe conditions on a road in the vicinity of the proposed
development. The applicant shall provide to the City of Lewiston with an analysis of traffic
movement of all types into and out of the development area and with a statement of
recommended findings on traffic issues, after consulting, as necessary, with the Maine
Department of Transportation (MDOT), the City of Lewiston Engineering Department, and the
Lewiston-Auburn Comprehensive Traffic Study (LACTS). The reviewing body may require this
analysis to be done by a registered professional engineer. In all cases where the passenger car
equivalents at peak hour is 100 or greater, the project must be reviewed by the planning board
and a registered professional engineer shall prepare the analysis and recommendations. In all
instances, the city shall discuss with the applicant and their representatives the scope of impact
evaluation required for the proposed development to be studied, what other agencies need to be
consulted, and what other information is required. In making its determination under this
subsection, the planning board or staff review committee shall consider the analysis and
recommendations provided by the applicant as well as those submitted by the Maine Department
of Transportation (MDOT), the City of Lewiston Engineering Department, and the Lewiston-
Auburn Comprehensive Traffic Study (LACTS), as applicable. Where required by state law, the
applicant shall provide notice to affected abutting municipalities.
The planning board or staff review committee may approve a development not meeting this
requirement if the applicant demonstrates that:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:11
(1) A public agency has committed funds to construct the improvements necessary to bring
the level of access to this standard; or
(2) The applicant will assume financial responsibility for the improvements necessary to
bring the level of service to this standard and will guarantee the completion of the
improvements within one year of approval of the project.
(c) Access into the site. Vehicular access into the development will provide for safe and
convenient access.
(1) Grades, intersections, access and sight distances shall be in accordance with the City of
Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(d) Internal vehicular circulation. The layout of the site will provide for the safe movement
of passenger, service and emergency vehicles through the site.
(1) Nonresidential projects will provide a clear route for delivery vehicles with appropriate
geometric design to allow turning and backing for WB-40 vehicles.
(2) Clear routes of access will be provided and maintained for emergency vehicles to all
portions of the site and will be posted with appropriate signage.
(3) The layout and design of parking areas will provide for safe and convenient circulation of
vehicles throughout the lot and will prohibit vehicles from backing out onto a street.
(4) All streets will be designed to harmonize with the topographic and natural features of the
site. The road network will provide for vehicular and pedestrian safety, all season
emergency access, snow storage and delivery and collection services.
a. Residential streets will be curved whenever practicable to the extent necessary to
avoid conformity of lot appearance.
b. Culs-de-sac and loop streets are encouraged so that through traffic on residential
streets is minimized. Similarly, to the extent practicable, driveway access to
collector or arterial streets will be minimized to facilitate the free flow of traffic
and avoid traffic hazards.
c. Streets will be designed to provide for proper continuation of streets from
adjacent development and for proper projection of streets into adjacent
unsubdivided and open land. Where the developer owns substantial contiguous
land that is not part of the proposed development, the planning board may require
a conceptual layout of streets to serve the contiguous land. This layout will not be
binding, but shall provide an indication of how the contiguous area can be served
in relation to the proposed development.
d. Wherever existing or planned streets, topographical features, and public safety
permit, streets will run in east-west directions, and lots on a north-south axis, to
maximize access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems. The character, extent,
width, and grade of all streets will be considered in their relation to existing or
planned streets.
(5) Where a development borders an existing narrow road (below standards set in this Code
for public streets) or when the comprehensive plan indicates plans for realignment or
widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the development, the
applicant shall be required to show areas for widening or realigning such roads on the
plan, marked "Reserved for Road Realignment (or Widening) Purposes." It shall be
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:12
mandatory to indicate such reservation on the plan when a proposed widening or
realignment is shown on the official map. Land reserved for such purposes may not be
counted in satisfying setback or yard or area requirements of the zoning districts.
(6) Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the board
may require marginal access streets (street parallel to arterial street providing access to
adjacent lots), reverse frontage lots (that is, frontage on a street other than the existing or
proposed arterial street) with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along
the rear property line, or such other treatment(s) as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(e) Pedestrian circulation. The development plan will provide for a system of pedestrian
circulation within the development. This system will connect with existing sidewalks if they
exist in the vicinity of the project. The pedestrian network may be located either in the street
right-of-way or outside of the right-of-way in open space or recreation areas. The system will be
designed to link residential units with recreational and commercial facilities, other common
facilities, school bus stops and existing sidewalks in the neighborhood. Sidewalks shall meet the
standards identified in the City of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets
and Sidewalks.
(f) Stormwater management. Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of all
stormwater collected on streets, parking areas, roofs or other impervious surfaces through a
stormwater drainage system which will not have adverse impacts on abutting or downstream
properties. All projects disturbing less than one acre shall be designed to meet the requirements
of this subsection 4(f). All projects including one acre or more of disturbed land shall meet the
requirements of this subsection 4(f) and the requirements of the Site Location of Development
Law, 38 MRSA, 481--490, the Maine Stormwater Management Law, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 420-
D, and regulations promulgated there under, specifically Rules 500, 501, and 502, as amended on
August 12, 2015. At the discretion of the director of public works or his/her designee he/she may
waive the above requirements, based on a finding that a particular site will have no significant
runoff.
(1) The plan will demonstrate the disposal of stormwater on the land at the site of
development, and do so through the wise use of the natural features of the site.
Stormwater runoff systems will infiltrate, detain or retain water falling on the site such
that the rate of flow from the site does not exceed that which would occur in the
predevelopment state for a storm of intensity equal to at least a 2-, 10-, and 25-year
storm, with a duration equal to the time of concentration. The stormwater quantity
calculations must be in accordance with acceptable engineering practice. Acceptable
stormwater methodologies and models include but are not limited to TR-20-Computer
Program for Project Formulation--Hydrology, Second Edition, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (May 1983); TR-55-Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Second Edition, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service
(June 1986); TR-55 Microcomputer Program, Version 2.0, (January 15, 1990); and HEC-
1 Flood Hydrology Package, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Any methodology other
than those listed must have prior approval from the director of public works or his/her
designee. Use of the 25-year, 24-hour storm as a design standard in this chapter is not
intended to prohibit appropriate use of the rational method. The outlet structures of each
detention basin must be designed to control 24-hour storms of 2-, 10-, and 25-year
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:13
frequencies. Each detention basin must be constructed with an emergency spillway
designed to independently convey the unrouted runoff from a 25-year, 24-hour storm
event.
Additionally, a waiver from these standards may be granted by the director of public
works or his/her designee in the cases specifically identified below:
a. Discharge to the Androscoggin River. A project conveys stormwater exclusively
in a manmade piped or open drainage system directly into the Androscoggin
River. Areas of the project or adjoining properties to be flooded during the 2-, 10-
, and 25-year, 24-hour storms must be identified and easements secured, if
necessary. A project that changes the flow-type (example: sheet to shallow
concentrated), changes the flow channel, or increases the stormwater discharge
must secure easements on the intervening property that meet the easement and
covenant requirements following in this section. The discharge may not result in
erosion of any upland or freshwater wetlands. The director of public works or
his/her designee may allow a waiver if it is determined that the increase in peak
flow from the site will not significantly affect the peak flow of the receiving
waters or result in unreasonable adverse impact on the river.
b. Public stormwater system. A project discharges its stormwater flow into the City
of Lewiston Stormwater System, when the applicant has adequately demonstrated
to the director of public works or his/her designee that it has the capacity to
accommodate increases in flow. The director of public works or his/her designee
may allow an insignificant increase in the peak flow from the site or in the peak
flow of the receiving waters, if it is determined that the increase cannot be
avoided by reasonable changes in project design or density and does not
significantly impact abutters or city property.
(2) If the outflow volume is greater than that for the undeveloped site, the developer will
demonstrate that downstream channel or system capacity is sufficient to carry the flow
without adverse effects, or will be responsible for the improvements to provide the
required increase in capacity.
(3) All natural drainage ways will be preserved at their natural gradients and will not be
filled or converted to a closed system except as approved by the director of public works
or his/her designee and appropriate state agencies.
(4) The design of stormwater drainage systems will insure the acceptance and disposal of
stormwater runoff based on quantities calculated per subsection 4(f)(1) above, without
damage to streets, adjacent properties or downstream properties.
(5) The design of the storm drainage systems will be fully cognizant of upstream runoff
which must pass over or through the site to be developed. The system will be designed to
pass upstream flows, based on quantities calculated per subsection 4(f)(1) above, from
the land, as fully developed, without surcharging the system.
(6) The maximum length for carrying open stormwater in a street gutter prior to intake at a
catch basin will be three hundred feet. No stormwater will be permitted to drain on the
surface across a street or across an intersection.
(7) The storm drainage system to serve a proposed development will be designed and
installed in accordance with the plans and specifications prepared by a professional
engineer, unless waived at the discretion of the director of public works or his/her
designee.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:14
(8) The developer will maintain and inspect all components of the stormwater runoff system
unless the system is formally accepted by the city, or is placed under the jurisdiction of a
legally created property owners association whose charter and powers require
maintenance of the system, with adequate financing to carry out this responsibility. Any
approved plans must include a statement as to who will be responsible for said
maintenance and inspections. The components of the stormwater run-off system shall
include, but not be limited to, detention ponds, level spreaders, inlet and outlet protection
and structures, swales, etc., and the piping unless the piping is under an accepted city
street. For piping under accepted city streets, at the time of street acceptance, the piping
shall become the property and maintenance responsibility of the city. An easement shall
be provided to the city for the maintenance of this piping. In addition, a separate access
easement for all other stormwater runoff components shall be provided to the city for
emergency purposes.
(9) The biological and chemical properties of the receiving waters will not be degraded by
the stormwater runoff from the development site. The use of oil and grease traps in
manholes, the use of on-site vegetated waterways, and the reduction in use of deicing
salts and fertilizers may be required, especially where the development stormwater
discharges into a gravel aquifer area or other water supply source.
(10) The filling of wetlands on-site will be conducted only in accordance with applicable
federal and state law and regulations, including the Natural Resources Protection Act.
(g) Erosion control. For all projects, building and site designs and street layouts will fit and
utilize existing topography and desirable natural surroundings to the fullest extent possible.
Filling, excavation and earth moving activity will be kept to a minimum. Parking lots on sloped
areas will be terraced to avoid undue cuts and fills, and the need for retaining walls. Natural
vegetation will be preserved and protected wherever possible. Erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall comply with the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Law, 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-C,
and regulations promulgated thereunder, as amended, both during construction and continuously
after construction is complete. In addition, erosion and sedimentation measures consistent with
the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs, Pub. No. DEPLW0588, published by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (March 2003) shall be implemented.
(1) Storage of fill materials within 50 feet of the banks of any stream, intermittent or
perennial or water body will not be allowed.
(2) The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill will not be closer than ten feet from a property
line.
(3) Removal of topsoil from any lot will not be allowed, except for that removed from areas
to be occupied by buildings, paving or other surfaces that will not be revegetated, or
unless in conformance with the performance standards for earth material removal set
forth in article XII of this Code.
(h) Water supply. The development will be provided with a system of water supply that
provides each use with an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the State of Maine
for drinking water. A water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City
of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks. Developments
and projects that will be provided by private water supplies shall demonstrate sufficient water is
available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the development or project.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:15
(i) Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system will be installed at the expense of the
developer, or, if in the opinion of the planning board, service by a sanitary sewer system is not
feasible, the board may allow individual underground waste disposal systems to be used. A
sewer system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City of Lewiston's Policy
for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(j) Utilities. The development will be provided with electrical and telephone service
adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project.
(1) Each utility system has adequate capacity to service the proposed development.
(2) All overhead utility poles and lines will be located to minimize potential safety hazards
and visual impact to the public. Similarly, transformer boxes, meters, pumping stations
and other components of the utility system located above ground will be located so as not
to be unsightly or hazardous to the public and will be landscaped or otherwise buffered so
as to screen the components from public view.
(k) Natural features. The landscape will be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical
by minimizing tree removal, disturbance and compaction of soil and by retaining existing
vegetation insofar as practical during construction.
(1) Extensive grading and filling will be avoided as far as possible.
(2) Cutting of trees on the northerly borders of the development will be avoided to the extent
possible to retain a natural wind buffer.
(3) The planning board or staff review committee may require a shadow study if it believes
the proposed development may interfere with the solar access of adjacent properties.
(4) If there has been excessive natural vegetation removal from the site since the adoption of
the current zoning and land use code prior to the submittal of an application for
development review, the planning board or staff review committee may require a
regeneration plan to be submitted by a registered forester and to be implemented to
revegetate that portion of the site not directly impacted by the proposed development. For
the purposes of this section, excessive is defined as the removal of more than 60 percent
of trees from a property, either in number of stems or area of tree cover, in any ten-year
period.
(l) Groundwater protection. The proposed site development and use will not adversely
impact either the quality or quantity of groundwater available to abutting properties or public
water supply systems. Projects involving common on-site water supply or sewage disposal
systems with a capacity of 2,000 gallons per day or greater have demonstrated that the
groundwater at the property line will comply, following development, with the standards for safe
drinking water as established by the State of Maine.
(m) Water and air pollution. The proposed development will not result in undue water or air
pollution.
(n) Exterior lighting. The proposed development will provide for adequate exterior lighting
to provide for the safe use of the development in nighttime hours.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:16
(1) All exterior lighting will be designed and shielded to avoid undue adverse impact on
neighboring properties and rights-of-way.
(2) Lighting will be provided, at a minimum, in the following areas:
a. Entrances to facilities and recreation areas;
b. Street intersections;
c. Pedestrian crossings; and
d. Entrance roads.
(o) Waste disposal. The proposed development will provide for adequate disposal of solid
wastes and hazardous wastes.
(1) All solid waste will be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility having adequate capacity
to accept the project's wastes.
(2) All hazardous wastes will be disposed of at a licensed hazardous waste disposal facility
and evidence of a contractual arrangement with the facility has been submitted.
(p) Lot layout.
(q) Landscaping. The development plan will provide for landscaping to define street edges,
break up parking areas, soften the appearance of the development and protect abutting properties
from adverse impacts of the development.
(1) The landscaping plan will comply with the guidelines contained in the City of Lewiston's
Site Plan Review and Design Guidelines as amended.
(r) Shoreland relationship. The development will not adversely affect the water quality or
shoreline of any adjacent water body. The development plan will provide for access to abutting
navigable water bodies for the use of residents of the development.
(s) Open space. The development plan will provide for recreation areas and open space to
meet the needs of residents and users of the development.
(1) For projects involving the construction of ten or more new residential dwelling units, a
portion of the site shall be set aside as permanent open space or recreational land.
(2) The size of the area to be set aside for open space shall be based upon the following:
a. Dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by persons 55 years or older--None.
b. Dwelling units with less than two rooms designed or used for sleeping--Three
hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit.
c. Dwelling units with two rooms designed or used for sleeping--Seven hundred
square feet per dwelling unit.
d. Dwelling units with three or more rooms designed or used for sleeping--One
thousand square feet per dwelling unit.
e. For mobile home parks, the size of the area to be set aside shall be no less than ten
percent of the combined area of the individual lots within the mobile home park.
(3) No portion of the site used to meet the minimum lot size or minimum lot area per
dwelling unit requirements shall be used toward meeting this requirement. This shall
include the required open space in a clustered residential development.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:17
(4) The area to be set aside for open space shall be shown on the development plan and
marked "Reserved for Recreation and/or Conservation Purposes".
(5) The open space provided to meet this requirement shall be owned and managed by one of
the following methods:
a. Continued ownership by the project owner for developments involving rental
housing, mobile home parks and similar situations where the development
remains under single ownership; or
b. Ownership by a condominium or lot owners association for developments
involving the creation of separate lots, condominiums or other situations where
the development is owned by a number of entities; or
c. Dedication of the land to the City of Lewiston as public park land; or
d. Transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a land trust or other recognized
conservation organization.
(6) The planning board shall approve the arrangements for the ownership, control and
maintenance of the open space as part of the approval of the final plan. No changes in the
ownership or management of the open space shall be made without planning board
approval. The arrangements for the ownership and management, if the open space is not
to be dedicated to the city, shall provide for at least the following:
a. That the area shall be permanently maintained as open space.
b. That there shall be no transfer of the open space separately from the remainder of
the development without approval of the planning board.
c. That there shall be no division of the property.
d. That no structures or buildings other than those shown on the approved plan shall
be erected in the open space.
e. That any agricultural or forestry activity be carried out in accordance with an
approved plan of action.
(7) The land designated as open space shall meet the following requirements:
a. The site shall have pedestrian access from a public street or private road and shall
be of such size, shape, and topography as to be usable for open space or recreation
purposes, with at least 50 percent of the land to be suitable to be used for active
recreation, including, but not limited to, softball fields, swimming pools, tennis
courts, bicycle paths, tot lots and hard surface court games.
b. Parcels which can be combined with existing city-owned property, dedicated open
space on adjacent parcels, or with possible future land dedications shall be given
priority.
c. The land will be maintained in a usable condition and retained in a natural state to
the maximum extent practicable. All clearing, grading and material placement or
removal shall be carried out in accordance with the approved landscape plan and
under the supervision of the city engineer and code enforcement officials.
(t) Technical and financial capacity. The applicant has demonstrated that he has the financial
and technical capacity to carry out the project in accordance with this Code and the approved
plan.
(1) The applicant has submitted evidence from a financial institution or other source of
project funding that demonstrates that adequate resources are available to complete the
project in accordance with the approved plans.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:18
(u) Buffering. The development will provide for the buffering of adjacent uses where there is
a transition from one type of use to another use and to screen service and storage areas. The
buffer areas required by the district regulations will be improved and maintained in accordance
with the standards set forth in the City of Lewiston's Site Plan Review and Design Guidelines.
(v) Compliance with district regulations. The applicant has established that the development
will be consistent with the district regulations of article XI.
(w) Design consistent with performance standards. The applicant has so designed the
development as to make it probable that the development and its use will comply with
performance standards of article XII, insofar as they maybe applicable.
(Ord. No. 89-3, 4-7-89; Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 92-18, 9-10-92; Ord.
No. 99-11, 5-20-99; Ord. No. 99-15, 8-12-99; Ord. No. 00-5, 5-4-00; Ord. No. 01-23, 2-7-02; Ord. No.
05-21, 1-19-06; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07; Ord. No. 08-08, 10-2-08; Ord. No. 16-
12, 12-15-16)
Sec. 5. Coordination with state subdivision law.
To the extent that the following standards are not contained in article XIII, section 4, said
standards shall be applicable to the review and approval of subdivisions:
(1) Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, it shall at
least consider: the elevation of land above sea level and its relation to the floodplains; the
nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; the
slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the availability of streams for disposal of
effluents; and the applicable state and local health and water resources regulations.
(2) Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision.
(3) Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be
utilized.
(4) Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold
water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result.
(5) Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to use of the highways or public roads, existing or proposed.
(6) Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal.
(7) Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid
waste and sewage, if municipal services are to be utilized.
(8) Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area,
aesthetics, historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for
physical or visual access to the shoreline.
(9) Is in conformance with this Code and the city's comprehensive plan.
(10) The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the above stated
standards.
(11) Whenever situated, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of any pond, lake, river or tidal
waters, will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect
the shoreline of that body of water.
(12) Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or
quantity of groundwater.
(13) The subdivider will determine, based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, whether the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:19
subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area
the subdivider will determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries
within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan shall include a condition of plat
approval requiring that principal structures on lots in the subdivision shall be constructed
with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
(14) Will not interfere unreasonably with the solar access of existing buildings or adjacent
parcels.
Sec. 6. Design guidelines.
The planning board shall adopt, on the recommendation of the planning director, site plan review
and design guidelines. Said guidelines shall be advisory in nature. Applicants for development
review are encouraged to consider and incorporate said guidelines in the preparation of
applications. The planning board and staff review committee shall consider said guidelines in
evaluating appropriate design solutions to specific situations.
Sec. 7. Additional standards for single-family cluster developments.
(a) Single-family clustered development is a form of housing development which allows a
developer to create smaller lots than would otherwise be required by the applicable zoning
district regulations in return for setting aside the balance of the tract as permanent open space.
The density of the development shall remain the same as if the site were developed as a
conventional subdivision in full compliance with the zoning district standard which would
otherwise be applicable.
(b) Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, the planning board in reviewing and
approving proposed single-family clustered developments may modify provisions relating to
space and bulk to permit innovative approaches to housing and environmental design in
accordance with the following standards. The purpose of this section shall be to encourage
housing development that will result in:
(1) Open space and recreation areas;
(2) Variety and choice of housing;
(3) A pattern of development in harmony with the natural features of the land;
(4) Efficient use of the land, with small networks of utilities and streets.
(c) In addition to the criteria set forth in article XIII, section 4, applications for single-family
clustered developments shall meet the following standards:
(1) Each lot will be an element of an overall creative plan for site development. The road and
lot layout shall discourage through traffic and provide for pedestrian access to the
common open space.
(2) No single-family clustered development will exceed the allowable residential density
(minimum net lot area per dwelling unit) otherwise permitted in the district in which it is
located.
(3) The development will contain a minimum of five lots.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:20
(4) Individual lot sizes may be reduced to 50 percent of that required by the district
requirements, but no lot may be reduced below 5,000 square feet.
(5) Each individual lot will have at least 50 feet of frontage on a road approved by the
planning board.
(6) Front yard and front setbacks for individual lots will not be reduced to less than 50
percent; parking for not more than one vehicle may take place in the area between the
front wall of the building or structure closest to the street, and running the full width of
the building, and the reduced front yard area.
(7) Side yard and side setbacks on one side of an individual lot may be reduced to five feet
provided that the minimum fire separation distance required by the International Building
Code, as amended, is maintained between adjacent structures;
(8) The common open space will meet the following requirements:
a. To the extent that any proposed lots in a cluster development have a lot area less
than would otherwise be required for other than a cluster development, the
difference between the aggregate lot area of said proposed lots and the aggregate
required lot area of said lots for other than a cluster development shall be added to
the minimum size requirements otherwise imposed for common open space and
the total shall constitute the minimum area required for common open space in a
single-family cluster development. Said common open space shall be used to
preserve natural features, protect wildlife cover and to provide outdoor recreation
areas. The open space shall be located to be easily accessible to all lots in the
development and the shape and location of the open space will be such that it is
readily usable for its intended purpose and enhances the overall quality of the
development.
b. The common open space will be accessible to the residents of the development,
and will be used to preserve natural features, protect wildlife cover, outdoor
recreation and for outdoor living purposes.
c. The formation and incorporation by the developer of a homeowner's association
will be a condition of the approval, with evidence of its accomplishment
submitted to the planning board prior to final plan approval. Covenants for
mandatory membership in the association will be included in the deed for each lot
or unit. The association will have the responsibility of maintaining private roads
and utilities, the common open space and other private facilities dedicated to the
use in common by the development's residents. Cluster developments utilizing
side and front setback reduction provisions must incorporate into their covenants
the areas where reductions may take place.
d. The open space will be distributed to be easily accessible to all lots in the
development.
e. The shape and location of the open space will be such that it is easily used for its
intended purpose and enhances the overall quality of the development.
(9) Where possible, building sites will be oriented with consideration for scenic vistas,
natural landscape features, topography and potential solar access.
(10) Development proposals will include a landscape plan encompassing the treatment of
roads, paths, service and parking areas, open space, buffers from surrounding uses, areas
where side and front setback reductions may take place, and shall detail the way in which
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:21
important natural features are to be preserved and any alterations to, or improvements to
be located in, the common open space.
(11) Lots within cluster developments that gain their frontage along extensions of existing
streets may only have their frontage, front setbacks and individual lot size reduced by a
maximum of 25 percent of that required by the district, and only if the planning board
finds that the proposed street extension utilizes appropriate design techniques, as set forth
in the city's site plan review and design guidelines, that provide an orderly transition from
established single-family neighborhoods into the cluster development. Lots proposed
along existing, accepted city streets cannot utilize cluster provisions to modify space and
bulk standards required by the district.
(12) Roads that are to remain private within the development must meet the standards
contained in the City of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and
Sidewalks.
(Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 06-17, 2-8-07; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 8. Additional standards for multi-unit residential development.
In addition to the criteria set forth in article XIII, section 4, applications for:
(1) Mixed single-family residential developments;
(2) Mixed residential developments;
(3) Planned residential developments; or
(4) Developments in which two or more principal residential structures are placed on one lot.
shall meet the following additional standards:
(1) Relationship of residences and open spaces. The dwelling units and other improvements
will be located so that each unit has access to the open space and/or recreational facilities.
The open space should be located to enhance the living environment of each unit in the
development.
(2) Buffering. The plan for development will provide for the buffering of adjacent properties.
To this end, no building, structure or other facility shall be located within any required
yard area. Within this yard area, a combination of landscaping, natural vegetation,
fencing and grading shall be used to minimize the impact on abutting property owners.
No parking, roads or service facilities will be located in this buffer strip.
(3) Recreation facilities. An area equal to 500 square feet per dwelling unit will be set aside
as recreation areas and will be developed with recreational facilities suitable for the
anticipated occupants of the development.
(4) Private outdoor space. The design of the development will provide each dwelling unit
with a private, outdoor space immediately adjacent to the unit where the architectural
style of the buildings makes this possible.
(5) Storage. Each dwelling unit will have access to and use of a minimum of 400 cubic feet
of private, lockable storage space either within the individual dwelling unit or in common
storage facilities.
The development plan will also make provisions for the safe storage of such items as
recreational vehicles and boats for dwellings other than detached single-family homes.
These storage areas will be screened and landscaped.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:22
(6) Open space. At least 25 percent of the total lot area will be set aside as open space. Areas
of the site with significant development constraints or outstanding natural features will be
included in the open space. If the site contains soils which are identified as prime
farmland soils, consideration should be given to including these areas in the open space.
This land, in whole or in part, may be controlled by one or more of the following
methods:
a. Ownership by the owner of the development;
b. Joint ownership by the owners of units within the project;
c. Joint ownership by the owners of the units within the project with a conservation
easement granted to the city or recognized conservation organization;
d. Dedication to the city as public open space land;
e. Transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a land trust or other recognized
conservation organization;
f. Transfer, with permanent restrictions, to a farmer for use as agricultural land.
The planning board shall approve the arrangements for the ownership, control and
maintenance of the open space as part of the approval of the final plan. No changes in the
management of the open space shall be made without planning board approval.
The arrangements for the ownership and management of the open space will provide for,
at least the following:
a. That the area shall be permanently maintained as open space.
b. That there shall be no transfer of the open space separately from the remainder of
the development without approval of the planning board.
c. That there shall be no division of the property.
d. That no structures or buildings other than those shown on the approved plan shall
be erected in the open space.
e. That any agricultural or forestry activity be carried out in accordance with an
approved plan of action.
Sec. 9. Additional standards for mobile home parks.
In addition to the standards set forth in article XIII, section 4, applications for mobile home parks
shall meet the following additional standards.
(1) Road and lot layout.
a. The mobile home park will be designed so that each mobile home is placed on a
defined lot having access from a road within the mobile home park. The roads and
lots will be laid out to provide safe and convenient access to every mobile home
lot. The lot layout will be designed so that the vehicular access to each lot is from
the internal road system of the mobile home park and not from existing public
streets.
b. Roads within a park shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City
of Lewiston's Policy for the Design and Construction of Streets and Sidewalks.
(2) Mobile home lot standards. Each mobile home lot will have a minimum lot size of 5,000
square feet which will be arranged so that any unit placed on the lot shall be able to be located so
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:23
that it is at least 15 feet from the front lot line and at least ten feet from each side or rear lot line.
Each lot will have a minimum of 45 feet of frontage on the roadway.
(3) Trash facilities. If house-to-house trash pickup is not provided within the park, suitable
trash disposal facilities will be provided. These facilities shall be completely fenced and
landscaped.
(4) Mobile home park cluster developments.
a. Notwithstanding other provisions of the Code, the planning board in reviewing
and approving mobile home parks, may modify provisions relating to space and
bulk to permit innovative approaches to park design which are sensitive to the
natural opportunities and constraints of the site, and that will result in:
1. Open space and recreation areas;
2. A pattern of development in harmony with the natural features of the land;
3. Efficient use of the land, with small network of utilities and streets;
4. Siting of units on lots to avoid monotony and sameness.
b. In addition to the criteria set forth in article XIII, section 4 of this Code,
applications for mobile home park cluster developments shall meet the following
standards:
1. Each lot will be an element of an overall creative plan for site
development. The road and lot layout shall discourage through traffic and
provide for pedestrian access to the common open space;
2. No mobile home park development will exceed the allowable residential
density based on a net lot area of 6,500 square feet per unit;
3. Individual lot sizes will not be reduced to less than 4,000 square feet;
4. Each lot will have at least 25 feet of frontage on a road approved by the
planning board;
5. Individual lot front setbacks will not be reduced to less than ten feet;
parking in the front yard is permitted; carports of noncombustible
materials are not subject to side setback requirements;
6. Individual lot side setbacks on one side of the lot may be reduced to five
feet provided that the minimum fire separation distance required by the
International Residential Code, as amended, is maintained between
adjacent structures; rear setbacks may be reduced to zero along rear lot
lines adjacent to required buffers;
7. To the extent that any proposed lots in a cluster development have a lot
area less than would otherwise be required for other than a cluster
development, the difference between the aggregate lot area of said
proposed lots and the aggregate required lot area of said lots for other than
a cluster development shall be added to the minimum size requirements
otherwise imposed for common open space and the total shall constitute
the minimum area required for common open space in a mobile home park
cluster development. Said common open space shall be used to preserve
natural features, protect wildlife cover and to provide outdoor recreation
areas. The open space shall be located to be easily accessible to all lots in
the development and the shape and location of the open space will be such
that it is readily usable for its intended purpose and enhances the overall
quality of the development;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:24
8. Where practicable, building sites will be oriented with consideration for
scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography and potential solar
access;
9. Development proposals will include a landscape plan encompassing the
treatment of roads, paths, service and parking areas, open space, buffers
from surrounding uses, and areas where side and front setback reductions
may take place, and shall detail the way in which important natural
features are to be preserved and any alterations to, or improvements to be
located in, the common open space;
10. For mobile home parks utilizing side and front setback reduction
provisions, the developer must submit park rules which specify that these
reductions may take place and how maintenance of structures on lots
where reductions take place shall be accomplished including necessary
access easements on required buffer or other areas.
(Ord. No. 90-10, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 07-02, 3-22-07)
Sec. 10. Additional standards for private commercial or industrial subdivisions.
Lots within a private commercial or industrial development may gain their required frontage on
private roads. In addition to the criteria set forth in Article XII, section 18 and Article XIII,
section 4, applications for these developments shall meet the following additional standards:
(1) The development will have a minimum lot size of five acres with a minimum of 200 feet
of frontage upon an accepted public street.
(2) Existing development patterns or existing natural features in the development area would
reasonably preclude the construction of a road to public standards.
(3) The formation and incorporation by the developer of a lot owners' association with
evidence of its accomplishment submitted to the planning board prior to final plan
approval. Covenants for mandatory membership in the association will be included in the
deed for each lot. The association will have the responsibility of maintaining private
infrastructure, including roads, sanitary and storm systems and water supply systems.
(4) Existing buildings on proposed private roads may have their required front yard and
setbacks from the private road reduced by the planning board to an extent necessary to
accommodate the road within the development. The reductions, however, must not
interfere with the convenient and safe use of the road right-of-way for all vehicles and
pedestrians, and must be noted on the plans and be incorporated into the covenants of the
development. Unless the necessary modifications or variances are obtained from the
board of appeals, all other space and bulk standards required for the respective zoning
district must be met by the existing structures, proposed lot and any proposed building or
structure.
(Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92)
Sec. 11. Expiration of approval.
(a) Initiation of development within two years.
(1) If development has not occurred as defined within the scope of this Code within
two years, development review approval shall expire. The applicant may not
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:25
begin construction or operation of the development until a new approval is
granted. A statement to this effect must appear on all approved plans.
(2) An extension of development review approval must be made within two years of
the initial granting of approval. The applicant must state the reasons why the
development was not begun within two years from the granting of the initial
approval and the reasons why the applicant will be able to begin the activity
within two years from the granting of an extension, if granted. Extensions of
approval may include information submitted in the initial application by
reference. Only one extension of the initial approval shall be allowed under these
provisions.
(b) Reexamination after five years.
(1) If the approved development is not completed within five years from the date of
the granting of approval or extension of approval, said approval shall expire and
the applicant shall reapply for a new approval. A statement to this effect must
appear on all approved plans. The appropriate reviewing authority must
reexamine its initial approval and may impose additional terms or conditions or
prescribe other necessary corrective action to respond to significant changes in
circumstances which may have occurred between the date of original approval
and the date of expiration of that approval, including any extension thereto.
Within the scope of this Code, these changes may include, but not be limited to
zoning, stormwater, environment, and traffic regulations. The appropriate
reviewing authority may waive requiring any additional terms or conditions or
other necessary corrective actions for a particular development for which it is
determined the changes to be insignificant.
(Ord. No. 90-5, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 93-3, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 10-12, 12-23-10)
Sec. 12. Performance guarantee.
(a) Performance guarantee required.
(1) Prior to the release of the approved plan, the developer shall file a performance guarantee
or conditional agreement with the director of planning covering the following
improvements:
a. The construction of any streets which are eligible to be accepted by the city as
public ways; and
b. The construction of any water supply or sewerage system other than individual
on-site facilities; and
c. The construction of any drainage systems; and
d. The construction of erosion and sedimentation control measures or landscaping
required to meet the standards of this Code; and
e. The construction of traffic improvements on or off the site necessary to meet the
criteria of this article; and
f. The maintenance of the improvements listed above until the street and related
improvements are accepted by the city.
(2) The performance guarantee may be tendered in one of the following terms:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:26
a. A certified check payable to the City of Lewiston;
b. A savings account passbook issued in the name of the City of Lewiston;
c. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution acceptable to the
planning board; or
d. A faithful performance bond running to the City of Lewiston and issued by a
surety company licensed to do business in the State of Maine.
(3) The amount of the performance guarantee shall be 125 percent of the cost of furnishing,
installing, connecting and completing in good working condition all of the street grading,
paving, storm drainage, utilities, and other similar improvements, including maintenance
until accepted by the city, as specified above. All guarantees shall be conditioned upon
the completion of all such improvements within two years from the date of the approval
of the plan, as recorded on the plan, with extensions to this deadline only as permitted by
this Code. If a performance guarantee as described in subsection (1) above has been
satisfactorily filed with the city, building permits may be issued for construction within
the development prior to completion of required improvements, but prior to occupancy of
a building or dwelling unit, the improvements serving that building or dwelling unit shall
be in place and serviceable.
For all developments as to which a performance guarantee is required, the following
statements shall appear on the approved plan:
a. Although there is a performance guarantee as to public improvements, it may be
inadequate, and there is no obligation on the city to complete the improvements;
b. There is no performance guarantee as to private improvements.
(4) The conditional agreement shall be endorsed by the planning board on the plan, and shall
provide that no lot or parcel of land may be conveyed, and that no permit may be issued
by the division of code enforcement for any building or other permanent structure within
the development until the completion of the street grading, paving, storm drainage,
utilities and other similar improvements as specified in the plan; and the acceptance of
any public improvements by the city. The agreement shall be conditioned upon the
completion of all such improvements within two years from the date of the approval of
the plan, as recorded on the plan, with extensions of this deadline only as permitted
below.
(5) An extension of the deadline in a performance guarantee or conditional agreement may
only be granted by the body which approved the plan for good cause shown and the
extension request must be made at least 60 days prior to the time of expiration.
(b) Inspection of required improvements.
(1) Completion of required improvements shall be determined by the planning board to its
satisfaction, which shall receive written and signed certifications by the city engineer that
all improvements assured by the performance guarantee or conditional agreement have
been constructed in accordance with the plan and all applicable codes and ordinances.
Before construction of the required improvements begins, the developer shall provide the
city engineer with adequate written notice and a proposed schedule of construction.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:27
(c) Release of guarantee. The performance guarantee shall be released by the planning board
upon the request of the developer only after:
(1) The board receives the certifications of completion required in subsection (b)(1) above.
(2) The developer has furnished the city with an accurate record plan and profile (which may
be the original reproducible drawing with corrections, provided the city has been
provided with a print of the unaltered original as approved by the planning board) of all
streets, including drainage lines and appurtenances, sanitary sewerage lines and
appurtenances, water mains and appurtenances and all other utilities as actually installed,
with sufficient ties for proper identification.
(3) The developer has presented to the city council a petition for the laying out and
acceptance as a city street, of the dedicated public streets in the development or portion
thereof for which release of the performance guarantee is sought, together with a
warranty deed for the street right-of-way, free and clear of all encumbrances and
providing marketable title in accordance with the Maine Title Standards.
(Ord. No. 90-5, 5-17-90)
Sec. 13. Independent professional review.
The planning board may require the owner or his authorized agent to carry out an independent
professional review of the development for a major development or any aspect thereof which,
due to the size or nature of the project, the board determines is necessary to generate facts
sufficient to warrant a finding that certain applicable criteria have been met.
(Ord. No. 92-12, 6-4-92)
Sec. 14. Reserved.
Sec. 15. Post-construction stormwater management standards
In addition to the criteria set forth in article XIII, section 4, applications for new development
and redevelopment as defined below, shall meet the following additional standards of this
section.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Post-construction stormwater management standards is to
provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Lewiston through
monitoring and enforcement of with post-construction stormwater management plans in order to
comply with minimum control measure requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, of federal
regulations, and of Maine’s General Permit for Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems.
(b) Objectives. These standards seek to ensure that post-construction stormwater management
plans are followed, and stormwater management facilities are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
(c) Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the terms listed below are defined as follows:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:28
(1) Applicant means a Person with requisite right, title or interest or an agent for such
Person who has filed an application for New Development or Redevelopment that
requires a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan under this Ordinance.
(2) Best Management Practices (“BMP”) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the State. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage
or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
(3) Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq., also known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(4) Construction Activity means construction activity including one acre or more of
Disturbed Area, or activity with less than one acre of total land area that is part of a
subdivision, if the subdivision will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one
acre.
(5) Discharge means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping,
disposing or other addition of Pollutants to “waters of the State.” “Direct discharge”
or “point source” means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or
other floating craft, from which Pollutants are or may be discharged.
(6) Disturbed Area is surface area proposed for clearing, grading and excavation. Mere
cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is
not considered “disturbed area.” “Disturbed area” does not include routine
maintenance but does include redevelopment. “Routine maintenance” is maintenance
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original
purpose of land or improvements thereon.
(7) Enforcement Authority means the Codes Enforcement Official, with the support of the
City Engineer, who are both authorized by the Municipality to administer and enforce
this Ordinance.
(8) Impervious Area means the total area of the Premises that consists of buildings and
associated constructed facilities or areas that will be covered with a low-permeability
material, such as asphalt or concrete, and areas such as gravel roads and unpaved
areas that will be compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability.
(9) Municipality means the City of Lewiston.
(10) Municipal Permitting Authority means the municipal official or body that has
jurisdiction over the land use approval or permit required for a New Development or
Redevelopment.
(11) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or MS4 means conveyances for storm water,
including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than
publicly owned treatment works) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or
sewage district, fire district, State agency or Federal agency or other public entity that
discharges directly to surface waters of the State.
(12) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)
or by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”) that authorizes the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:29
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
(13) New Development means any Construction Activity on unimproved Premises.
(14) Person means any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal
corporation, State agency or Federal agency or other legal entity.
(15) Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse,
effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or
agricultural wastes of any kind.
(16) Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan means BMPs and associated
inspection and maintenance procedures for the Stormwater Management Facilities
employed by a New Development or Redevelopment to meet the stormwater
standards of the Municipality’s subdivision, site plan, or other zoning, planning or
other land use ordinances, and approved by the Municipal Permitting Authority.
(17) Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located
within the Urbanized Area in Lewiston.
(18) Qualified Post Construction Third-Party Inspector means a person who conducts
post-construction Stormwater Management Facilities inspections and meets the
following qualifications:
a. Have a practical knowledge of stormwater hydrology and stormwater
management techniques, including the maintenance requirements for
Stormwater Management Facilities, and
b. Have the ability to determine if stormwater facilities are performing as
intended.
c. Have had training and / or is certified in the inspection of Stormwater
Management Facilities.
(19) Redevelopment means Construction Activity on Premises already improved with
buildings, structures or activities or uses, but does not include such activities as
exterior remodeling.
(20) Regulated Small MS4 means any Small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine
“General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems” effective July 1, 2008 (“General Permit”), including all those
located partially or entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and those additional
Small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the General Permit have
been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small MS4s.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:30
(21) Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4,means any MS4 that is
not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater program including municipally
owned or operated storm sewer systems, State or federally-owned systems, such as
colleges, universities, prisons, Maine Department of Transportation and Maine
Turnpike Authority road systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
(22) Storm Drainage System means the Municipality’s Regulated Small MS4.
(23) Stormwater means any Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage; “Stormwater” has the same meaning as “Storm Water.”
(24) Stormwater Management Facilities means any parking areas, catch basins, drainage
swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related structures that are part of the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for a New Development or
Redevelopment.
(25) Urbanized Area (“UA”). “Urbanized Area” or “UA” means the areas of the State of
Maine so defined by the latest decennial census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
(d) Applicability.
(1) In General. This Ordinance applies to all New Development and Redevelopment
within the Municipality and to associated Stormwater Management Facilities located
within the Urbanized Area.
(2) Exception. This Ordinance does not apply to New Development or Redevelopment
on a lot, tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel is part of a subdivision that is
approved under this Ordinance; said lot, tract or parcel shall not require additional
review under this Ordinance, but shall comply with the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan requirements for that approved subdivision.
(e) Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Approval
(1) General Requirement. Notwithstanding any ordinance provision to the contrary, and
except as provided in Section d(2) above, no Applicant for a building permit,
subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land use
approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is
applicable shall receive such permit or approval for that New Development or
Redevelopment unless the Applicant also receives approval under the Municipality’s
subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances for its
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan and Stormwater Management
Facilities for that New Development or Redevelopment, even if the Municipality’s
subdivision, site plan or other zoning, planning or other land use ordinances would
not otherwise apply.
(2) Notice of BMP Discharge to Municipality’s MS4. At the time of application for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or
other land use approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this
Ordinance is applicable, the Applicant shall notify the Municipal Permitting
Authority if its Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan includes any
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:31
BMP(s) that will discharge to the Municipality’s MS4 and shall include in this
notification a listing of which BMP(s) will so discharge.
(3) Performance guarantee.
a. No applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or
other zoning, planning or other land use approval for New Development or
Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is applicable shall receive such permit or
approval for that New Development or Redevelopment unless the Applicant
provides a performance guarantee to the city’s satisfaction in accordance with one
of following options:
Option 1: Documentation submitted by the Applicant to the Municipality
that shall:
1. Reference the Applicant, its successors, heirs and assigns;
2. Note their legal obligation to operate, repair, maintain, and replace
the Stormwater Management Facilities;
3. Acknowledge that the City of Lewiston shall have the ability to
establish a special assessment, district, or other means upon the
Applicant, its successors, heirs and assigns to ensure said resources
are available;
4. Clearly state that the Applicant, its successors, heirs and assigns, or
other responsible party shall properly maintain, repair, or replace
Stormwater Management Facilities serving the development after
the developer has legally relinquished that responsibility;
5. Provide an estimated cost of repair or replacing the Stormwater
Management Facilities that are part of the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan for a New Development or
Redevelopment;
6. Be recorded in the Androscoggin Registry of Deeds and be
included in the deed for each lot.
Option 2: A certified check payable to the City of Lewiston;
Option 3: A savings account passbook issued in the name of the City of
Lewiston;
Option 4: An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution; or
Option 5: A faithful performance bond running to the City of Lewiston and
issued by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Maine.
b. Should a guarantee be submitted in accordance with Option 2, 3, 4 or 5 as noted
in subsection above, the following additional criteria must be met:
i. Compliance with all the criteria referenced in Option 1.
ii. The guarantee must be for an amount not less than the estimated cost of
replacing the Stormwater Management Facilities that are part of the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan for a New Development or
Redevelopment.
iii. In event a bond or irrevocable letter of credit is provided, either must be
renewed annually for an amount not less than the estimated cost of repair
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:32
or replacing the Stormwater Management Facilities that are part of the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan for a New Development
or Redevelopment.
iv. Evidence of said bond or irrevocable letter of credit must be provided in a
manner acceptable to the City by May 31 of each year.
(f) Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan Compliance
(1) General Requirements. Any Person owning, operating, leasing or having control over
Stormwater Management Facilities required by a Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan approved under the Municipality’s subdivision, site plan or other
zoning, planning or other land use ordinances shall demonstrate compliance with that
Plan as follows.
a. A Qualified Post Construction Third-Party Inspector shall, at least annually,
inspect the Stormwater Management Facilities, including but not limited to any
parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes
and related structures, in accordance with all municipal and state inspection,
cleaning and maintenance requirements of the approved Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan.
b. If the Stormwater Management Facilities require maintenance to function as
intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, that
Person shall take corrective action(s) to address the deficiency or deficiencies.
c. A Qualified Post Construction Third-Party Inspector shall provide, on or by May
31 of each year, a completed and signed certification to the Enforcement
Authority in a form identical to the City of Lewiston’s Annual Stormwater
Management Facilities Certification form, certifying that the Stormwater
Management Facilities have been inspected, and that they are adequately
maintained and functioning as intended by the approved Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan, or that they require maintenance or repair,
describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies found during inspection
of the Stormwater Management Facilities and, if the Stormwater Management
Facilities require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to function as
intended by the approved Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the
Person shall provide a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and
corrective action(s) taken.
(2) Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance and with the Post-
Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon
property at reasonable hours to inspect the Stormwater Management Facilities.
(3) Annual Report. Beginning July 1, 2009 and each year thereafter, the Municipality shall
include the following in its Annual Report to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIII. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW AND STANDARDS
Lewiston Code A XIII:33
a. The cumulative number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4;
b. A summary of the number of sites that have Stormwater Management Facilities
discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the Municipality;
c. The number of sites with documented functioning Stormwater Management
Facilities; and
d. The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to
ensure that Stormwater Management Facilities are functioning as intended.
(g) Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.
Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this Ordinance or the
Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this
Ordinance in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(1) Notice of Violation. In addition to the provisions contained in Appendix A, Article V of
this Code, whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this
Ordinance or the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan, the Enforcement
Authority may order compliance with this Ordinance or with the Post-Construction
Stormwater Management Plan by written notice of violation to that Person indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without
limitation:
a. The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices, or operations in violation
of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;
b. At the Person’s expense, compliance with BMPs is required as a condition of
approval of the New Development or Redevelopment, including the repair of
Stormwater Management Facilities and/or the restoration of any affected property;
and/or
c. The payment of fines, of the Municipality’s remediation costs and of the
Municipality’s reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees and costs.
If abatement of a violation, compliance with BMPs, repair of Stormwater Management
Facilities and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which such abatement, compliance, repair and/or restoration must be
completed.
(h) Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions,
clauses, sentences, or paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 09-07, 12-31-09)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:1
*Editor's note: Retitled
Sec. 1. Applicability.
Certain areas of the City of Lewiston, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious
damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
The City of Lewiston, Maine is a participating community in the National Flood Insurance
Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the City of Lewiston, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood
hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood
hazards.
The City of Lewiston has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce
future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A., §§ 3001--3007, 4352 and 4401--4407., and
Title 38 MRSA, Section 440. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the
aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the City of Lewiston having a special flood hazard be
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management
measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a flood hazard
development permit system and review procedure for development activities in the designated
flood hazard areas of the City of Lewiston, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE for the City of Lewiston, Androscoggin
County, Maine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled
“Flood Insurance Study – Androscoggin County, Maine,” dated July 8, 2013 with accompanying
“Flood Insurance Rate Map” dated July 8, 2013 with panels: 212E, 214E, 216E, 218E, 219E,
238E, 326E, 327E, 328E, 329E, 331E, 332E, 333E, 334E, 337E, 341E, 342E, 343E, 344E, 351E,
353E, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled “Digital Flood
Insurance Rate Map, Androscoggin County, Maine,” are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 2. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes,
begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article XIV, Section 1, a flood
hazard development permit shall be obtained from the code enforcement official. This permit
shall be in addition to any other permit s which may be required pursuant to the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Lewiston, Maine.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 3. Application for permit.
The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to the planning and
code enforcement office and shall include:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:2
(1) The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
(2) An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
(3) A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not
limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and
filled, and lot dimensions;
(4) A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
(5) A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
(6) A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
(7) Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items (8)--(11)b. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
(8) The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), to North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of
the:
a. Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures,
which is determined:
1. In Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study—
Androscoggin County, Maine," as identified in Section 1; or
2. In Zone A:
(a) From any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other
technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265),
including information obtained pursuant to Section 6(k). and
Section 8(d);
(b) From the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of
the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto a USGS quadrangle
map or other topographic map prepared by a professional land
surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the floodplain
boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour
line(s); or, in the absence of all other data,
(c) To be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the
floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the shoreline
which passes along the ground through the site of the proposed
building.
b. Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed
building;
c. Lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a
basement; and
d. Level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be
floodproofed;
(9) A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments
for which elevation standards apply as required in Section 6;
(10) A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer
or architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application
are accurate;
(11) The following certifications as required in Section 6 by a registered professional engineer
or architect:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:3
a. A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), to verify that the floodproofing
methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Section 3(8)d; Section 6(g); and other applicable standards in Section 6;
b. A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Section 6(l)2;
c. A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Section 6(m);
d. A certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Section
6(n);
(12) A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a
result of the proposed development; and
(13) A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development
standard in Section 6 will be met.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 4. Application fee and experts fees.
A fee may be charged if the code enforcement official and/or reviewing board needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within ten (10) days after the City of Lewiston submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to
pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop
work order. An expert shall not be hired by the city at the expense of an applicant until the
applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard
on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may
appeal that decision to the board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 5. Review standards for flood hazard development permit applications.
The code enforcement official shall:
(1) Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent
requirements of Article XIV, Section 6, have been, or will be met;
(2) Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit applications:
a. The base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study—Androscoggin
County, Maine," as described in Article XIV, Section 1;
b. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are
not provided, the code enforcement official shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other
technical sources, including information obtained pursuant to Section 3(8)a.2.;
Section 6(k); and Section 8(d), in order to administer Section 6 of this Article; and
c. When the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods
outlined in Section 3(8)a.2, the community shall submit that data to the Maine
Floodplain Management Program.
(3) Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on
the maps described in Section 1 of this Article;
(4) In the review of flood hazard development permit applications, determine that all
necessary permit s have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:4
agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not
limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1344;
(5) Notify adjacent municipalities, the department of environmental protection, and the
Maine Floodplain Management Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water
course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency;
(6) If the application satisfies the requirements of this Article, approve the issuance of one
(1) of the following flood hazard development permits based on the type of development:
a. A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated structures. Part I shall
authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal
floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the
code enforcement official with an elevation certificate completed by a
professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect based on
the Part I permit construction, "as built", for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Section 6(f), (g), or (h). Following review of the
elevation certificate data, which shall take place within seven (7) days of receipt
of the application, the code enforcement official shall issue Part II of the flood
hazard development permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the
construction project; or
b. A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of non-residential structures
that are new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that
are not being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of Section
6(g)1.a., b. and c. The application for this permit shall include a floodproofing
certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
c. A flood hazard development permit for minor improvement for all development
that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs,
maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than fifty (50) percent
of the market value of the structure. Minor improvement also includes, but is not
limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Section 6(j), mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural
projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and
piers.
(7) Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard development permit
applications, corresponding permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of
the board of appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX, Section 3 of
this Article, and copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, certificates of
compliance and certifications of design standards required under the provisions of
Section 3, 6 and 7 of this Article.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 6. Development standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
(a) All development--All development shall:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:5
(1) Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding
piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and
(4) Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
(b) Water supply. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
(c) Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system
and discharges from the system into flood waters.
(d) On-site waste disposal systems. On site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
(e) Watercourse carrying capacity. All development associated with altered or relocated
portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no
reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
(f) Residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure
located within:
(1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
Section 3(8)a.2; Section 5.2; or Section 8(d).
(g) Non-residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
(1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities shall:
a. Be floodproofed to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation so
that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.
Such certification shall be provided with the application for a flood hazard
development permit, as required by Section 3(11) and shall include a
record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
Section 3(8)a.2; Section 5.2; or Section 8(d)., or
a. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Section 6(g)1.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:6
(h) Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located
within:
(1) Zone AE shall:
a. Be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home is at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation;
b. Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or
foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or
block supports, any of which support the manufactured home so that no
weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and
c. Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to:
1. Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four (4) corners of
the manufactured home, plus two (2) additional ties per side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet
long require one (1) additional tie per side); or by
2. Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five (5) additional ties
along each side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less
than fifty (50) feet long require four (4) additional ties per side.
3. All components of the anchoring system described in Section
6(h)1.c.(1)and (2) shall be capable of carrying a force of four
thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
(2) Zone A shall:
a. Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Section 6(h).1.b.,
such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home
is at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to Section 3(h).1.b; Section 5; or Section 8.d; and
b. Meet the anchoring requirements of Section 6(h)1.c.
(i) Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located within:
(1) Zones A and AE shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days,
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or
c. Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements
for "manufactured homes" in Section 6(h)1.
(j) Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in Article II, Section 2 of this
Article, located within Zones A and AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria
required in Section 6(f) and (g) above, if all other requirements of Section 6 and all the
following requirements are met. Accessory structures shall:
(1) Be five hundred (500) square feet or less and have a value less than three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00);
(2) Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
(3) Have hydraulic openings, as specified in Section 6(l)2., in at least two (2)
different walls of the accessory structure;
(4) Be located outside the floodway;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:7
(5) When possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the
source of flooding than is the primary structure; and
(6) Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect
shall be located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the
special flood hazard area.
(k) Floodways.
(1) In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a
regulatory floodway which is designated on the community's "Flood Insurance
Rate Map," unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(2) In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and
other development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in
Section 6(k)3. unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated
development:
a. Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one (1) foot at any point within the community; and
b. Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled
"Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study--Guidelines and
Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37).
(3) In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water
course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half ( 1/2) the width of the
floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
(l) Enclosed areas below the lowest floor. New construction or substantial improvement of
any structure in Zones A and AE that meets the development standards of Section 6,
including the elevation requirements of Section 6(f), (g), or (h) and is elevated on posts,
columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood
elevation requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article II, Section2;
(2) Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either:
a. Be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or
b. Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one (1) square inch for every square foot of the enclosed area;
2. The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation
and no higher than one (1) foot above the lowest grade; and
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:8
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of
flood waters automatically without any external influence or
control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and
(4) The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or
storage.
(m) Bridges. New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A and AE
shall be designed such that:
(1) When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns)
is elevated to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; and
(2) A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. The structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation
requirements of this section and the floodway standards of Section 6(k);
and
b. The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and
water loads acting simultaneously on all structural components. Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood.
(n) Containment walls. New construction or substantial improvement of any containment
wall located within:
(1) Zones A and AE shall:
a. Have the containment wall elevated to at least one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such
certification shall be provided with the application for a flood hazard
development permit, as required by Section 3(11).
(o) Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or substantial improvement of wharves,
piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A and AE, in and over water and seaward of the
mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
(1) Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and
federal regulations; and
(2) For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer
shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 7. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is
constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is issued
by the code enforcement official subject to the following provisions:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:9
a. For New construction or substantial improvement of any elevated structure the applicant
shall submit to the code enforcement official, an elevation certificate completed by a
professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance
with Section 6(f), (g), or (h).
b. The applicant shall submit written notification to the code enforcement official that the
development is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
c. Within ten (10) working days, the code enforcement official shall:
1. Review the elevation certificate and the applicant's written notification; and
2. Upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this
ordinance, shall issue a certificate of compliance.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 8. Review of subdivisions and development proposals
The planning board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that
require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all
projects on five (5) or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided
into two (2) or more lots, assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(d) All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine
floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices
recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(e) Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a special
flood hazard area, are to be constructed in accordance with Section 6 of this Article. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or
document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or
structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly
articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement
and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or
plan to be signed by the planning board or local reviewing authority as part of the
approval process.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 9. Enforcement and penalties
(a) It shall be the duty of the code enforcement official to enforce the provisions of this
Article pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(b) The penalties contained in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this
Article.
(c) In addition to any other actions, the code enforcement official, upon determination that a
violation exists, may submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XIV. FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT*
Lewiston Code A XIV:10
Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist
of:
(1) The name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property
sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2) A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited
state or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
(3) A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do
so and a citation to that authority;
(4) Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and
the prospective denial of insurance; and
(5) A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316
of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 13-04, 06-20-13)
Sec. 10. Validity and severability.
If any section or provision of this Article is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Article.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 11. Conflict with other ordinances.
This Article shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Article
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this
Article shall control.
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
Sec. 12. Abrogation.
This Article repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
(Ord. No. 06-05, 4-20-06)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:1
Sec. 1. Statement of purpose and definitions.
(a) The purpose of the article is to preserve, protect and enhance buildings and areas which
represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's architectural,
archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history; to safeguard the
city's historic and cultural heritage; to provide procedures for local review of changes to
significant structures and for new construction, reconstruction, building alteration, and
demolition within designated historic districts; and to provide demolition delay
provisions for designated historic, contributing and other important buildings and
structures. The appropriate sections of this article shall apply to all properties, both
municipally-owned or acquired properties, as well as privately-owned properties, as listed
under Sections 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of this article.
(b) Definitions. As used in this article:
Altered means changed, modified, rebuilt, removed, demolished, restored, razed, moved,
or reconstructed.
Appropriate means not incongruous with those aspects of a building or place within a
district which the Board determines to be of historical value.
Archeological resource means any remains of the prior presence of humans including
(without limitation) structures, artifacts, terrain features, graphics (such as paintings or
drawings), or remains of plants or animals associated with human habitation.
Archeological site means the geographical location of any archaeological resource.
Board means the Historic Preservation Review Board as enabled by and described in this
article and any amendments and/or additions thereto.
Building means anything that is the result of having been built by humans including
(without limitation) any combination of materials forming a shelter for animals or
persons and/or their activities or property, fences, signs, walks, terraces, landscaping,
walls, driveways, and parking yards, and anything comprehended by the word
"structure."
Built means any activity wherein the results of the combining and/or manipulation of
materials are positioned or repositioned on the land, and includes (without limitation) the
words altered, erected, constructed, installed, moved, and enlarged.
Certificate of appropriateness means a written certification, pursuant to a duly passed
resolution of the Board, that a proposed activity within a district involving a building
being built or altered or a place being altered or built upon is appropriate, and may
include conditions, qualifications, and/or provisos specified by the Board to be adhered to
in order for the certificate to be valid.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:2
Contributing structure means a building or structure within a designated historic district
that contributes to the historic significance of the district. Designated contributing
structures are listed in Section 6 of this article.
Exterior architectural features means that portion of the exterior of a building that is
visible from a public street, place or way or would be so visible but for the
interpositioning of flora and/or other buildings, including (without limitation) the
architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, finish and/or
texture of exterior building materials, whether installed originally or as a replacement for
or as a change in or substitution for existing materials (as by replacing a clear finish with
a colored finish, or replacing a stained or natural finish with paint, or replacing wood
with brick, or sandblasting or otherwise re-facing an existing material), the visible
inherent and substantially permanent color of materials used (e.g., brick, mortar, roofing,
flashing, etc.), and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant exterior fixtures. Specifically excluded from this definition is the color of
any substantially nonpermanent exterior finish, such as paint, that is applied to some
underlying, substantially permanent material.
Historic district or district means a delineated geographical area that includes one (1) or
more buildings and/or places of historical value, and may include other buildings,
structures and/or places that, though not of historical value themselves, may be or
become the site of anything being built that may be deemed not to be appropriate with
regard to any of the rest of the district.
Historic landmark means any building of historic value.
Historic site means any parcel of land which is of historic value, or upon which is
positioned any historic landmark.
Historic value (as to a building or place) means any building or place that is associated
with, that is the situs of, that is indicative of, or that leads to an understanding of, the
history of or a period or style of architecture of, the municipality, the state, or the nation,
or their lands or inhabitants, or events concerning them, including (without limitation)
cultural, political, economic, military, social, sociological, or other significant events,
historical personages, a great idea or ideal, archeological resources, architectural types or
specimens, including (without limitation) vernacular structures that are valuable for the
study of a period, style, or method of building construction, of community organization
and living, or of landscaping, or with a notable structure or site representing the work of
an outstanding builder, designer, architect, or landscaper, or any site listed or eligible for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places or as a National Historic Landmark.
Incongruous means incompatible with, at variance with, lacking propriety or suitability
or having inconsistent or inharmonious aspects with respect to, or resulting in the
destruction or modification of anything that the Board has determined to be of historic
value to an extent that is material.
To "issue" (e.g., a decision or an order) means to hand deliver, or to post by first class
mail, postage prepaid.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:3
Other important buildings and structures means those buildings and structures that have
been designated as contributing structures or complexes within the Lewiston Mill System
District as developed by Christopher Closs; and those "buildings of major importance"
and "buildings of importance", as designated in the Lewiston Historic Preservation Plan"s
"Preservation Index" (1995) as developed by Russell Wright, and adopted as part of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Lewiston (1997).
Place means any geographical location that is of historical value, and includes (without
limitation) any historic site or archaeological site.
Public street, place or way means any portion of any building, structure, street, place,
way, park, or body of water that is legally accessible by any member of the general public
at will.
Significant structures and districts means structures and districts that have been
designated by the City of Lewiston as significant with respect to historic preservation.
Designated historic structures and districts are listed in Section 6 of this article.
(Ord. No. 90-16, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10)
Sec. 2. Historic Preservation Review Board.
(a) Creation. There shall be a Historic Preservation Review Board consisting of seven (7)
members, each of whom shall be a qualified voter of the city and who shall be appointed
by the mayor. All members should have knowledge and experience in the architectural,
archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic or political history of Lewiston. The
terms of office of members of the Board shall be for three (3) years. There shall be, in
addition to the seven (7) members of the Board, two (2) associate members of the Board,
each of whom shall be a qualified voter of the City of Lewiston, appointed by the mayor.
The term of office of associate members shall be for three (3) years. When designated by
the chairman to do so, an associate member shall serve in the place of a member who is
absent, disqualified or otherwise unable to participate.
(b) Compensation. Each member of the Board shall serve without compensation.
(c) Duties. The Board shall carry out those duties assigned to it by this article.
(d) Organization and rules.
(1) A quorum necessary to conduct an official meeting of the Board shall consist of at
least four (4) members.
(2) The Board shall annually elect a chairman and other officers deemed necessary
from its membership, and a secretary, who need not be a member. All seven (7)
members enjoy the same rights and privileges, regardless of any office that they
may hold.
(3) The chairman shall call meetings of the Board, as required. The chairman shall also
call meetings of the Board when requested to do so by a majority of the members,
the mayor or the City Council.
(4) The secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board meetings and all
correspondence of the Board. The secretary shall be responsible for maintaining
those records that are required as part of the various proceedings that may be
brought before the Board. All records maintained or prepared by the secretary are
deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:4
(5) The concurring vote of at least four (4) members is required to constitute an action
on any matter.
(6) Any member of the Historic Preservation Review Board of the city who is deemed
to have a direct or indirect interest or conflict, whether pecuniary or by bias, on any
matter that has come before the Board shall make full disclosure of his interest prior
to any action being taken on said matter. Any member who has made such a
disclosure shall then refrain from any negotiations and voting, and from otherwise
attempting to influence a decision in which he has an interest.
(7) The Board may adopt statements of policy, along with its rules of procedure,
consistent with the Charter and any applicable ordinance, to enable it to perform its
function.
(8) The Board may elect non-voting, advisory or student members to assist the board in
its duties and functions.
(9) In addition to other provisions for amending the Board's rules of procedure, any rule
adopted by the Board relating to the conduct of any hearing may be waived by the
chairman, upon good cause shown.
(10) When reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, or when making
any recommendation concerning historic preservation, the Board shall utilize, along
with other resources, the Lewiston Historic Preservation Design Manual (1999),
and the Lewiston Downtown Development District Preservation Plan (1997).
(e) Administration. The planning and code enforcement department shall be responsible to
provide for the administration of the affairs of the Board.
(Ord. No. 90-16, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 94-3, 5-5-94; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05;
Ord. No. 06-13, 10-19-06)
Sec. 3. Designation of structures and districts for preservation and conservation.
(a) Significant structures and districts, except for districts established at the time of passage
of this article, shall be designated in accordance with this section. All such designations
may be initiated by written notification of the Historic Preservation Review Board by:
(1) Reference from the City Council;
(2) A petition signed by ten (10) or more residents of the City of Lewiston, eighteen (18)
years of age or older;
(3) The Planning Board;
(4) The Lewiston Historic Commission;
(5) Maine Historic Preservation Commission; or
(6) The Historic Preservation Review Board, at its own initiation.
(b) Any application for the designation of structures and districts for historic preservation
shall be in writing and shall include the following:
(1) Designation of structures for preservation and conservation.
a. A concise description of the physical elements, qualities, architectural style and
period represented by the structure, including a consideration of scale, materials,
workmanship and spacial qualities;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:5
b. A concise statement of how the structure meets the review criteria;
c. Exterior photographs of the structure, illustrating significant details.
(2) Designation of districts for preservation and conservation.
a. A concise statement of the physical elements that make this area a historic district
and a description of building types and architectural styles and periods
represented;
b. A concise statement of how the district meets the review criteria;
c. A justification of the boundaries of the district;
d. A definition of the types of structures that do not contribute to the significance of
the district and an estimate of the percentage of noncontributing structures;
e. A map showing all district structures with the identification of contributing
structures.
(c) The Historic Preservation Review Board shall hold a public hearing on any written
application.
(1) The public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application.
(2) The Board shall make its report and recommendation, including the identification of
contributing structures, when applicable, to the City Council within thirty (30) days
after the public hearing has been closed. Failure of the Board to issue its report
constitutes a denial of the designation of the proposed historic structure or district.
(3) The Board shall require to be given proper notice of the public hearing to all
applicants and to all owners of property within a proposed district.
a. Failure of any petitioner to receive such notice of such public hearing shall not
necessitate another hearing, shall not constitute grounds for objections by such
petitioner and shall not invalidate any recommendation by the Board on such
matter.
b. Notice must be served a reasonable time in advance of the meeting, which will be
construed to mean at least seven (7) days before the date of such meeting. Notice
shall be by any method of personal service or substituted personal service
authorized by the ordinances of the City of Lewiston and the laws of the State of
Maine.
(d) The City Council, upon receipt of the Historic Preservation Review Board's
recommendation, may designate structures or districts for historic preservation.
Contributing structures within such districts shall be identified. Due consideration shall
be given to the written views of owners of affected property and the City Council shall
hold public hearings on any proposed structure or district for historic preservation
designation.
(Ord. No. 90-16, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05)
Sec. 4. Standards for designation of structures and districts as significant.
In considerin/0g applications for designating structures or districts as significant, the Board shall
be guided by the following criteria. In making a recommendation to the City Council for the
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:6
designation of a structure or district, the Board shall make specific findings with respect to how
the application conforms to these standards.
(a) Historic importance. The structure, district or site:
(1) Has character, interest or value, as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the city, state or nation;
(2) Is the site of a historic event with an effect upon society;
(3) Is identified with a person or group of persons who had some influence on society; or
(4) Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social or historic heritage of the
community;
(b) Architectural importance. The structure or district:
(1) Portrays the environment of a group of people in an area of history characterized by a
distinctive architectural style;
(2) Embodies those distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type specimen;
(3) Is the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the
development of the city; or
(4) Contains elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship that
represent a significant innovation.
(c) Geographic importance. The structure or district:
(1) Because of being part of, or related to, a square, park or other distinctive area, should
be developed or preserved according to a plan based on a historic, cultural or
architectural motif; or
(2) Due to its unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an established
and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood, community or city.
(d) Archeological importance. The site has yielded or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.
(Ord. No. 90-16, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05)
Sec. 5. Certificates of appropriateness.
(a) Purpose. The Historic Preservation Review Board shall protect designated historic
structures and districts as listed in Section 6 of this article by the issuance of certificates
of appropriateness.
(b) Exclusive authority of Board. A certificate of appropriateness may only be issued by the
Historic Preservation Review Board.
(c) When required. A certificate of appropriateness is required for any of the following
activities:
(1) Any change in the exterior appearance, including signage, of a designated historic
structure or contributing structure within a designated historic district, as listed;
(2) New construction of a principal or accessory building or structure, where such
building or structure will be located within a designated historic district, as listed;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:7
(3) Demolition or removal of a designated historic structure or contributing structure
within a designated historic district, as listed;
(4) Any change in siding materials, roofing materials, exterior door and window sash,
and integral exterior decorative elements, including, but not limited to, cornices,
brackets, windows, architraves, doorway pediments, railings, balusters, columns,
cupolas, cresting, and roof decorations of a designated historic structure or
contributing structure within a designated historic district, as listed.
(d) Application procedure. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
submitted in writing to the director of planning and code enforcement. The director of
planning and code enforcement shall date the application and transmit it to the chairman
of the Historic Preservation Review Board. The Board shall consider each application
and, within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal, hold a hearing and approve or deny
the application. Upon mutual written consent of the Board and the applicant, the review
period may be extended. Failure to take action on the application at the end of the review
period shall constitute denial of the application.
(e) Application contents. The application shall state the location, use and nature of the matter
for which such certificate is sought and shall include the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and interest in the property;
(2) The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's;
(3) The present use of the property;
(4) A brief description of the work for which the certificate of appropriateness is
required;
(5) A drawing or drawings to scale indicating the design and location of any proposed
alteration or new construction for which the certificate is required;
(6) Photographs of the building and of adjacent buildings; and
(7) A site plan showing the structure in context and indicating improvements affecting
appearance, such as walls, walks, terraces, accessory buildings, signs and other
elements.
(f) Review criteria. In considering applications for certificates of appropriateness and for
demolition or removal of designated historic and contributing buildings or structures, and
important portions and features thereof, the Board must find that the criteria listed below
have been met. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and the
proof shall include the production of evidence sufficient to warrant a finding by the
Board that all the following applicable criteria have been met:
(1) Significant areas and districts. The Historic Preservation Review Board shall
consider the degree to which the project, within itself and in relation to other existing
significant structures or proposed development, produces a functionally efficient and
visually coherent grouping of buildings and spaces. The aim is to enhance the ability
of the general public to locate, use, and enjoy designated significant districts and
areas. This includes the degree to which the design:
a. Produces buildings that are well related visually in terms of light, air, height,
shadow, spacing, bulk, and scale;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:8
b. Locates portals, service loading areas, automobile access points, street furniture,
interior building floor layouts, exterior public activity locations, and similar
features in a manner that maximizes the efficient use of these facilities by the
general public and the occupants of the private space:
c. Locates building masses and related architectural features in such a manner as to
enhance the ability of the general public to find their way into and around the
building and open spaces;
d. Integrates the architectural forms and the open spaces around them so as to
enhance the quality of the pedestrian environment, including such factors as
sunlight, weather protection, noise and air quality, seating arrangement,
landscaping, street furniture, and artistic embellishments; and
e. Contains other attributes that improve the functional and visual enjoyment of the
project.
(2) Significant structures and buildings. The Historic Preservation Review Board shall
utilize "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" in evaluating modifications to significant
structures and designated historic structures:
a. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that
requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site
and environment.
b. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal
of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a
property shall be avoided.
c. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
undertaken.
d. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
e. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be preserved.
f. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new
feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and,
where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated
by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
g. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to
historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if
appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
h. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be
undertaken.
i. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy
historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be
differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale,
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:9
and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its
environment.
j. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in
such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(3) New construction within significant districts. The Historic Preservation Review Board
shall utilize the following criteria in evaluating applications for the construction of
new buildings within designated historic districts:
a. Mass. The height of principal building or structure, its bulk; the nature of its
roofline, and the proportions of the new construction will be of the same scale and
proportion as the existing significant structures;
b. The location, size and proportions of openings in the facade, primarily windows
and doors, of new construction will be consistent in proportion and rhythm with
openings in the facade of existing significant structures;
c. The massing and type of roof (flat, gabled, hip, gambrel, mansard) of the new
construction shall complement the massing and type of roof of existing significant
structures;
d. Nature of building materials and texture shall exhibit the characteristics of texture,
composition and reflectivity of adjacent significant structures and buildings; and
e. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof, ground or buildings
will be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or
they will be so located not to be visible from public ways.
(4) Demolition or removal of designated historic structure, contributing structures, or
important portions and features thereof. Applicants applying for the demolition or
removal of designated historic or contributing buildings, or important portions and
features thereof (see Section 4(a) through (d) of this article for standards to determine
the importance of building features), shall clearly demonstrate that their application
meets one (1) or more of the following demolition or removal criteria before the
Board will approve the application for demolition or removal;
a. The physical condition of the building makes the continued upkeep of the
building, or important portions or features thereof, uneconomical; or
b. The building or structure, or important portions and features thereof has been
determined by the director of planning and code enforcement to represent an
immediate hazard to the public health or safety, which hazard can not be abated
by reasonable measures.
The demolition or removal of designated significant or contributing structures
shall also be subject to the demolition delay provisions in Section 5(f)(5) and 6
below, unless otherwise exempted in Section 5(f)7 and 8. In addition, the Board
must find that the reuse of the site will be compatible with the character of the
district, and proposed buildings or structures will comply with the criteria in
Section 5(f)(3) of this article.
(5) Demolition delay. The purpose of this section is to afford the city, Historic
Preservation Review Board, the Lewiston Historic Commission, other preservation
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:10
organizations and others interested in preservation the opportunity to acquire or
arrange for the preservation of historic buildings and structures, or important portions
and features thereof or the proper removal of historic artifacts, or the proper
recordation of the building, structure and/or site. Before the issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness or a demolition permit, a delay period of ninety (90) days shall
apply to any building or structure and portions thereof that is:
a. Designated historically significant or listed as contributing within an existing
historic district as listed in Section 6 of this article;
b. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places, but not designated significant
locally as listed in Section 7 of this article;
c. Within the proposed Lewiston Mill System District, as developed by Christopher
Closs, as listed in Section 8 of this article; or
d. "Buildings of major importance" and "buildings of importance", as designated in
the Lewiston Historic Preservation Plan's "Preservation Index" (1995) developed
by Russell Wright, Architect and adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan for
the City of Lewiston (1997) as listed in Section 8 of this article.
For the purpose of this section, buildings or structures, or important portions and
features thereof referred to under c. and d. above shall be referred to as "other
important buildings and structures."
(6) Demolition delay procedures. In the event an application to demolish a building or
structure, or important portions and features thereof that is designated historically
significant pursuant to Section 6 of this article meets the criteria set forth in Section
5(f)(4), and the applicant receives permission from the Board to demolish or remove
the building or structure or portions thereof, the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness shall be delayed for up to a period of ninety (90) days, subject to the
procedures listed below. Similarly, if the building or structure, or important portions
and features thereof is designated an "other important building or structure", under
Section 5(f)(5) c. and d. above, issuance of the required demolition permit from the
director of planning and code enforcement shall also be delayed for a period of up to
ninety (90) days, and subject to the same procedures, listed below:
a. Notices required. A statement shall be filed with the Board identifying the
property proposed for demolition and providing other applicable information. The
90-day delay period set forth in this section shall not commence until such
statement has been filed. During the delay period, the owner shall post a public
notice of the proposed demolition or removal, including identification of the
property, its owner or agents, their address and telephone number, reason for the
demolition and other applicable information. The notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general local circulation once a week for two (2) successive weeks
and a copy forwarded to the director of planning and code enforcement. The first
such publication shall be within fifteen (15) days after the filing of the statement
with the Board. In addition, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the facade of
the building or structure, or important portions and features thereof proposed for
demolition. The City of Lewiston shall also forward a copy of the notice to the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission, the Lewiston Historic Commission, and
Maine Preservation.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:11
b. During the delay period, the applicant shall work the city and others in the
preservation community to accomplish the following:
1. Find alternatives to demolition, such as assisting in securing funding to
preserve in place the building, structure, or important portions and features
thereof; or finding other ways to preserve the building or structure such as
outright purchase of the property when feasible, or relocation.
2. Proper recordation of buildings, structures and sites including photography
and narrative report;
3. Saving of historic artifacts.
(7) Exceptions and emergencies. This section shall not apply to any structure that has been
ordered demolished by the City Council, or court, in accordance with Title 17 M.R.S.A.
§§ 2851 through 2959 and amendments thereto, or to any structure that has been partially
destroyed and is determined by the department of planning and code enforcement to
represent an immediate hazard to the public health or safety, which hazard can not be
abated by reasonable measures, specified by the department of planning and code
enforcement, including securing apertures and/or erecting fences.
(8) Waivers. The Board may, upon the applicant's request, waive all or any part of the 90-day
delay period and demolition delay procedures. Such action shall be taken only upon:
a. A finding by the Board that the strict application of the demolition delay provisions to
the applicant and his property would cause undue hardship that could not be
reasonably avoided. Undue hardship shall not include mere inconveniences or
incidental financial loss;
b. The Board finds that the goals and objectives of the demolition delay can be achieved
in less than ninety (90) days.
(9) Action by the Historic Preservation Review Board. The board may approve, modify or
deny the application:
a. Upon approval of the application (except those that involve demolition pursuant to
Section 5(f)(4) of this article), the Board shall immediately issue a certificate of
appropriateness. The issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall in no way be
interpreted as a waiver of any regulation governing the issuance of a building permit.
Any changes or modifications in the proposed work that are approved by the Board
shall become conditions of the certificate of appropriateness.
b. Upon disapproval of the application, the applicant may reapply within a mutually
agreed upon period, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, for a certificate of
appropriateness, based upon amended plans for the proposed work. A building permit
shall not be issued without evidence of a certificate of appropriateness.
(10) Appeals. Any action of the Historic Preservation Review Board may be appealed in
writing directly to the board of appeals, by any affected party.
(11) Violations and penalties. Violations of this article shall be subject to penalties and
fines pursuant to Article V, Sections 7 and 9 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 90-16, 1-11-91; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:12
Sec. 6. Designated historic structures and historic districts.
(a) Boundary lines generally. Unless otherwise described, the district boundary lines are the
center lines of streets, alleys, waterways or public utility and railroad rights-of-way or
such lines extended.
(b) Historic districts. The following described districts are designated as historic districts:
(1) Kennedy Park Historic District. Start at the intersection of Pine and Blake Streets:
Thence in a general southeasterly direction along Blake Street to a point
approximately two hundred fifty (250) feet northwesterly of Birch Street; thence
in a general southwesterly direction along a line two hundred fifty (250) feet from
and parallel to Birch Street approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) feet;
thence in a general southeasterly direction along a line one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet from and parallel to Blake Street approximately fifty (50) feet; thence
in a general northeasterly direction along a line two hundred (200) feet from and
parallel to Birch Street to Blake Street; thence along Blake Street to Birch Street;
thence along Birch Street to Bates Street; thence along Bates Street to a point
approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) feet northwesterly of Birch Street;
thence in a general southwesterly direction along a line one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet from and parallel to Birch Street approximately one hundred twentyfive
(125) feet; thence in a general southeasterly direction along a line one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet from and parallel to Bates Street approximately
one hundred twenty-five (125) feet to Birch Street; thence along Birch Street to a
point approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) feet southwesterly of Knox
Street; thence along a line one hundred twenty-five (125) feet southwesterly of
and parallel to Knox Street to Spruce Street; thence along Spruce Street to a point
approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) feet southwesterly of Park Street;
thence along a line one hundred twenty-five (125) feet southwesterly of and
parallel to Park Street to Chestnut Street; thence along Chestnut Street to Park
Street Alley; thence along Park Street Alley to a point approximately one hundred
seventy-five (175) feet southeasterly of Ash Street; thence along a line one
hundred seventy-five (175) feet southeasterly of and parallel to Ash Street to Park
Street; thence along Park Street to Pine Street; thence along Pine Street to Blake
Street and the point of beginning.
The following are contributing structures within the Kennedy Park Historic District:
190 Bates Street (H.C. Little House)
192 Bates Street;
208 Bates Street (Wallace School);
220 Bates Street (St. Patrick's Church);
247 Bates Street (Trinity Episcopal Church), listed on National Register of
Historic Places 3/30/78;
250 Bates Street (St. Dominic's School);
255 Bates Street;
28 Birch Street;
30 Birch Street;
30 Knox Street;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:13
56 Birch Street (Dominican Court);
143 Blake Street;
99 Chestnut Street
1 Knox Street;
5 Knox Street;
6 Knox Street;
10 Knox Street;
11 Knox Street;
20 Knox Street;
22 Knox Street;
25 Knox Street;
28 Knox Street;
103 Park Street (Knights of Columbus);
107 Park (Public Library - entrance at 200 Lisbon Street), listed on National
Register of Historic Places 1/31/78;
120 Park Street (Kennedy Park and Bandstand);
27 Pine Street (City Hall), listed on National Register of Historic Places 10/21/76;
73 Pine Street (The Russell House);
35 Spruce Street;
47 Spruce Street;
1 Walnut Street (Albert Kelsey House).
(2) Lewiston Commercial Historic District. (2018) The boundary of the Lewiston
Commercial Historic District begins at the southwest corner of 391 Lisbon Street
and extends northerly along Canal Street Alley to the south property line of 113
Lisbon Street, where it follows that line westerly to Canal Street and continues
northerly along Canal Street to Main Street where it turns easterly and continues
along Main Street to Middle Street, where it turns northerly to cross Main Street
and extend along Middle Street to the northwest corner of the property that
includes 240 Main Street, turning easterly along the property line and following
that line back to the south to re-cross Main Street and turning easterly again to the
east property line of 249 Main Street where it turns southerly following the line to
the southeast corner of the property and then turning westerly, following the
property lines of all the Main Street properties to Journal Alley, extending along
Journal Alley to a point in line with Park Street Alley and then running southerly
along Park Street Alley to Ash Street, turning easterly along Ash Street to Park
Street and then southerly along Park Street to the southern property line of 103
Park Street, then westerly to Park Street Alley and again southerly along Park
Street Alley to Chestnut Street, turning easterly along Chestnut Street to the east
property line of 99 Chestnut Street and southerly along that line to the southeast
corner of the property, turning west to the rear property line of 276 Lisbon Street,
turning southerly along that line and the rear line of 276 Lisbon Street to the
southeast corner of that lot, then westerly to Lisbon Street where it turns southerly
to the south line of 391 Lisbon Street, turning westerly to the point of beginning,
listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 4, 2018.
The following are contributing structures within the Lewiston Commercial Historic
District:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:14
41 Ash Street, (Second Manufacturer’s National Bank Building)
99 Chestnut Street
9-7 Lisbon Street, (The Gateway-Masonic Hall Building)
21-31 Lisbon Street, (Union Block)
43-47 Lisbon Street
46 Lisbon Street, (Lewiston Trust and Safe Deposit Company Building)
49-53 Lisbon Street, (Lyceum Hall)
50 Lisbon Street, (Second Osgood Building)
55 Lisbon Street,( Depositor’s Trust Company Building)
69-87 Lisbon Street, (Music Hall/Frye Block)
80-84 Lisbon Street
96-108 Lisbon Street, (Evans Ehrefried Building)
110 Lisbon Street, (Lamey-Wellehan Building)
112-114 Lisbon Street, (Singer Building)
113 Lisbon Street, (Grant’s Building)
117-119 Lisbon Street, (Supovitz Brothers Building)
124-130 Lisbon Street, (Sands Building)
127-129 Lisbon Street, (Osgood Building)
130 Lisbon Street, (Call Building)
133 Lisbon Street, (First McGillicuddy Block)
140 Lisbon Street, (People’s Savings Bank Building)
145 Lisbon Street, (First Manufacturer’s National Bank Building)
152 Lisbon Street
160-166 Lisbon Street, (Second McGillicuddy Building)
168 Lisbon Street
179 Lisbon Street, (Montgomery Ward Building)
180 Lisbon Street, (Ellard Building)
182-188 Lisbon Street, (Odd Fellows Block)
191-193 Lisbon Street
192-194 Lisbon Street, (Garcelon Building)
195 Lisbon Street
196-208 Lisbon Street, (Pilsbury Block)
199 Lisbon Street, (The Scruton Block)
215 Lisbon Street, (The Savings Bank Block)
220-226 Lisbon Street, (Atkinson Building)
223-225 Lisbon Street, (Le Messager Building)
230-234 Lisbon Street
239 Lisbon Street
240-242 Lisbon Street
243-245 Lisbon Street
244-248 Lisbon Street
249 Lisbon Street
250-274 Lisbon Street, (Lisbon Block/College Block)
255-259 Lisbon Street
263-267 Lisbon Street, (The Martel’s Pharmacy Building)
276 Lisbon Street, (First Callahan Block)
277 Lisbon Street, (Institute Jacques Cartier Building)
282 Lisbon Street, (Second Callahan Block)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:15
291-297 Lisbon Street, (The Centennial Block)
311 Lisbon Street (Simard and Sons Building – upper floors destroyed by fire and
demolished in 1996)
323 Lisbon Street (Condemned 2004 – demolished 2006)
331-335 Lisbon Street
337 Lisbon Street
339-341 Lisbon Street, (J. Bureau Building)
343 Lisbon Street (Condemned and demolished in 2004) 347 Lisbon Street
351-353 Lisbon Street, (The Dulac Building)
359 Lisbon Street (Condemned and demolished in 2004)
379 Lisbon Street, (The Lord Block)
389 Lisbon Street
383 Lisbon Street, (The V. Palange Building)
391 Lisbon Street
157-163 Main Street and 2-10 Lisbon Street, Central Block/First National Bank
Building
181-193 Main Street
195-205 Main Street (and 5 Park Street)
217 Main Street, Clifford Block
238-240 Main Street
249 Main Street, (Bonnalue Block)
90 Middle Street
103 Park Street, (Knights of Columbus Building)
(3) Lewiston Canal Water Power Historic District. (Effective upon City ownership of
the Canals on March 22, 2018)
Main Canal Parcel (including Upper Androscoggin Power Station): Start at the
intersection of the northeasterly edge of the Main Canal structure with the
northwesterly side of Main Street; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly
side of Main Street to the prolongation northwesterly of the southwesterly side of
Canal Street; thence southeasterly along southwesterly side of Canal Street to the
northwesterly side of 677 Lisbon Street; thence southwesterly along the
northwesterly side of 677 Lisbon Street and continuing on the same course to the
southeasterly edge of the spillway structure leading from the Main Canal structure
to Gully Brook; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly edge of the spillway
structure to the shore of Gully Brook; thence westerly and northwesterly along the
shore of Gully Brook to the face of the southeast wall of the Upper Androscoggin
Power Station; thence southwesterly along the face of the southeast wall of the
Upper Androscoggin Power Station to the southerly corner of the Upper
Androscoggin Power Station; thence northwesterly along the face of the
southwest wall of the Upper Androscoggin Power Station to the westerly corner
of the Upper Androscoggin Power Station; thence northeasterly along the face of
the northwest wall of the Upper Androscoggin Power Station and continuing on
the same course to a point that is 10 feet southwesterly of the southwesterly edge
of the Main Canal structure; thence northwesterly along a line 10 feet from and
parallel to the southwesterly edge of the Main Canal structure to a point that is 10
feet southeasterly from the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:16
thence in a southwesterly direction along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the
southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure to the easterly edge of the
footbridge over Cross Canal No. 1, thence northwesterly along the northeasterly
edge of the footbridge over Cross Canal No. 1 to the southeasterly wall of Bates
Mill No. 5; thence northeasterly along the face of the southeasterly wall of Bates
Mill No. 5 to a point that is 10 feet southwesterly of the southwesterly edge of the
Main Canal structure; thence northwesterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel
to the southwesterly edge of the Main Canal structure to the northwesterly side of
Main Street; thence northeasterly along the northwesterly side of Main Street to
the point of beginning.
Cross Canal No. 1 Parcel: Beginning at the intersection of the westerly bound of
the Main Canal Parcel (as described above) with the face of the southerly wall of
Bates Mill No. 5; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly face of the wall of
Bates Mill No. 5 and continuing on the same course to the northeasterly side of
Mill Street; thence southeasterly along the northeasterly side of Mill Street to the
southeasterly side of Railroad Alley; thence southwesterly along the southeasterly
side of Railroad Alley and continuing on the same course to the southwesterly
side of Lincoln Street; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly side of
Lincoln Street to a point 10 feet northwesterly of the northwesterly edge of the
Cross Canal No. 1 structure; thence southwesterly along a line 10 feet from and
parallel to the northwesterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure, continuing
along the face of the northwesterly wall of the Red Shop Weir structure and
continuing on the same course to the northeasterly edge of the foot bridge over
Cross Canal No. 1 that leads to Simard-Payne Park; thence southeasterly along
the northeasterly edge of the foot bridge to a point that is 10 feet southeasterly of
the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure; thence northeasterly
along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal
No. 1 structure to the face of the southwesterly wall of the Red Shop Weir
structure; thence southeasterly along the southwesterly wall of the Red Shop Weir
structure to the southwesterly corner of the Red Shop Weir structure; thence
northeasterly along the southeasterly wall of the Red Shop Weir structure to the
southeasterly corner of the Red Shop Weir structure; thence northwesterly along
the northeasterly wall of the Red Shop Weir structure to a point that is 10 feet
southeasterly of the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure; thence
northeasterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the southeasterly edge of the
Cross Canal No. 1 structure to the intersection of the southwesterly side of Oxford
Street and the northwesterly side of Cross Street; thence northeasterly along the
northwesterly side of Cross Street and continuing on the same course across
Lincoln Street to the northeasterly side of Lincoln Street; thence southeasterly
along the northeasterly side of Lincoln Street to a point that is 10 feet
southeasterly of the southeasterly side of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure; thence
northeasterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the southeasterly edge of the
Cross Canal No. 1 structure to the face of the southwesterly wall of Mill No. 6;
thence northwesterly along the face of the southwesterly wall of Mill No. 6 to the
northwest corner of Mill No. 6; thence northeasterly along the face of the
northwesterly wall of Mill No. 6 to the northeasterly corner of Mill No. 6; thence
southeasterly along the face of the northeasterly wall of Mill No. 6 to a point 10
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:17
feet southeasterly of the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure;
thence northeasterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the southeasterly
edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure and continuing on the same course across
Mill Street to the face of the southwesterly wall of Mill No. 1; thence
northwesterly along the face of the southwesterly wall of Mill No. 1 to the
northwest corner of Mill No. 1; thence northeasterly along the face of the
northwesterly wall of Mill No. 1 to the northeasterly corner of Mill No. 1; thence
southeasterly along the face of the northeasterly wall of Mill No. 1 to a point 10
feet southeasterly of the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure;
thence northeasterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the southeasterly
edge of the Cross Canal No. 1 structure to the southwesterly bound of the Main
Canal Parcel; thence northwesterly along the southwesterly bound of the Main
Canal Parcel to the point of beginning.
Lower Canal Parcel: Beginning at the intersection of the southwesterly side of
Oxford Street and the southeasterly bound of the Cross Canal No. 1 Parcel (as
described above); thence southeasterly along the southwesterly side of Oxford
Street to a point 10 feet southeasterly of the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal
No. 3 structure; thence southwesterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel to the
southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 3 structure to a point that is 10 feet
southwest of the prolongation southeasterly of the southwesterly edge of the
Lower Canal structure; thence northwesterly along a line 10 feet from and parallel
to the southwesterly edge of the Lower Canal structure to the southeasterly bound
of the Cross Canal No. 1 Parcel; thence northeasterly along the southeasterly
bound of the Cross Canal No. 1 Parcel to the point of beginning.
Cross Canal No. 2 Parcel: Beginning at the southwesterly corner of the Lewiston
Municipal Parking Garage lot on the northeasterly side of Lincoln Street; thence
northeasterly along the southeasterly side of said parking garage lot and
continuing on the same course to the southwesterly bound of 41 Chestnut Street
(Hill Mill); thence southeasterly along the southwesterly bound of 41 Chestnut
Street to the northwesterly side of 70 Cedar Street; thence southwesterly along the
northwesterly sides of 70 Cedar Street and the Lewiston Fire Station lot,
continuing on the same course across Lincoln Street, along the northwesterly side
of 179 Lincoln Street, continuing on the same course across Lincoln Street Alley,
along the northwesterly side of 88 Oxford Street and continuing on the same
course across Oxford Street to the northwesterly bound of the Lower Canal Parcel
(as described above); thence northerly along the northwesterly bound of the
Lower Canal Parcel to the prolongation southwesterly of the southeasterly side of
74 Oxford Street; thence northeasterly along the southeasterly side of 74 Oxford
Street, continuing on the same course across Lincoln Street Alley, along the
southeasterly side of 161 Lincoln Street and continuing on the same course across
Lincoln Street to the point of beginning.
Cross Canal No. 3 Parcel (including Continental Mill Power House and Lower
Bates Power Facilities): Beginning at the intersection of the westerly bound of
the Lower Canal Parcel (as described above) with a line that is 10 feet
southeasterly of and parallel with the southeasterly edge of the Cross Canal No. 3
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:18
structure; thence southwesterly along said parallel line a distance of 214 feet,
more or less, to a point on the northeasterly side of a parcel of land on which the
Continental Power Station is located; thence southeasterly and southwesterly
along said Continental Power Station land on the following courses:
Southeasterly, 30 feet more or less to a corner,
Southwesterly, 245 feet more or less to a corner,
Southeasterly partially along the centerline of the northeasterly wall of the
Continental Power Station 63 feet more or less to a the centerline of the
southeasterly wall of the Continental Power Station,
Southwesterly partially along the centerline of the southeasterly wall of the
Continental Power Station 173 feet more or less to the shore of the Androscoggin
River;
thence northerly along the shore of Androscoggin River to its intersection with a
line that is 10 feet southeasterly from and parallel to the southeasterly edge of the
Cross Canal No. 3 structure; thence northwesterly across Cross Canal No. 3 on a
line that passes through the southerly corner of the Lower Bates Power Station
and continuing on the same course to the shore of the Androscoggin River; thence
southwesterly, westerly and northwesterly along the shore of the Androscoggin
River to the southeasterly bound of 1 Beech Street (Museum L-A); thence along 1
Beach Street on the following courses:
Northeasterly, 487 feet more or less to a corner,
Easterly, 77 feet more or less to a corner,
Northeasterly, 10 feet more or less to the southerly corner of 35 Beech Street
(Lewiston Mill);
thence northeasterly along the southeasterly side of 35 Beech Street, along the
face of the southeasterly wall of the Lewiston Mill and continuing on the same
course to the southwesterly bound of the Lower Canal Parcel; thence
southeasterly along the southwesterly bound of the Lower Canal Parcel to the
point of beginning.
Gully Brook and Lower Androscoggin Facilities Parcel: Beginning at the
intersection of the northeasterly edge of the dam and powerhouse structure with
the northerly shore of Gully Brook; thence southwesterly along the face of the
northeasterly edge of the dam and powerhouse structure and continuing on the
same course to the northwesterly side of 354 Lincoln Street; thence southwesterly
along the northwesterly side of 354 Lincoln Street to the northeasterly side of
Lincoln Street; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly side of Lincoln Street
to the southeasterly side of 348 Lincoln Street; thence northeasterly along the
southeasterly side of 348 Lincoln Street to the prolongation northwesterly of a
line along the face of the northeasterly edge of the dam and powerhouse structure;
thence southwesterly along such prolongated line to the point of beginning.
Excluded Property. Any of the following that are included in the above parcel
descriptions are expressly excluded from the Historic District designation:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:19
Public Streets and Ways. All land and improvements located within the bounds of
the right of way of public streets and ways with the exception of railroad,
vehicular and foot bridges.
Bates Upper or Bates Weave Shed Generating System. The land inside Bates Mill
No. 5 and adjacent to the westerly side of the Main Canal Parcel (as described
above) and the northerly side of the Cross Canal No. 1 Parcel (described above)
on which are located the forebay, generating station, wheel pit and tail race that
were formerly used in connection with the generation of electric energy in Bates
Mill No. 5.
Hill Mill Generating System. The land inside, underneath and adjacent to the Hill
Mill extending from the westerly side of the Main Canal Parcel (as described
above) to the end of Cross Canal No. 2 Parcel (described above) on which are
located the intake tunnels, forebay, generating station, wheel pit and tail race
tunnels that were formerly used in connection with the generation of electric
energy in the Hill Mill.
The following are contributing site, structures and buildings within the Lewiston
Canal Water Power Historic District:
Power Canals
Upper Canal - 1 contributing structure: begins at Main Street, flows south to the
Androscoggin Mill Complex, Tax Map 197, Lot 43, Inventory Map No. 7 of the
National Register of Historic Places Registration Form and associated documents
of the Lewiston Mills and Water Power System Historic District, hereinafter
Inventory Map)
Lower Canal - 1 contributing structure: begins at Cross Street, flows south to
Continental Mill Complex, Tax Map 197 Lot 43, Inventory Map No.8
Cross Canal No. 1 - 1 contributing structure: begins at intersection of Upper Canal
and Ash Street, flows west into Androscoggin River, Tax Map 197 Lot 43,
Inventory Map No. 9
Cross Canal No. 2 - 1 contributing structure: flows west from the Upper Canal
under the Hill Mill complex into Lower Canal, Tax Map 208 lots 24, 36, 72, 77
and Tax Map 197, lot 43, Inventory Map No. 10
Cross Canal No. 3 - 1 contributing structure: begins at Chestnut Street, flows west
into Androscoggin River, Tax Map 197 lot 43, Inventory Map No. 11
Gully Brook - contributing site: flows south into the Androscoggin River from the
Androscoggin Mill complex weir, Tax Map 197 lot 43, Inventory Map No. 12
Control Structures
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:20
Bates Cross-Canal No.1 Dam - contributing structure: located between Bates No.
5 Mill and Bates No. 1 Mill, Tax Map 207, Inventory Map No. 15
Red Shop Weir - Contributing structure: western terminus of Cross Canal No. 1,
Tax Map 208 lot 6, Inventory Map No. 17
Bates Manufacturing Company Lower Station - contributing building: 49 Beech
Street, Tax Map 208 lot 6, Inventory Map No. 18
Continental Control House - contributing building: Beech Street, Tax Map 208
Lot 6, Inventory Map No. 19
Continental Weir - contributing structure: Tax Map 208 Lot 6, Inventory Map No.
20
Androscoggin Weir - contributing structure: at the southern end of the upper
canal, Tax Map 197, Inventory Map No. 21
No. 2 Mill Wheel House/Bates Centennial Station - contributing building: 352
Lincoln Street, Tax Map 197 lots 14 & 15, Inventory Map No. 22
Railroad Bridges
Grand Trunk Railroad Bridge Lower canal - contributing structure: Lewiston &
Auburn Railroad Company Bridge #5.30, Tax Map 208, Inventory Map No. 24
Maine Central Railroad Bridge No. 48.70 - contributing structure: between Bates
Mill No. 3 and Bates Mill No. 6, carrying Mill Street, Tax Map 197, Inventory
Map No. 25
Maine Central Railroad, Lower Line Railroad Bridge No. 48.48 - contributing
structure: over cross Canal #2, in the former MCRR-Lower Line right-of-way
behind the Hill Mill, Map 197, Inventory Map No. 27
Vehicular and Foot Bridges
Bates Mill Office Iron Girder Bridge - contributing structure: spanning Upper
Canal at western end of Pine Street, Tax Map 208, Inventory Map No. 32
Bates Concrete Bridge - contributing structure, spanning upper canal at western
end of Ash Street, Tax Map 297, Inventory Map No.33
Wiseman Bridge/Chestnut Street Bridge, MDOT Bridge 5003 - contributing
structure: spans upper canal on Chestnut Street, Tax Map 208, Inventory Map No.
35
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:21
Lewiston Mill Pedestrian Bridge and Continental Mill Pedestrian Bridge - 2
contributing structures: spans Lower Canal north and south of Chestnut Street,
Tax Map 208, Inventory Map No.s 38 & 39
Lincoln Street Alley Bridge, MDOT Bridge #0051- contributing structure: over
Cross Canal #2 at Lincoln Street Alley, Tax Map 208, Inventory Map No. 41
Androscoggin Footbridge - contributing structure: spans Upper Canal at
intersection of Canal and Lisbon Streets, Map 197, Inventory Map No. 46
(c) Historic structures, building or sites. The following structures, buildings or sites have
been designated as having significant historic value and are recommended for historic
preservation:
81 Ash Street (Healey Asylum) listed on National Register of Historic Places 10/1/79;
27 Bartlett Street (Sts. Peter and Paul Church) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 7/14/83;
122 Bartlett Street (Dr. Louis Martel House) listed on National Register of Historic
Places1/4/83;
257 College Street (Hathorn Hall--Bates College) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 5/25/70;
100 Campus Avenue (Marcotte Nursing Home) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 12/26/85;
103 Lincoln Street (Grand Trunk RR Station) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 6/4/79;
143 Lincoln Street (Dominican Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places
1/15/80;
23, 25, 29 Lisbon Street (Union Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places
4/25/86;
46 Lisbon Street (Grants Clothing) listed on National Register of Historic Places 4/25/86;
133 Lisbon Street (First McGillicuddy Block) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 4/25/86;
145 Lisbon Street (Manufacturer's National Bank Building) listed on National Register of
Historic Places 4/25/86;
186 Lisbon Street (Odd Fellows Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places
4/25/86;
200 Lisbon Street (Pilsbury Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places 4/14/83;
215 Lisbon Street (Monroe Building/Savings Bank Block) listed on National Register of
Historic Places 1/20/78;
220 Lisbon Street (Atkinson Building) listed on National Register of Historic Places
2/2/83;
242 Lisbon Street (College Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places 4/25/86;
276 Lisbon Street (First Callahan Building) listed on National Register of Historic Places
4/25/86;
276 Lisbon Street (Second Callahan Building) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 4/25/86;
381 Lisbon Street (Lord Block) listed on National Register of Historic Places 4/25/86;
415 Lisbon Street (Maine Supply Company Building) listed on National Register of
Historic Places 4/25/86;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:22
253 Main Street (St. Joseph's Church) listed on National Register of Historic Places
7/13/89;
377 Main Street (Holland-Drew House) listed on National Register of Historic Places
12/22/78;
497 Main Street (James C. Lord House) listed on National Register of Historic Places
7/21/78;
3 Mill Street (Cowan Mill) listed on National Register of Historic Places 8/1/85
(condemned and demolished 2009);
36 Oak Street (Oak Street School/Dingley Building) listed on National Register of
Historic Places 10/8/76;
74 Oxford Street (Continental Mill Blocks) listed on National Register of Historic Places
7/10/79;
101 Pine Street (Dr. Milton Wedgewood House) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 1/10/86;
19 Wood Street (Jordan School) listed on National Register of Historic Places 3/22/84.
(Ord. No. 92-32, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10;
Ord. 17-12, 3-22-18; Ord. 19-03, 7-18-19)
Sec. 7. Buildings and structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places but not
designated locally.
(a) The following are those properties that are listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, but whose owners at the time their individual properties were included in this article
chose not to nominate them to be designated locally and therefore, are only subject to the
demolition delay provisions of this article:
49 Ash Street (U.S. Post Office) listed on National Register of Historic Places 5/2/86;
142 College Street (Capt. Holland House) listed on National Register of Historic Places
3/21/85;
45 Golder Street (St. Mary's Hospital) listed on National Register of Historic Places
12/30/87;
49 Lisbon Street (Lyceum Hall) listed on National Register of Historic Places 4/25/86;
129 Lisbon Street (Osgood Building) listed on National Register of Historic Places
4/25/86;
157 Main Street (First National Bank Building) listed on National Register of Historic
Places 4/25/86;
457 Main Street (Senator Frye House) listed on National Register of Historic Places
10/8/76;
54 Pine Street (Bradford House) listed on National Register of Historic Places 12/22/78
(demolished 2007);
11 Sabattus Street (Kora Temple) listed on National Register of Historic Places 9/11/75;
14 Ware Street (J.D. Clifford House) listed on National Register of Historic Places
12/30/87.
(b) Buildings and structures listed on the National Register of Historic places, but whose
owners at the time their individual properties were included in this article chose not to nominate
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:23
them to be designated locally and, are not subject to the demolition delay provisions of this
article:
506 Main Street (Bradford Peck House) entered in the National register of Historic Places
on 2/12/2009.
(Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10)
Sec. 8. Other important buildings and structures.
(a) The following have been designated as contributing structures or complexes within the
Lewiston Mill System District and are only subject to the demolition delay provisions of
this article:
520 Lisbon Street (Lewiston Bleachery and Dye Building);
1 Beech Street (Lewiston Mill #2--Northern portion demolished 2004);
35 Beech Street (Lewiston Mill #1);
65 Canal Street (Bates Mill – Mill 7 demolished 1988, Mill 3 Annex demolished 2007
and the Executive Office Building demolished 2009);
2 Cedar Street (Continental Mill);
41 Chestnut Street (Hill Mill);
134 Main Street (Union Water Power Main Gatehouse);
296 Lincoln (Avon Mill);
332 Lincoln Street (Lewiston Gas & Light Company Building--Demolished 2001);
348 Lincoln Street (Androscoggin Mill #3--Portion demolished 2004);
354 Lincoln Street (Cumberland Mill);
550 Lisbon Street (Pepperell Mill)
15 Locust Street (Androscoggin Mill);
28 Middle Street (Maine Central Railroad Depot);
10 Mill Street (Union Water Power Substation);
6 Mill Street (Libbey Mill--Portion demolished 2001 and totally demolished 2007);
62 Oxford Street (Union Water Power Cross Canal #3 Hydro Station);
38 Water Street (Union Water Power Cross Canal #1 Gate House);
2 West Bates Street (Lewiston Machine Company Building).
(b) The following properties have been designated as buildings of major importance or
buildings of importance, within the Lewiston Historic Preservation Plan's "Preservation
Index" and are only subject to the demolition delay provisions of this article:
35 Ash Street (First Manufacturers National Bank Building);
77 Bates Street (Portland Lewiston Interurban Building);
46 Cedar Street (St. Mary's Church);
59 Cedar Street (Charest-Lacasse Building);
68 Cedar Street (demolished 2004);
15 Lincoln Street (Davis Block – demolished 2008);
14 Lincoln Street (Carman--Thompson Company Building--Demolished 2002);
69 Lincoln Street;
132 Lincoln Street (FX Marcotte);
2 Lisbon Street (Central Block);
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:24
1 Lisbon Street (The Gateway Building);
43 Lisbon Street (J.J. Newberry Company Building);
50 Lisbon Street (Osgoods Building);
55 Lisbon Street (Depositors Trust Company
Building);71 Lisbon Street (Music Hall Building/Frye Block);
84 Lisbon Street (Burlington Chambers Apartments);
93 Lisbon Street;
96 Lisbon Street (Lincoln Stores);
108 Lisbon Street (A. Singer Building);
128 Lisbon Street (Sands Building);
159 Lisbon Street (Old Kora Temple – condemned 2006 and demolished 2007);
160 Lisbon Street (McGillicudy Building);
167 Lisbon Street (D.B. Cressey Building – condemned 2006 and demolished 2007);
168 Lisbon Street;
171 Lisbon Street (Greely Building- condemned 2006 and demolished 2007);
179 Lisbon Street (Centreville Plaza);
180 Lisbon Street (Ellard Building);
192 Lisbon Street (Garcelon Building);
195 Lisbon Street (Clifford Block);
199 Lisbon Street (Marcotte Furniture Building);
223 Lisbon Street (Le Messager Building);
230 Lisbon Street (Pottle Building);
238 Lisbon Street;
305 Lisbon Street (condemned and demolished 2006);
330 Lisbon Street (Bergen Block--Demolished 1999);
369 Lisbon Street (demolished 2004);
385 Lisbon Street (Palange Building);
389 Lisbon Street (S.B.S. Lithuanian Hall);
391 Lisbon Street;
142 Main Street (Empire Theater – demolished 2005);
177 Main Street;
184 Main Street (Peck's Department Store);
195 Main Street;
250 Main Street (United Baptist Church);
253 Main Street (St. Joseph's Church Rectory);
29 Maple Street (Ritz Theater);
39 Maple Street (demolished 2005);
10 Oak Street (Oak Street Arms Apartments/Twin City Motor Corp.);
88 Oxford Street (St. Mary's Church Rectory Building);
20 Park Street;
37 Park Street;
104 Park Street (Daily Sun Building);
228 Park Street (demolished 2001);
257 Park Street (Androscoggin Mill Block);
263 Park Street (Androscoggin Mill Block);
271 Park Street (Androscoggin Mill Block--Listed on National Register of Historic
Places 4/12/01);
31 River Street;
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:25
70 River Street.
(Ord. No. 00-21, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 05-05, 3-17-05; Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10)
Sec. 9. Main Street Frye Street National Historic District.
The following properties are located within the Main Street-Frye Street National Historic
District (entered in the National Register of Historic Places on 01/23/2009). The Main Street-
Frye Street National Historic District is not designated locally and, in addition, the individual
properties are not subject to the demolition delay provisions of this article):
226 College Street (Thomas L. Angell House - two contributing buildings);
240 College Street (James T. Small House - one contributing building);
250 College Street (Abbie C. Whittum House - one contributing building);
256 College Street (Emeline C. Boothby House - one contributing building);
262 College Street (Oren B. Cheney House - one contributing building);
6 Frye Street (Heircy Day House - two non-contributing buildings);
9 Frye Street (vacant lot - no resources);
10 Frye Street (Albert B. Nealey House - one contributing building);
11 Frye Street (William P. Frye House - one contributing building – demolished 2008);
16 Frye Street (George Colby Chase House - one contributing building);
17 Frye Street (Caroline W. D. Rich House - one non-contributing and one contributing
building);
18 Frye Street (James A. Howe House - two contributing buildings);
19 Frye Street (David S. and Josephine L. Waite House - two contributing buildings);
24 Frye Street (Lyman G. Jordan House - one contributing building);
27 Frye Street (George D. Armstrong House - two contributing buildings);
28 Frye Street (John H. Rand House - one contributing building);
29 Frye Street (Byron Armstrong House - two contributing buildings);
30 Frye Street (Richard C. Stanley House - one contributing building);
31 Frye Street (Maurice Small House - one contributing building);
36 Frye Street (Evindar and Angenette Whittier House - one contributing building);
425 Main Street (Bauer Apartment Block - three contributing buildings);
437 Main Street (Colonel John M. Frye House - two contributing buildings);
443 Main Street (Ralph W. Crockett House - one contributing building);
444 Main Street (James Wirt White House - one contributing building);
449 Main Street (Wallace H. White Jr. House - two contributing buildings);
452 Main Street (Archibald Wakefield House - one contributing building);
453-455 Main Street (vacant lot - no contributing resource);
457 Main Street (Senator William P. Frye House - one contributing building);
460 Main Street (John D. Clifford House - one contributing building);
465 Main Street (Joseph H. and Rebecca Day House - two contributing buildings);
471 Main Street (John B. Smith House - one contributing building);
473 Main Street (Emma C. Smith House - one contributing building);
477 Main Street (Ashbury E. Soule House - one contributing building);
481 Main Street (John W. Perry House - two non-contributing buildings);
485 Main Street (George Bonnallie House - two contributing buildings);
487 Main Street (Sarah Wakefield House - one contributing building);
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XV. SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XV:26
491 Main Street (Thomas Francis Butler House - one contributing building);
493 Main Street (Adolphe Plourde Apartment - one contributing building);
497 Main Street (James C. Lord House - two contributing buildings).
(Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10)
Sec. 10. Buildings and structures eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Place whose owners at the time of such determination chose not to have their individual
properties listed:
354 Main Street (Blake Ham House) is eligible for listing on National Register of
Historic Places (determination made on February 12, 2009).
(Ord. No. 10-05, 04-15-10)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVI. DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
Lewiston Code A XVI:1
Sec. 1. Downtown Development District.
There is hereby created, in the City of Lewiston, a special development district to be known as
the "downtown development district" and described as follows:
Starting at a point at the edge of the Androscoggin River and the rear property line of a
parcel on the northerly side of Main Street adjacent to the James B. Longley Memorial
Bridge.
Along the rear property lines of the parcels fronting on Main Street from the James B.
Longley Memorial Bridge to Hammond Street.
Hammond Street, Main Street, Blake Street, along the rear property lines of the parcels
fronting on Main Street to Bates Street, Bates Street, Ash Street, Middle Street, Pine
Street, Park Street.
Spruce Street and an extension thereof from Park Street to Canal Street.
Canal Street, along the rear property lines of the parcels fronting to Main Street to the
Androscoggin River, along the river to the point of beginning.
The term "rear property lines" shall be deemed in all instances to mean the rear lot line of a lot
fronting on a stated street or the rear lines of the building facing the street and not more than ten
feet distant therefrom, whichever rear line is the greater distance from Main Street.
Unless otherwise described, the district boundary lines are the center line of streets or such lines
extended.
Sec. 2. Southern Gateway Development District.
There is hereby created, in the City of Lewiston, a special development district to be known as
the "southern gateway development district" and be described as follows:
The area bounded by the beginning of the intersection of Canal Street and Adams
Avenue, along Adams Avenue to Knox Street, along Knox Street to Spruce Street, along
Spruce Street to Lisbon Street, along Lisbon Street to Chestnut Street, along Chestnut
Street to Canal Street and along Canal Street back to the point beginning.
(Ord. No. 03-07, 7-17-03)
Sec. 3. Western Gateway Development District.
There is hereby created, in the City of Lewiston, a special development district to be known as
the "western gateway development district" and be described as follows:
The area bounded by the beginning of the intersection of Androscoggin River and Cross
Canal #1, following the southern edge of Cross Canal #1 to the eastern edge of the main
canal, along the eastern edge of the main canal to the gatehouse, where the boundary
crosses the canal and follows the River's edge, parallel to Island Avenue, turning
southward at the Monty Hydro Station, and following the river's edge to the point
beginning.
(Ord. No. 03-08, 7-17-03)
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:1
Sec. 1. Application.
This Code is not intended and shall not be interpreted to interfere with, abrogate, annul or repeal
any ordinance, rule, regulation or permit previously enacted, adopted or issued pursuant to law.
Sec. 2. Interpretation.
(a) In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the City of Lewiston.
(b) Interpretation of what may not be clear in the Code shall be according to the intent of the
Code and the comprehensive plan.
Sec. 3. Conflict with other ordinances.
Whenever the regulations of this Code conflict with those of another ordinance, the stricter shall
apply.
Sec. 4. Severability.
(a) If any provision of this Code is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
judgment shall be confined in its operation to that provision of this Code directly involved in the
controversy which gave rise to the judgment and shall not affect or impair the validity of any
other provision of this Code.
(b) Nothing in this Code shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in
any court or any rights arising prior to its enactment pursuant to provisions of law then in effect.
Sec. 5. Amendments.
(a) Power to amend. The power to amend this Code rests in the city council of the city.
(b) Proposed amendments.
(1) A proposal to amend this Code may be initiated by:
a. Reference from the city council; or
b. Petition signed by not less than ten (10) residents of the City of Lewiston,
eighteen (18) years of age and older; or
c. The planning board at its own initiative.
(2) Any proposal to amend or repeal this Code shall be in writing and shall include
the following:
a. The setting out in full of the ordinance section or subsection to be repealed
or amended, indicating matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or
by striking out type and indicating new matter by underscoring or italics;
b. The enacting clause shall be "The City of Lewiston hereby ordains . . . ";
c. A statement indicating the reasons for the proposed amendment;
d. A statement indicating how the proposed amendment is in conformance
with the comprehensive plan.
e. In the case of a petition for rezoning, a black line print of a diagram
reflecting the verbal description of the proposed change and the relation of
the proposed change to the presently existing district boundaries involved.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:2
(3) Rezoning in accordance with architect's plan. When a person petitions for
rezoning of an area for the purpose of development in accordance with an
architect's plan, the area shall not be rezoned unless the petitioner posts a
performance bond equal to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the estimated cost
of the development. Said bond shall become payable to the city if the petitioner
fails to begin construction in a substantial manner and in accordance with the plan
within one (1) year of the effective date of the rezoning.
(4) Conditional or contract zoning. Proposals to rezone may include those for
conditional or contract zoning pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4352(8) as
amended. Such a rezoning should be limited in its application and only be
authorized where for reasons such as the unusual nature or unique location of the
development proposed, the city council finds it necessary and appropriate to
impose, by agreement with the property owner or otherwise, certain conditions or
restrictions in order to ensure that the rezoning is consistent with the city's
comprehensive plan. Nothing in this section shall authorize either an agreement to
change or retain a zone or a rezoning which is inconsistent with the city's
comprehensive plan. A proposal for conditional zoning shall contain, in addition
to the requirements imposed hereby for other amendments, a written statement of
the conditions regarding the use of the subject property which the proponent
requests be imposed which are not generally applicable to other properties
similarly zoned. A proposal for contract zoning shall contain, in addition to the
requirements imposed hereby for other amendments, a proposed written contract
which the proponent requests that the city enter into with the owner of the
property affected by which, in consideration of the rezoning of said property,
certain conditions or restrictions not imposed on other similarly zoned properties
would be imposed.
(c) Amendment procedure.
(1) The planning board shall hold a public hearing on any proposal to amend this
Code. Public hearings on proposals initiated by reference from the city council or
by petition shall be held within thirty (30) days after the proposal has been
submitted to the planning board, unless a greater number of days is authorized by
the city council.
(2) The planning board shall make its report and recommendation on the proposal to
the city council not more than fifteen (15) days after the public hearing has been
closed. The failure of the board to issue its report constitutes approval of the
proposal.
(3) The planning board's recommendation to the city council shall address the
proposal's conformance with the comprehensive plan.
(d) Notice of public hearing.
(1) Notice to petitioners. The planning board shall give notice of the public hearing to
the petitioners by mail. Failure of any petitioner to receive such notice shall not
necessitate another hearing, shall not constitute grounds for objections by such
petitioner, shall not invalidate any recommendation by the planning board on such
zoning matter, nor any final action taken by the city council thereon.
(2) Public notice. On all proposals notice shall consist of a legal advertisement
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least two (2) times,
the first at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, and posting in the city
building at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. On all
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:3
rezoning proposals, notice shall also consist of a copy of the public hearing notice
mailed to the owners of all property within or abutting the area proposed to be
rezoned, together with, in the case of a proposal for conditional or contract
rezoning, a copy of the proposed conditions and restrictions.
(3) Manner of giving mailed notice. Mailed notice shall be given by first class mail at
least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notices shall be mailed to the addresses
shown on the property tax records of the city. Notices shall be deemed given
when mailed.
(e) Vote requirements.
(1) If the planning board approves a proposal, either by way of an official report to
the city council or by way of default by failing to issue its report to the city
council, the city council may, by affirmative vote of at least four (4) councilors at
a regular or special meeting, duly called, amend this Code.
(2) If the planning board disapproves the proposal by way of an official report to the
city council, the city council may amend this Code only by the affirmative vote of
at least five (5) councilors at a regular or special meeting, duly called.
(f) Amendments affecting the resource conservation district. The development department
shall notify the state planning office by certified mail of all proposed amendments to this Code
that would affect the resource conservation district. Such notice shall be given on or before the
deadline imposed by section 5(c)(2) of this article.
(g) Conditional or contract zoning. The city council may, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. section
4352(8) as amended, approve a rezoning conditionally or by contract. Such a rezoning shall only
be approved if:
(1) The change is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
(2) The change establishes rezoned areas which are consistent with the existing and
permitted uses within the original district.
(3) All conditions and restrictions imposed relate only to the physical development or
operation of the property and may include, by way of example:
a. Limitations on the number and types of uses permitted;
b. Restrictions on the scale and density of development;
c. Specifications for the design and layout of the buildings and other
improvements;
d. Schedules for commencement and completion of construction;
e. Performance guarantees securing completion and maintenance of
improvements, and guarantees against defects;
f. Preservation of open space and buffers, and protection of natural areas and
historic sites;
g. Contributions toward the provision of municipal services required by the
development; and
h. Provisions for enforcement and remedies for breach of any condition or
restriction, which may include, by way of example;
1. Provisions that violation of any of the conditions shall constitute a
violation of the zoning and land use code.
2. Statements that the conditions shall bind the owner, its successors,
assigns and any person in possession or occupancy of the premises
or any portion thereof and shall inure to the benefit of and be
enforceable by the city.
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:4
3. Provisions requiring the owner at his expense to record in the
Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds a copy of the conditions
and any required site plans within thirty (30) days following final
approval of the petition by the city and that the form of the
recording be in a form satisfactory to the city.
4. Statement indicating that the conditions shall run with the land.
5. Provisions that state in addition to all other remedies to which the
city may be entitled under applicable provisions of statute
ordinance, that if any party in possession or use of the premises
fails or refuses to comply with any of the conditions imposed that
any rezoning approved by the city in accordance with the
conditions shall be of no force or effect and, in that event, any use
of the premises and any buildings structures developed pursuant to
the rezoning shall be immediately abated and brought into
compliance with all applicable provisions of the zoning and land
use code with the same effect as if the rezoning had never
occurred.
6. Statements indicating that if any of the conditions are found by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such a determination
shall not invalidate any of the other conditions.
7. The site plans should be attached and incorporated by reference.
(4) The owner of the property rezoned has agreed in writing to the conditions
imposed or has executed a contract in a form acceptable to the city council.
Any rezoning approved by the city council conditionally or by contract shall be of
no force or effect if the owner of the property fails or refuses to comply with the
conditions imposed or the terms of the contract. In that event, any use of the
property and any buildings and structures developed pursuant to the rezoning
shall be abated and the property brought into compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 91-6, 6-6-91)
Sec. 6. Transitional rules.
Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary contained in this Code:
(1) Major subdivisions. All approved lots on a major subdivision which was approved after
October 31, 1972, and before the date of enactment of this Code shall be deemed to be
conforming lots under this Code if, on or before the date of enactment of this Code, all
public improvements provided for in said approved subdivision plan were substantially
complete.
(2) Major subdivisions--Phase development. All approved lots contained in the phase of a
major subdivision which was approved after October 31, 1972, and before the date of
enactment of this Code shall be deemed to be conforming lots under this Code if, on or
before the date of enactment of this Code, all public improvements provided for in said
phase of the approved subdivision plan were substantially complete.
(3) Same--Public improvements. All major subdivisions for which complete applications
were filed after October 31, 1972, and before the date of enactment of this Code which
are finally approved by the planning board but for which complete applications for all
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:5
required permits for the construction and completion of the public improvements required
by said approved plan were not filed prior to the enactment of this Code may have said
public improvements developed and constructed in accordance with said approved plan.
All permits, licenses and certificates necessary for the development and construction of
said public improvements in accordance with said approved plan may be applied for and
issued in accordance with said approved plan so long as complete applications for all said
required permits are filed within two (2) years from the date of enactment of this Code or
two (2) years from the date of final approval of said subdivision, whichever is later.
(4) Cluster development.
a. So long as subsection (2) hereof is complied with, any plan for a new town,
planned unit development or cluster development which received final planning
board approval after October 31, 1972, and on or before October 22, 1987, may
be developed, constructed and used in accordance with the plans approved by the
planning board and all permits, licenses and certificates necessary for the
development, construction or use of said cluster development in accordance with
said plan may be applied for and issued in accordance with those ordinances in
effect on the date said plan was finally approved by the planning board and which
were repealed on the enactment of this Code.
b. In order to be entitled to the relief provided for in subsection (1) hereof, complete
applications for all permits required for the development, construction and use of
said cluster development must be filed within two (2) years of the date on which
the planning board granted final approval of said cluster development; or, in the
event of a development approved in phases, all said applications for permits
required for the initial phase of said development shall be filed within two (2)
years of said approval and filed thereafter in accordance with the phasing which
was approved by the planning board.
c. Any plan for a new town, planned unit development or cluster development which
received preliminary planning board approval after October 31, 1972, and on or
before October 22, 1987, may, if finally approved by the planning board, be
developed, constructed and used in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Said development, construction and use shall be, except as otherwise
herein required, in accordance with said plan as finally approved.
2. Said development, construction and use shall comply with those
provisions of this Code which relate to permitted uses, minimum net lot
area per dwelling unit and maximum number of dwelling units per
building which are applicable in the district in which said development is
located.
3. Except as otherwise herein provided, all permits, licenses and certificates
necessary for the development, construction or use of said cluster
development in accordance with said plan may be applied for and issued
in accordance with those ordinances in effect on the day before the
enactment of this Code and which were repealed on its enactment.
d. Any plan for a new town, planned unit development or cluster development for
which a complete application for preliminary approval was filed after October 31,
1972, and on or before October 22, 1987, may, if finally approved by the planning
board, be developed, constructed and used in accordance with the following
requirements:
APPENDIX A – ZONING AND LAND USE CODE
ARTICLE XVII. AMENDMENT AND OTHER LEGAL PROVISIONS
Lewiston Code A XVII:6
1. Said development, construction and use shall be, except as otherwise
herein required, in accordance with said plan as finally approved.
2. Said development, construction and use shall comply with those
provisions of this Code which relate to permitted uses, minimum net lot
area per dwelling unit, maximum number of dwelling units per building,
buffers and open space.
3. Except as otherwise herein provided, all permits, licenses and certificates
necessary for the development, construction or use of said cluster
development in accordance with said plan may be applied for and issued
in accordance with those ordinances in effect on the day before the
enactment of this Code and which were repealed on its enactment.
(5) Development review. Article XIII of this Code shall not apply to a development for which
a building permit was issued prior to the date of enactment of this Code or to a
development for which site location approval was obtained under former section 21-2 of
the Revised Code of Ordinances.