1
2
ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND WAYS ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
An ordinance regulating the laying out and acceptance of new streets and
ways, or parts thereof, by the Town of Livermore Falls. Town requirements
for privately owned subdivision roads and privately owned mobile home
park roads are also included in this ordinance (Sections XII and XIII).
Section I. New Streets, Conditions of Acceptance
A. General: The Board of Selectmen shall not lay out a street as a Town
way, nor shall it submit any article to a Town meeting requesting the
acceptance of a street as a Town way unless the street has been designed and
constructed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Subdivisions: The Planning Board shall not approve any subdivision plan
unless proposed town streets are designed and will be, or are constructed in
accordance with this ordinance. The Planning Board is not precluded by this
ordinance from adopting additional or more restrictive regulations governing
street design and construction within subdivisions, pursuant to Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4401.
Section II. Dedication and Acceptance
No property or interest therein may be dedicated for highway purposes
unless the owner of such property or interest has filed with the Board of
Selectmen a petition, agreement, deed, affidavit, or other writing specifically
describing the property of interest and its location, and stating that the owner
voluntarily offers to transfer such interests to the Town of Livermore Falls
without claim for damages, or has filed in the Registry of Deeds an approved
subdivision plot plan which describes property to be appropriated for public
use.
The Town of Livermore Falls may accept a dedication of property or
interests therein by an affirmative vote of Town Meeting.
Unless specifically provided by the Town of Livermore Falls, title to
property accepted for highway purposes shall be in fee simple (Title 23,
MRSA, Section 3025 ).
3
Section III. Names
Continuations of existing streets shall be given the name of existing streets.
Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of
existing streets.
Section I v. Applications
Applicants requesting the acceptance of a new street or way must file a plan
showing the following:
a. The scale of the plan.
b. The direction of magnetic north.
c. The starting and ending points with relation to established roads,
streets or ways.
d. The street lines with relation to existing buildings and landmarks.
e. Dimensions, both lineal and angular, necessary for locating
boundaries and necessary for locating subdivisions, lots, easements,
and building lines.
f. The lots as laid out on said street, showing the names of all other
owners of abutting property.
g. All natural waterways and water courses on land contiguous to the
said streets or ways.
h. Any streets or rights of ways off the proposed street shall be
located on the plan and any existing or proposed names shall be
given.
i. Subdividers desiring to have streets in their subdivision accepted
as town streets shall submit to the Planning Board all information
concerning proposed streets required in Items a-h above as an integral
part of their plot plan and application for subdivision approval, and as
required by the Planning Board (Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4401).
With the plan, applicants shall submit a written application for the
acceptance, giving the following information:
a. The names of the owner or owners of the land containing the street
or way to be accepted.
b. The name or names of the developers.
c. A statement of any legal encumbrances on the property.
4
d. A statement giving the proposed starting and finishing dates of the
street construction.
The applicant shall also submit with the plan and written application, a
profile drawing showing:
a. The scale of the profile, both horizontal and vertical.
b. Proposed provisions for ditching, culverts, and storm drainage with
respect to natural waterways or contours.
c. The Planning Board may require cross sections at 100 foot
intervals along the profiles if the roughness of the terrain warrants this
information, in the opinion of the Board.
All applications shall be made to and supporting data filed with the
Selectmen and/or the Planning Board of the Town of Livermore Falls, and
approval must be obtained before plans are filed with the Registry of Deeds.
Section V.. Specifications
No street or way shall be accepted by the Town as a public way, unless the
following specifications have been complied with:
a. All roads and streets must be designed by a Professional Engineer,
registered in the State of Maine.
b. The minimum right of way width shall be fifty feet. A minimum
right of way of sixty feet shall be required for collector streets. A
five foot snow and utility easement may be required on each side of
the fifty foot right of way.
c. The road section shall be in the center of the right of way.
d. Unstable or soft material in the area of the sub-base of the street or
road shall be removed and replaced with a base material suitable to
the Town Road Commissioner.
e. The base grading shall contain no rocks or other material larger in
size than one third the depth of the base.
f. The finish grade shall consist of fine clean gravel.
g. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of surface water
through ditches, culverts and/or other similar means. Culverts shall
not be less than twelve (12) inches in size. Catch basins shall be
no less than thirty by thirty inches (30"x30"). Both culverts and catch
5
basins shall be of steel or concrete. All materials incorporated into
the work shall be new.
h. All construction shall comply with cross sections and profile
drawings accompanying and made an integral part of this ordinance,
except for variations approved by the Planning Board.
i. Monuments as required by the Board of Selectmen shall be
provided for proper location of the street.
j. At all 90 degree right angle intersections of local highways and
streets, the edge of pavement in all quadrants will be designed and
constructed to provide as a minimum, simple curves having a radius
of 25'.
k. Whenever the ratios of slopes for ditches, shoulders, grading and
other purposes required by this ordinance cannot be adhered to within
the required fifty foot limits, and grading and excavation is necessary
beyond this width, it shall be necessary to secure good and sufficient
slope easement from abutting owners without cost or expense to the
Town, and such rights indemnifying the Town shall be presented and
recorded prior to any action for acceptance.
l. All streets or ways shall be constructed according to the latest
edition of the "State of Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges".
Section V I. Gravel Base and Paving
A base course of 12“of gravel and a surface course of 6“ of gravel shall be
applied. The thickness of the gravel base course shall be increased where it
is found necessary to stabilize poor sub-grade conditions and/or to minimize
frost penetration.
Aggregates for both the base and surface courses shall consist of granular
material containing hard, durable particles with reasonably uniform
distribution in size from largest to the smallest particle. Materials that have
abnormally high absorption characteristics or that breakup when alternately
frozen and thawed or wetted and dried shall not be used. The base course
shall not contain any rocks larger than four inches in diameter. All base
course material shall be free of vegetable matter, clumps or balls of clay and
other undesirable materials.
The top six inches, the surface course, shall consist of durable gravel and
contain no particles larger than two inches in diameter.
6
An all-weather flexible type pavement shall be constructed on all new streets
and ways prior to their acceptance as Town ways. The type of pavement
shall be as shown on the typical road cross-sections on page 8 of this
ordinance or as specified by the Planning Board.
The materials and application shall be in accordance with the latest edition
of the "State of Maine Department of Transportation Standards
Specifications for Roads and Bridges".
The Planning Board may waive paving of streets within subdivisions of less
than six lots.
Section VII. Driveway Entrances
Each abutting property owner or developer, as the case may be, shall not
obstruct the flow or drainage of a ditch on any road or street within the
jurisdiction of the Town by construction of a driveway or entrance to his
property. To comply with this, all culverts that may be necessary shall be
furnished by the owner or developer. On accepted streets the culverts
furnished will be installed and maintained by the Town. Prior to acceptance
of any street, such culverts shall be installed in accordance with this
ordinance by the property owner or developer, but will be maintained by the
Town following acceptance of the street. Culvert sizes and materials shall
be as specified in this ordinance. Culverts shall be a minimum of thirty feet
in length unless a shorter length is allowed by the Road Commissioner.
Section VIII. Sidewalks
The Board of Selectmen and/or the Planning Board shall have the authority
to designate whether sidewalks shall be required and whether sidewalks
shall be constructed on both sides of the street or way or only on one
designated side.
Section IX. Utilities
Longitudinal runs of water or sewer mains shall be laid outside the roadbed
and clear of any present or designated sidewalks. Utility poles shall be so
placed that any present or designated sidewalk may be contained within the
boundaries of the street or way without obstruction by polls or
appurtenances.
7
Section X. Inspection During Construction
Whenever an application for the acceptance of a street is received, the Road
Commissioner of the Town shall be fully informed and given all the data as
to layout and location. All inspection during construction shall be made by a
professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Maine. The
engineer shall make periodic reports to the Road Commissioner as to the
degree of compliance or noncompliance with this ordinance. All costs of
inspection by the licensed engineer shall be borne and paid for by the
applicant.
Section XI. Planning Board Concurrence
All applications for laying out streets or ways must be approved by the
Planning Board prior to being presented to the Town for acceptance.
Section XII. Privately Owned Roads
Privately owned roads in a subdivision shall be designed by a professional
engineer, registered in the State of Maine, and shall be constructed according
to the latest edition of the "State of Maine Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges".
Section XIII. Privately Owned Roads - Mobile Home Parks
1. Privately owned roads shall be designed by a professional engineer,
registered in the State of Maine, and shall be built according to the latest
edition of the "State of Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges".
2. Roads shall have a maximum right of way of 23 feet, of which 20 feet
shall be paved.
3. Mobile home parks which intersect with public roads shall meet the
following standards:
a. The desired angle of intersection shall be 90 degrees. The
minimum angle of intersection shall be 75 degrees.
b. The maximum grade within 75 feet of the intersection shall be 2%.
8
c. The minimum site distance shall be 10 feet for each 1 MPH of
regulated speed. Site distances shall be measured from the driver's
seat of a vehicle that is 10 feet behind the curb edge or shoulder line
with the height of the eye 3 1/2 feet above the pavement and the
height of object 4 1/4 feet. Where necessary, the park land
bordering the intersection shall be cleared of all growth and sight
obstructions to achieve the required visibility.
d. Distance from other intersections - the centerline of any street
within a park intersecting an existing public street shall be at least 125
feet from the centerline of any other street intersecting that public
street.
Adopted June 3, 1991
9
1
2
ADDRESSING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid
location of properties for the delivery of public safety and emergency
services, postal delivery and business delivery.
Section 2. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the
Municipal Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section
1 of the Constitution of the State of Maine and Title 30-A MRSA Section
3001.
Section 3. Administration
This ordinance shall be administered by the Board of Selectmen, or
their appointed representative(s) who shall assign road names and numbers
to all properties, both on existing and proposed roads. The Board of
Selectmen, or their appointed representative(s) shall be responsible for
maintaining the following official records of this ordinance:
A. A Town of Livermore Falls map for official use showing road
names and numbers.
B. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current
assessment records, by last name, showing the assigned numbers.
C. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in
order of their assigned numbers.
Section 4. Naming System
All roads in the Town of Livermore Falls that serve two or more
addresses shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is public or
private. A road name assigned by the Town of Livermore Falls shall not
constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way. The following
criteria shall govern the naming system:
3
A. Similar names – No two roads shall be given the same or similar
sounding (e.g. Beech and Peach, Pine Road and Pine Lane) names.
B. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
Section 5. Numbering System
Numbers shall be assigned every 50 (fifty) feet along both sides of the
road, with even numbers appearing on the left side of the road and odd
numbers appearing on the right side of the road, determined by the number
origin. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
A. All number origins shall begin from the designated center of the
Town of Livermore Falls or that end of the road closest to the designated
center. For dead end roads, numbering shall originate at the intersection of
the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end.
B. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the
numbered interval falling closest to the front door or driveway of said
structure.
C. Every structure with more than one principle use or occupancy
shall have a separate number for each use or occupancy (i.e. duplexes will
have two separate numbers; apartments will have one road number with an
apartment number, such as 235 Maple Street, Apt.2.)
Section 6. Compliance
All owners of structures shall, on or before the effective date of this
ordinance, display and maintain in a conspicuous place on said structure, the
assigned numbers in the following manner:
A. Number on the structure or residence. Where the residence or
structure is within 50 (fifty) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the
assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the residence or structure
in the vicinity of the front door or entry.
B. Number at the street line. Where the residence or structure is over
50 (fifty) feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number
4
shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mailbox or on some structure at the
property line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the residence or
structure.
C. Size and color of number. The numbers shall be displayed in a
color and size approved for use by the Board of Selectmen and shall be
located as to be visible from the road.
D. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned number shall
remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused
with, the number assigned in conformance with this ordinance.
E. Interior location. All residents and other occupants are requested
to post the assigned number and road name adjacent to their telephone for
emergency reference.
Section 7. New Developments and Subdivisions
All new developments and subdivisions shall be named and numbered
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and as follows:
A. New developments. Whenever any residence or other structure is
constructed or developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an
assigned number from the Board of Selectmen or their representative(s).
This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
B. New subdivisions. Any prospective subdivider shall show a
proposed road name and lot numbering system on the pre-application
submission to the Planning Board. Approval by the Planning Board shall
constitute the assignment of road names and numbers to the lots in the
subdivision. On the final plan showing proposed roads, the applicant shall
mark on the plan, lines or dots, in the center of the streets every 50 (fifty)
feet so as to aid in assignment of numbers to structures subsequently
constructed.
Section 8. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective as of June 14, 1995. It shall be
the duty of the Town of Livermore Falls to notify by mail each owner and
the Post Office of the new addresses within 30 (thirty) days. It shall be the
5
duty of each property owner to comply with this ordinance within 30 (thirty)
days of notification. On new structures, numbering will be installed prior to
final inspection, if required by local ordinance, or when the structure is first
used or occupied, whichever comes first.
Adopted June 14, 1995
1
2
ADULT-ONLY BUSINESS ORDINANCE
Section I. Findings
There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented businesses,
because of their very nature, have negative secondary effects on surrounding
areas. Research and studies of municipalities throughout this country
indicate that the presence of sexually oriented businesses is consistently and
strongly associated with perceived decreases in value of both residential and
commercial properties and the facilitation of illicit and undesirable activities.
This evidence is relevant to issues facing the Town. It is recognized that
sexually oriented businesses can adversely affect the character and quality of
life of a town and can be incompatible with surrounding uses, particularly
when the sexually oriented businesses are concentrated within a limited
geographic area or are located in proximity to residences, day care centers,
schools, houses of worship, public parks or recreational areas, or other
sexually oriented businesses. A police power ordinance is a proper and
reasonable means of controlling the negative secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses.
Section II. Purpose
The regulations of this ordinance are not directed at the content of speech,
but are directed at the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the time, place and
manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses. It is intended to
regulate and to annually license sexually oriented businesses; and to prevent
their location in proximity to residences, day care centers, schools, houses of
worship, public parks or recreational areas, or another sexually oriented
business. Regulations of these uses are necessary to insure that the negative
secondary effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding areas of the Town at large. The purpose of this ordinance is not
to prohibit sexually oriented businesses from operating in the Town, but to
regulate their location and manner of operation, while providing a
reasonable opportunity for such business to exist.
Section III. Definitions
The following terms are used in this Ordinance and for the purpose of the
Ordinance have the meanings to them below:
3
A. “Adult amusement store” means an establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, sexual devices or printed
material including pictures and photographs or films for sale or viewing on
premises that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specific sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” or an establishment with a portion of the premises devoted
to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment that holds itself
out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based on its signage,
advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coinoperated
booths, the exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises,
or any other factors showing that the establishment’s primary purpose is to
purvey such material.
B. “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building used
regularly and routinely for presenting motion picture or video material
having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specific sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons
therein.
C. “Adult entertainment cabaret” means a public or private establishment
which: 1) features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators,
or erotic dancers; 2) features entertainers who display “specified anatomical
areas”; 3) features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct
perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient
interest of the patron or entertainers who engage in explicit simulation of
“specified sexual activities”; or 4) offers sadomasochistic acts or bondage
and discipline to patrons.
D. “Adult spa” means an establishment or place primarily in the business of
providing a steam bath or sauna, bathing or hot tub services or rub-down or
other massage services and at which 1) a person’s specified anatomical areas
are not touched, rubbed, massaged or manipulated in any manner by another
person with or without the aid of any instrument or device or 2) a person’s
specified anatomical areas are exposed while that person touches, rubs,
massages or manipulates any part of the body of another person, with or
without the aid of any instrument or device or 3) specified sexual activities
are permitted to occur.
4
E. “Sexually oriented business” means adult amusement stores, adult movie
theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, or adult spas, as defined herein, or any
business where specified sexual activities are displayed, depicted described
or simulated as a regular and substantial part of its operation.
F. “Erotic dance” means a form of dance which seeks, through one or more
dancers, to arouse or excite the sexual desires of a patron or patrons.
G. “Residence” means any structure which is principally used as a dwelling
including, without limitation, a single family or multi-family house,
apartment, condominium or a mobile home.
H. “Sadomasochistic acts” or “bondage and discipline” means respectively,
flagellation, torture or punishment by or upon a person clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained while so clothed or by a
person so clothed.
I. “Sexual device” means a device or object the primary purpose of which is
to provide direct sexual stimulation of male or female genitals or anus.
J. “Specified criminal activity” means a criminal conviction for any of the
following offenses: prostitution or the promotion of prostitution;
dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material
to a minor; sexual performance by a child; or any similar sex-related
offenses to those described above under the Maine Criminal Code or statutes
of other states, the United States or any other nation or province, and for
which:
1. less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of the release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for an offense punishable by a
maximum term of imprisonment of less than one (1) year;
2. less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the
conviction or the date release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for an offense punishable by a
maximum term of one (1) year or more;
3. less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are for two (2) or
more offenses or combination of offenses occurring within any twenty-four
5
(24) hour period and all such offenses are punishable by maximum term of
imprisonment of less than one (1) year.
K. “Specified sexual activities” means:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, any sexual act or
sexual contact as defined by Maine law, or sodomy;
3. Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock
or female breast.
L. “Specified anatomical areas” means:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered: a.) human genitals,
pubic region, b.) buttocks or c.) female breast below a point of immediately
above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
Section IV. License Required
A person wishing to operate a sexually oriented business shall obtain an
annual license a.) prior to opening the person’s establishment, b.) prior to the
expiration of the person’s current annual license and c.) prior to the
expiration of the amortization period established in Section XIV of this
Article if a sexually oriented business is in existence on November 2, 2004.
Section V. Application, Investigation and Issuance of License
1. Application – an applicant for a sexually oriented business shall:
A. Complete and file an application prescribed by the Board of
Selectmen;
B. Deposit a license fee of $250 and a $50 processing fee in advance
with the Town Clerk;
C. Submit a completed application to the Town Manager, together
with attested copies of the articles of incorporation and bylaws, if the
applicant is a corporation, evidence of a partnership, if a partnership, or
articles of association and bylaws; if the applicant is an association, as well
as list of all officers and directors;
D. File a sworn affidavit which states the names of all owners,
officers, managers or partners of the applicant and their places of residence
6
at the time of the application and for the immediately preceding three (3)
years;
E. File the release authorized by 16 MRSA 620(6) (Criminal History
Record Information Act) with the application, for the applicant and each
officer, owner, manager or partner of the application;
F. Submit evidence of right, title or interest in the premises in which
the sexually oriented business will be sited, along with the written consent of
the owner of the premises for such use if applicant is not the owner;
G. State the date of initiation of the sexually oriented business and the
nature of the business with a description of the nature of all products and
services offered to customers;
H. Submit evidence of compliance with Section X of this ordinance
and evidence that there is no basis for denial of a license to applicant under
the standards listed in Section VI of this ordinance.
2. Investigation of applicant, officers – upon receipt of an application or
notice of a change of the owners, officers, managers or partners of the
applicant:
A. The Town Manager, upon receipt of a completed application, shall
immediately send a copy of the complete application to the Town officials
referenced in paragraphs B through E below. The Town Manager shall also
immediately consult with the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen and then
arrange for a public notice of a public hearing on the application in a
newspaper of general circulation and by mail to owners of lots within 1000
feet of the proposed location of the structure, at least ten (10) days prior to
the public hearing before the Board of Selectmen. The costs of publication,
certified mail postage and other expenses related to the hearing shall be paid
from the processing fee. After receipt of required reports from the Town
officials, the Town Manager shall forward the application and other
documents to the Board of Selectmen for public hearing and final decision.
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete
application by the Town Manager and a decision shall be made within
fifteen (15) business days thereafter;
B. The Health Officer, within fifteen (15) days of notice, shall inspect
the location or proposed location to determine whether the applicable laws
relating to health and safety have been satisfied and then report findings in
writing to the Town Manager;
C. The Fire Chief, within fifteen (15) days of notice, shall inspect the
location or proposed location of the business to determine if applicable State
7
and fire safety regulations have been satisfied and then report findings in
writing to the Town Manager;
D. A constable or other law enforcement officer shall investigate the
applicant, including the criminal history record information required under
Section V (1) (E) and then report findings in writing to the Town Manager
and
E. The Code Enforcement Officer, within fifteen (15) days of notice,
shall verify that the proposed premises of the establishment will comply with
Section X and with all other applicable State and Town laws and land use
codes of the Town and then report findings in writing to the Town Manager.
3. Issuance of license- The Board of Selectmen, after notice and public
hearing, shall determine whether the application and documents submitted
comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance. The license shall be
issued upon determination by the Board of Selectmen, based upon the
record, including evidence and testimony at the public hearing, that the
applicant meets the requirements of this ordinance. The license may not be
transferred or assigned.
Section VI. Standards of Denial
An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be denied by the
Board of Selectmen in the following circumstances:
A. The applicant is a corporation or other legal entity that is not authorized
to do business in the State of Maine;
B. The applicant is an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age;
C. The applicant has submitted an incomplete application, knowingly made
an incorrect statement of a material nature, or failed to supply additional
information required by the Town Manager or the Board of Selectmen that
is reasonably necessary to determine whether the license is issuable;
D. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or
management interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has been denied a
sexually oriented business license for knowingly making an incorrect
statement of material nature within the immediately preceding five (5) years;
E. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or
management interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has had a license
granted pursuant to the ordinance or a similar ordinance provision in any
other municipality revoked for any reason during the immediately preceding
five (5) years;
8
F. The applicant, if an individual, or any person having an ownership or
management interest, if a corporation or other legal entity, has committed
any Specified Criminal Activity as defined herein;
G. The site on which the sexually oriented business is proposed is a
prohibited site under Section X, or
H. The application in any other way fails to meet the requirements of this
ordinance.
Section VIII. Age Restriction
No sexually oriented business may permit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years on the premises in which the sexually oriented business
is located.
Section IX. Display of License, Price Charges and Names of Owners or
Officers to be Prominently Displayed
A sexually oriented business licensee must display the sexually oriented
business license at all times in an open and conspicuous place in the sexually
oriented business for which the license has been issued. Sexually oriented
business licenses must also display at all times, in an open and conspicuous
place in the sexually oriented business, a complete list of the names of
owners and officers of the sexually oriented business and a complete list of
fees, prices and charges for all food, beverages, goods, wares, merchandise
or services offered by the business.
Section X. Prohibited Sites, Site Requirements
1. A sexually oriented business may not be sited within 1000 feet of the lot
lines of any of the following:
A. a church, synagogue or other house of religious worship;
B. a public or private elementary or secondary school;
C. a day care facility;
D. a public park or public recreational facility;
E. another sexually oriented business;
or within 500 feet of the lot lines of any residence.
9
The distance cited in this section shall be measured between any structure
used as a sexually oriented business and the lot line of the use listed (A)
through (E) above, or a lot line of a residence at their closest points.
2. A sexually oriented business must have a separate driveway entrance,
parking area and signage at least 200 feet from any driveway entrance or
signage of any of the following:
A. a church, synagogue or other house of religious worship
B. a public or private elementary or secondary school
C. a day care facility
D. a public park or public recreational facility
E. another sexually oriented business
3. A sexually oriented business must have a contiguous six (6) foot high
solid fence along all boundary lines it has in common with any of the
following:
A. a church, synagogue or other house of religious worship
B. a public or private elementary or secondary school
C. a day care facility
D. a public park or public recreational facility
E. another sexually oriented business
4. A lawful existing sexually oriented business, at the time of renewal of a
not yet expired valid license, shall not be in violation of the site
requirements of Section X by the subsequent location of a residence, day
care center, school, house of worship or public park or recreational area, at a
site that would otherwise conflict with the site requirements of this Section.
Section XI. Interior Layout of Sexually Oriented Business
1. Any sexually oriented business having available for customers, patrons or
members, any booth, room or cubicle for any private viewing of any adult
entertainment shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to
and from aisles and public areas of the sexually oriented business and shall
be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type device.
B. Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the
following construction requirements:
10
1. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from
adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.
2. Each booth, room or cubicle must have at least one side
totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at
all times of anyone occupying the booth, room or cubicle.
3. All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended
from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light-colored,
non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
4. The floor must be light-colored, non-absorbent, smooth
textured and easily cleanable.
5. The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not
in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot candles at all times, as measured
from the floor.
C. Occupants. No more than one individual shall occupy a booth,
room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of a booth, room or cubicle shall
engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge of litter
while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the
booth.
2. Any adult motion picture theater shall comply with the following:
A. Aisle lights and overhead lights in the theater shall be kept on
during business hours and shall illuminate to a minimum of ten-foot candles
except when motion pictures are being shown;
B. No standing shall be allowed in the theater;
C. Signs shall be posted warning patrons that sexual activity is
prohibited in the theater and informing them of the presence of surveillance
cameras; and
D. Theater employees shall regularly patrol the theater during
business hours and eject persons found to be engaged in sexual intercourse, a
sexual act, sexual contact or any criminal activity. Incidents of sexual
intercourse, a sexual act, sexual contact or any criminal activity in the
theater shall be immediately reported to law enforcement officer.
3. Restrooms must be individual rooms and shall not contain facilities for
more than one person at a time. No more than one person may be in the
restroom with the door closed at any time.
Section XII. Prohibited Activities
11
A. All acts of public indecency, as defined in 17-A MRSA 854, are
prohibited in sexually oriented businesses.
B. Dancers, performers, employees, owners or officers of a sexually
oriented business shall not fondle or caress any patron or client, and patrons
and clients shall not fondle or caress dancers, performers, employees,
owners or officers of the sexually oriented business.
C. Dancers, performers, employees, owners or officers of a sexually
oriented business shall not commit or perform, or offer to agree to commit or
perform, any specified sexual activity either alone or with each other or any
patron or client of the sexually oriented business; and
D. Patrons and clients of the sexually oriented businesses shall not commit
or perform, or offer to agree to commit or perform, any specified sexual
activity either alone or with any dancer, performer, employee, owner,
officer, patron or client of the sexually oriented business.
Section XIII. Dancers and Other Performers
A sexually oriented business must observe the following restrictions on
dancers and performers:
A. All dancing or other performances must occur on a platform intended for
that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor.
B. No dancing or other performance shall occur closer than ten (10) feet
from any patron and no patron shall be allowed to be closer than ten (10)
feet from any dancer or other performer.
Section XIV. Amortization of Sexually Oriented Business Lawfully Existing
as of the Date of the Adoption of This Ordinance
A sexually oriented business lawfully existing on November 2, 2004 shall be
permitted to continue to operate as a lawfully non-conforming use without
complying with the licensing requirements, location requirements and other
terms and standards of this ordinance for a period of time determined by
consideration of the length of time during which the sexually oriented
business lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance. This
amortization period shall be determined according to the following table:
12
Months of Operation of Period of Time after November 2, 2004
Existing Business Prior to Before Existing Business Must Fully
November 2, 2004 Comply with this Ordinance
Less than 6 months 6 months
6 months to 36 months one year
36 months to 72 months two years
72 months to 120 months three years
Greater than 120 months five years
During the amortization period, a lawfully existing sexually oriented
business may not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, including any
increase or change in the nature of products or services provided to
customers, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. At the
end of the amortization period an existing sexually oriented business shall
have either obtained a license in full compliance with this ordinance or have
ceased operation.
Section XV. Enforcement
A violation of this ordinance is a civil violation and the civil penalties and
remedies under shall apply. The
owner of the premises on or in which the sexually oriented business is
located, who is not the licensee of the sexually oriented business, is jointly
and severally liable with the licensee for any violations of Section X to XIII.
The ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, in
conjunction with the Board of Selectmen. If court action is required to
enforce this ordinance, the Town shall be awarded its enforcement costs,
including its reasonable attorney’s fees.
Section XVI. Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion thereof.
13
Section XVII. Conflict with Other Ordinance
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or
statute, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
Section XVIII Appeals
An appeal from any final licensing, denial, suspension or revocation
decision of the Board of Selectmen may be taken by an aggrieved party to
Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure. Service of Process shall be served on the Town
Clerk or any Selectmen. The Town shall file its responsive pleadings and
record of proceedings with the Court no later than ten (10) business days
after service of the summons and complaint. Additionally the Town shall
submit its responsive brief within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the
plaintiff’s brief and shall move for an expedited hearing. All enforcement
action, if any, shall be stayed during the pendency of the Rule 80B appeal.
THIS ORDINANCE ADOPTED 6/15/05 REPEALS AND REPLACES
THE NOVEMBER 2004 ORDINANCE.
1
2
BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Board of Appeals
1. Establishment
A Board of Appeals is hereby established in accordance with State
Law and the provisions of the ordinance.
2. General Provisions
A. Business of the Board shall be conducted in accord with Maine
Statutes, Town Ordinances and the procedures adopted by the Board in its
Bylaws.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to become familiar with
all the duly enacted Ordinances of the Town which may be expected to act
upon as well as with the applicable State Statutes.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to become familiar with
the community goals, desires and policies as expressed in the Livermore
Falls Comprehensive Plan, and grant the minimum relief which will insure
that the goals and policies of the plan are preserved and substantial justice is
done.
3. Appointments
A. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Municipal
Officers/Town Manager and shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom
shall be legal residents of the municipality, serving staggered terms of at
least three (3) years and not more than five (5) years. The Board shall elect
annually a Chairperson, acting Chairperson and a Secretary from its
membership. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members.
B. A Municipal Officer or his/her spouse may not serve as a member
or associate member.
3
C. Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of
interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting thereof shall be
decided by a majority vote of the membership who is being challenged.
D. A member of the Board may be dismissed for cause by the
Municipal Officers upon written charges and after a public hearing.
4. Duties
A. The Officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Acting
Chairperson and a Secretary, who shall be elected annually by the majority
of the Board, and shall until their successors are elected.
B. Chairperson. The Chairperson shall perform all duties required by
law and the Bylaws and preside at all meetings of the Board. The
Chairperson shall rule on issues or evidence, order and procedure, and shall
take such other actions as are necessary to carry out the business of the
Board.
C. Acting Chairperson. The Acting Chairperson shall serve in the
absence of the Chairperson and shall have all the powers of the Chairperson
during the Chairperson’s absence, disability or disqualification.
D. Secretary. The Secretary, subject to the direction of the Board and
the Chairperson, shall keep minutes of all Board proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. The Secretary shall also arrange from proper and legal
notice of hearings, attend to all correspondence of the Board, and to other
duties as are normally carried out by the Secretary. All records are public
and may be inspected at reasonable times.
5. Powers and Limitations
A. The Board shall have the following powers to be exercised only
upon receipt of a written appeal by an aggrieved party:
1. The Board may interpret the provisions of any applicable Town
Ordinance which are called into question.
4
2. The Board may approve the issuance of a special exception permit
or conditional use permit if it deems appropriate.
3. The Board may grant a variance only where strict application of
any applicable Town Ordinance, or a provision thereof, or Maine State
Statute to the petitioner and his property. For examples:
A. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted;
B. That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions of the
neighborhood;
C. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality;
D. The hardship is not a result of action taken by the applicant
or prior owner.
4. The Board shall have the power to hear and determine all appeals
by any person directly or indirectly affected by any decision, action or
failure to act with respect to any Town Ordinance.
6. Hearings
A. The Board shall schedule a public hearing on all appeals
applications within thirty (30) days of the filing of a completed appeal
application.
B. The Board shall cause notice of the date, time and place of such
hearing, the location of the building or lot and the general nature of the
question involved, to be given to the person making the application and to be
posted in three (3) public places within the Town at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing. The Board shall also cause notice of hearing to be
given to the Municipal Officers, the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer, and the owners of property abutting that for which the appeal is
taken at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing.
5
C. The Board shall provide as a matter of policy for exclusion of
irrelevant material, or unduly repetitious evidence.
D. The order of business at a public hearing shall be as follows:
1. The Chairperson calls the hearing to order.
2. The Chairperson determines whether there is a quorum.
3. The Chairperson gives a statement of the case and reads all
correspondence and reports received.
4. The Board determines whether it has jurisdiction over the
appeal.
5. The Board decided whether the applicant has the right to
appear before the Board.
6. The Board determines which individuals attending the
hearing are “interested parties.” “Interested parties” are those
persons who request to offer testimony and evidence and to
participate in oral cross-examination. They would include
abutting property owners and those who may be adversely
affected by the Board’s decision. Parties may be required by
the Board to consolidate or join their appearances in part or in
whole if their interests or contentions are substantially similar
and such consolidation would expedite the hearing. Municipal
Officers, the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall automatically be made parties to the proceedings. Other
persons attending the hearing and federal, state, municipal and
other governmental agencies shall be permitted to make oral or
written statements and to submit oral or written questions
through the Chair.
7. The appellant is given the opportunity to present his/her case
without interruption.
8. The Board and interested parties are given the opportunity to
present their case.
9. The interested parties are given the opportunity to present
their case. The Board may call its own witnesses, such as the
Code Enforcement Officer.
10. The appellant may ask questions of the interested parties
and Board witnesses directly.
11. All parties are given the opportunity to refute or rebut
statements made throughout the hearing.
6
12. The Board shall receive comments and questions from all
observers and interested citizens who wish to express their
view.
13. The hearing is closed after all parties have been heard. If
additional time is needed, the hearing may be continued to a
later date. All participants should be notified of the date, time
and place of the continued hearing.
14. Written testimony may be accepted by the Board for seven
days after the close of the hearing.
D. The Board may waive any of the above rules if good cause is
shown.
7. Decisions
A. Decisions by the Board shall be made not later than thirty (30)
days from the date of the hearing.
B. The final decision on any matter before the Board shall be made
by written order signed by the Chairperson. The transcript of testimony, if
any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the
proceeding, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall constitute the
record. All decisions shall become part of the record and shall include a
statement of findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis
therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented and
the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof.
C. Notice of any decision shall be sent by certified or registered mail,
or hand delivered to the applicant, his representative or agent, Planning
Board, the Code Enforcement Officer, and the Municipal Officers with
seven (7) days of the decision.
D. Decisions of the Board shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Town Clerk and shall be made public record. The date of filing of each
decision shall be entered in the official records and minutes of the Board.
E. Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the Board
which permits a use shall expire if a building or occupancy permit for the
use is not obtained by the applicant within ninety (90) days from the date of
7
the decision; however, the Board may extend this time an additional ninety
(90) days.
8. Appeal to Superior Court
The decision of the Board of Appeals may be taken, within forty-five
(45) days after the decision is rendered, by any party to the Superior Court in
accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
9. Severability
A. The invalidity of any section or provision of these by-laws shall
not be held to invalidate any other section or provision of these by-laws.
B. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between this Ordinance
and Maine State Law, the Maine State Law will prevail.
Adopted July 1996
1
2
LIVERMORE FALLS BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
ORDINANCE
Section 1. Creation of Board. There shall be established a Board of
Assessment Review (the “Board”) created and to be staffed pursuant to 30-
A, MRSA 2526(6).
Section 2. Staffing of the Board and Terms of Office. The Board shall
consist of five (5) regular members who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen for a term of three (3) years. The initial appointments shall be as
follows: one of the members shall have a term of one (1) year; two members
shall have terms of two (2) years and the two remaining Board members
shall have terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, the term of each new
member shall be three (3) years.
Section 3. Compensation. Compensation for the members of the
Livermore Falls Board of Assessment Review, if any, shall be determined by
the legislative body.
Section 4. Vacancies and Residency Requirement. Board memberships
that become vacant shall be filled by appointment by the Selectmen for the
remaining portion of the expired term. Members of the Board shall, at all
times, remain as residents of the Town of Livermore Falls. A change of
residence by a Board member shall terminate the person’s tenure as a
member of the Board.
Section 5. Duties of the Board. The Livermore Falls Board of
Assessment Review shall:
A. Review appeals from decisions of the assessors regarding
applications of abatement of property taxes and make other
determinations as are necessary with respect to assessments according with
the general laws of the State of Maine, including but not limited to
administering appeals under 35 MRSA 843; and
B. In carrying out its functions, the Board shall have the power to
administer oaths, take testimony and hold hearings as may be required; and
3
C. Adopt, subject to approval of the Livermore Falls Board of
Selectmen, rules and regulations for the transaction of the business of the
Board.
Adopted July 3, 1996
1
2
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
BOTTLE CLUB ORDINANCE
Section 1. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “The Bottle Club
Ordinance” of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine.
Section 2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish procedures for the
issuance of licenses for the operation of Bottle Clubs and establish controls
over the operation of said clubs.
Section 3. AUTHORITY
A. This ordinance is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to and
consistent with Article VIII-A of the State of Maine Constitution, Title 30
MRSA, Section 1917, “Ordinance Power Limited” (Home Rule).
B. This ordinance is enacted in accordance with Title 30 MRSA,
Section 2153 “Enactment Procedure”, (Enactment of Ordinance).
Section 4. LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall keep, maintain, operate, lease or otherwise furnish,
either to its members and guests or to the general public, any premises,
building, apartments or place, or portion thereof, for use as a Bottle Club,
without first having obtained a license and paying the fee therefore.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, a bonafide
non-profit, charitable, educational, political, civic, recreational, fraternal,
patriotic or religious organization, organized under the provisions of 13
MRSA 901 and followed or recognized as such by 501 (c) (7) of the Internal
Revenue Code, shall not be subject to the provisions of this ordinance
provided:
a. They only occasionally allow activities or events at which their
members, guests, or members of the public, provide their own alcoholic
3
beverages, paying a fee for consideration for admission, setups, or for any
other reason.
b. Any revenues derived from such activities or events are solely for
the use of, or benefit of, the organization.
c. They notify the Municipal Officers at least 20 days in advance of
the activity or event and obtain a permit from the Municipal Officers for
each activity or event.
d. They otherwise comply with the ordinances and rules and
regulations of the Town of Livermore Falls, and the Statutes and rules and
regulations of the State of Maine.
Section 5. Licensing Authority
Licenses shall be issued by the Municipal Officers. The Municipal Officers
shall grant a license only when they find that the applicant is in strict
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other ordinances and
rules and regulations of the Town of Livermore Falls, and with statutes and
rules and regulations of the State of Maine.
Section 6. Definitions
A. Bottle Club. A "Bottle Club" is an establishment where no alcoholic
beverages are sold, but where members, the guests, or members of the
public, provide their own alcoholic beverages, paying a fee or other
consideration for admission to the Bottle Club, setups, or any other reason.
B. Person. "Person" shall mean any natural person, corporation,
association, or partnership.
C. Principal Officers. "Principal Officers" shall mean the applicant and any
officer, director, stockholder, owner, manager, or person who either has a
financial interest of any nature in a Bottle Club or directs any policy of a
Bottle Club.
4
Section 7. Fees
Fees for a license for a Bottle Club shall be paid annually:
Bottle Club .........$375.00
Section 8. Application and Information
Every applicant for a Bottle Club license shall:
A. Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the Municipal
Officers.
B. Deposit the prescribed license fee in advance with the Town Clerk.
C. Submit the completed application to the Town Clerk, together with
attested copy of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws, if the applicant is
a corporation; or Articles of Association and Bylaws, if the applicant is an
association; or partnership documents, if the applicant is a partnership; as
well as a list of all civil officers of the Bottle Club.
D. File an affidavit which will identify all principal officers, their places of
residency at the present time and for the immediately preceding three years.
Submission of false information in an application shall be a violation of this
ordinance and such act shall be grounds for the denial of the application.
There shall be a continuing obligation to, by affidavit, inform the Municipal
Officers of any changes in the principal officers within 15 days after such
changes occur.
Section 9. Eligibility
No person shall be licensed to keep, maintain, operate, lease, or otherwise
furnish a Bottle Club unless the eligibility requirements found in Title 28,
201, are met by said person in its principal officers.
Section 10. Description of the Premises
Every applicant for a Bottle Club license shall include in the application a
description of the premises for which a license is desired and shall set forth
such other material information, description, or plan of that part of the
5
premises where it is proposed to consume or keep liquor, as desired by the
Municipal Officers.
Section 11. Membership Rules
Membership in a Bottle Club shall be determined by written membership
rules, which shall be promulgated by the principal officers of the Bottle
Club.
Section 12. Investigation of the Applicant
The Municipal Officers or their designated agent shall fully investigate the
principal officers of the Bottle Club for compliance with Title 28, 201 and
shall fully investigate the premises of the Bottle Club for compliance with
Town of Livermore Falls ordinances and rules and regulations, and with
State of Maine statutes and rules and regulations, which are applicable. In
doing so they may consult with the appropriate officials of the Town or of
the State of Maine.
Section 13. Hearing
Upon receipt of each application for a Bottle Club license, and after the
investigation provided for in Section 12, the Municipal Officers shall
schedule a public hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in a
method consistent with the requirements of Title 28, 252.
Section 14. License not to be Transferable
A separate license must be obtained for each branch or separate
establishment of the Bottle Club. Each license shall authorize the operation
of such an establishment only at the location described in such license and in
conformity with all applicable ordinances and laws. No license shall be
transferred to another person or to any other location, except that licensed
Bottle Club may change its name upon approval of the Municipal Officers, if
its location remains the same.
Section 15. Display of License
Every Bottle Clubs shall exhibit its license at all times in a conspicuous
place on its premises.
6
Section 16. Expiration
All licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire one year after the
date of issuance.
Section 17. Proximity to Schools and Churches
No Bottle Club license shall be granted under this ordinance to premises
situated within 300 foot of a public or private school, school dormitory,
church, chapel or parish house, in existence as such as the time such license
is applied for. The 300 foot distance shall be measured from the main
entrance from the school, school dormitory, church, chapel, or parish house
by the ordinary course of travel.
Section 18. Minors Not Permitted on Bottle Club Premises
No person under the age of 20 years shall be permitted in or on that part of
the premises subject to the control of any Bottle Club.
Section 19. Entertainment
For the purposes of the Town of Livermore Falls Special Amusement
Ordinance and Rules and Regulations, the applicant for a Bottle Club license
shall be considered a licensee, and shall be subject to all provisions set forth
in said ordinance, rules and regulations.
Section 20. Hours
The principal officers and employees of Bottle Clubs shall not permit the
consumption of alcohol beverages on its premises between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on January 1st, and 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other
days.
Section 21. Entrance
The entrance to every Bottle Club shall be plainly marked "Bottle Club,
Members and Guests Only".
7
Section 22. Illegal Activities
The principal officers and employees of Bottle Clubs shall not knowingly
permit any illegal activities to take place on the licensed premises. Law
Enforcement Officers of the Town of Livermore Falls, the State and the
County shall have the same access to the premises of a Bottle Club that they
would have if the Bottle Club were an establishment licensed by the State
for on-premises consumption of alcohol.
Section 23. Suspension or Revocation
A license to operate a Bottle Club, as provided for in this ordinance, may be
denied, suspended or revoked by the Municipal Officers for either violation
of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or with
the provisions of any other ordinances or rules and regulations of the Town
of Livermore Falls, or Statutes or rules and regulations of the State of Maine.
A license may be suspended or revoked by the Municipal Officers, only after
Notice and Hearing.
Section 24. Rules and Regulations
The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized after public notice and
hearing, to establish written rules and regulations governing the operation of
the establishment and the issuance, suspension and revocation of Bottle Club
permits.
Such rules and regulations shall be in addition to and consistent with all
sections of this ordinance.
Section 25. Appeals
Appeals from any final decision of the Municipal Officers shall be taken by
any party to the Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of Rule
80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedures.
Section 26. Penalty
In addition to any action which the Municipal Officers may take, violation of
any provision of this ordinance shall be a civil violation and a fine not
exceeding $495.00 may be imposed, which shall accrue to the benefit of the
8
Town of Livermore Falls. Each day that a violation continues will be treated
as a separate offense. The Municipal Officers may also seek injunctive
relief, where appropriate.
Section 27. Severability
If any section or provision of this ordinance shall be found to be invalid, no
other section or provision shall be invalidated thereby.
Section 28.
This ordinance shall be effective when adopted by the legislative body of the
Town of Livermore Falls.
Adopted February 27, 1981
1
2
Building Lot Standards Ordinance
Article I. Purpose
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
Livermore Falls, Maine by establishing standards for the creation of building
lots throughout the town, to secure the rural qualities of peace, privacy and
quiet, and so far as possible to assure that changes in population, taxes and
property values shall be gradual and orderly.
Article II. Administration and Authority
The code Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce this
ordinance. This ordinance is adopted and may be amended according to
Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the State of Maine Constitution; Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. Section 3001, “Ordinance Power Limited” (Home Rule).
Article III. Applicability
A. This ordinance shall apply in the Town of Livermore Falls to all new lots
recorded after the approval of this ordinance, upon which a year-round
dwelling, seasonal dwelling, mobile home or other habitat trailer is to be
placed or erected, except housing funded by government agencies for use
by the elderly, handicapped or economically disadvantaged persons.
B. Contiguous lots are lots which adjoin at any line or point, or are separated
at any point by a by a body of water less than 15 feet wide. If the same
owner owns two or more contiguous lots, any of which is smaller than
the minimum lot size required herein, they shall be combined for the
purpose of approaching or reaching the minimum square footage and
road frontage required for new lots.
C. All dwellings built, rebuilt or replaced on a nonconforming lot in the
“Village Area” of Livermore Falls shall be within the same footprint as
the previous dwelling and shall be constructed/placed upon a full
foundation wall at least four feet in height. The village area shall include
all of the area defined by the Jay town line on the north, the
Androscoggin River on the west, the CMP rite of way on the east and on
3
the south by an east-west line from the river to the power lines and
encompassing all properties abutting Gilbert Street, the south loop.
Article IV. Lot Requirements
A. For those areas served by municipal sewer, a minimum of 10,000
square feet shall be required with a minimum of 100 feet on the
roadway, or body of water.
B. For those areas not served by municipal sewer, a minimum of
40,000 square feet shall be required with a minimum of 150 feet on
the roadway, or body of water
C. A 25 foot setback from the rite-of-way limits of a public road or
travel way, or private road except that a dwelling destroyed by fire
or natural disaster may be replaced within one year at the same
location
D. Any building or dwelling must be set back at least 10 feet from all
other lot boundaries.
E. No more than one dwelling unit may be located on one lot, unless
the lot is large enough to meet the aggregate dimensional
requirements for all units.
F. All residential structures shall be at least 400 square feet in size.
G. No building permit shall be issued for any structure on any new lot
that is a back-lot created after the effective date of this ordinance and
that does not have frontage on a public or private road, unless the new
back-lot is served by right-of-way at least 50 feet in width.
Article V. Permits Required
A. Any person, firm or corporation, before erecting or establishing a
dwelling, habitat trailer (other than a travel trailer) or other
dwelling unit, or miscellaneous construction as defined in 3 below,
shall obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Any
4
request for a permit shall include an accurate measurement of the
lot acceptable to the Code Enforcement officer, and evidence of
compliance with the State Plumbing Code. The application shall
also include a plan or sketch showing lot boundaries, and all
existing or proposed buildings, and the location of any septic
system. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not withhold a permit
when all requirements of the town’s ordinances have been met.
B. Permit shall be of three types
1. Year round dwellings, defined as a dwelling used for more
than 120 days during a calendar year.
2. Seasonal dwelling, limited to 120 days or less use during the
calendar year. No seasonal dwelling may be used year-round
without first obtaining a seasonal conversion permit from
the Plumbing Inspector and Planning Board if the dwelling
is located in Shoreland Zoning.
3. Miscellaneous Construction: any expansion of a dwelling
which creates 200 square feet or more of additional floor
space; or any other building construction covering 200
square feet or more, such as barns, sheds, outbuildings,
garages, etc.
Article VI. Enforcement
A. the minimum penalty for starting construction, or undertaking a
land use activity without a required permit shall be $100.00 an a
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.00; and further provided in Title
30-A M.R.S.A, Section 4452. The town may seek to enjoin anyone
from making use or occupying any dwelling or trailer erected or
established contrary to this ordinance
B. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. If the CEO shall find a violation, he
or she shall notify, in writing by certified mail, the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering action necessary to correct it, including
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, structures, or work
5
being done and removal of illegal buildings or structures. A copy
of such notices shall be maintained as a permanent record.
Article VII Validity and Severability and Conflict with other
Ordinances
A. Validity and Severability: shall any section or provision of this
ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
B. Conflict with other ordinances: Whenever the requirements of this
ordinance are inconsistent with the requirements of any other
regulation, ordinance, code or statute, the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
Article VIII Appeals process
A. Any aggrieved person may appeal to the Board of Appeals
B. Filing process: in all cases, a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall commence the appeal within 30 days
after the decision. The appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals,
and the aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the
grounds for the appeal.
Adopted
March 20, 1975
Amended
February 27, 1981
June 11, 2003
June 15, 2005
1
2
BUILDING NOTIFICATION ORDINANCE
Section I. Title
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Building Notification
Ordinance of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine”.
Section II. Purpose
To protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the people; to
protect the environment; and to provide for the orderly development of the
land in the Town of Livermore Falls by requiring a Building Notification
Permit before construction of residential, commercial, and outbuildings 200
square feet or more.
Section III. Applicability
This ordinance shall apply to all new residential and commercial structures
constructed or placed on a piece of property, the creation of one or more
dwelling units within an existing structure, the reconstruction of an existing
structure that changes the footprint by 200 square feet or more, outbuildings
200 square feet or more, the relocation of an existing residential or
commercial structure, garages, barns, to a different parcel of land after the
effective date of this ordinance.
Section IV. Application Procedure
A. After the effective date of this ordinance, no person shall engage in any
use of land requiring a Building Notification Permit without first obtaining
the required form. All applications for a Building Notification Permit shall
be submitted to the Town Office on forms provided for that purpose. The
approved Building Notification Permit shall be accessible at the premises of
construction and is non-transferable. The following information shall
accompany the application.
1. A drawing showing the following:
a. Location of the lot or parcel to be developed (i.e. street address, tax
map and lot.)
3
b. The location and dimensions of the proposed buildings, additions to
existing buildings.
c. The distances from roads, property lines and any water bodies of
the proposed building(s).
d. A copy of permits approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector for a
subsurface wastewater disposal system and internal plumbing permits if
required.
e. copy of any applicable state permits.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Building Notification Forms in
conformance with this ordinance.
3. Applications shall be acted upon within 30 days after a completed
application is received.
Section V. Performance Standards
All new residential structures, commercial structures, including additions
200 square feet or more, the relocation of buildings to another site, and
outbuildings 200 square feet or larger, shall conform to the following site
requirements:
A. Shall conform to the applicable provision of the Minimum Lot Size
Ordinance, Building Lot Standards Ordinance, Mobile Home Park
Ordinance, and Sewer Ordinance of the Town of Livermore Falls.
B. Sanitary Standards: All new residential structures and commercial
structures shall comply with the following:
1. An approved sewage waste disposal system. If an approved privy
(a.k.a. outhouse) is to be used, an approved system for the disposal of gray
water (i.e. dishwater, bath water, etc.) is required.
2. All residential structures shall be capable of being provided with a
potable water supply.
4
Section VI. Authority and Administration
A. Authority
1. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-a
MRSA, Section 3001.
2. This ordinance is enacted in accordance with Title 30-A, Section
3002, “Enactment Procedure” (Enactment of Ordinance) and Section 4452,
“Enforcement of Land Use Laws and Ordinances”.
Section VII. Enforcement
A. Any person, firm or corporation, being the owner of the property where
such construction, demolition, or relocation (including plumbing) is being
completed; who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be liable for
the penalties set forth in Title 30-a MRSA, Section 4452, as it may, from
time to time, be amended. The Code Enforcement Officer may institute
proceedings to enjoin any violation of this ordinance and for other penalties.
The party found guilty of violating this ordinance shall pay the Town’s legal
fees and expenses.
B. Any construction, placement, or relocation (including plumbing),
undertaken WITHOUT A REQUIRED BUILDING NOTIFICATION
PERMIT shall be penalized as follows:
1. An application for a Building Notification Permit must be acquired after
the fact.
2. The applicant shall pay a fine of: First: Offense $50.00, Second Offense
$100.00, Third Offense $500.00, any further violations the penalty fine shall
be set by the Board of Selectmen based on the seriousness of the violation,
location and damage it may have caused.
3. Any activity which is non-conforming or in any way in violation of the
terms of this Ordinance, of which, when completed would be in violation,
shall immediately upon notice of the Code Enforcement Officer, be halted.
If so directed by the Code Enforcement Officer, the site shall be returned to
its original condition.
5
Section VIII. Amendments
A. This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at a Town Meeting.
Amendments may initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board, by a
request of the Board of Selectmen, or by petition of a number of voters equal
to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in the municipality at the last
gubernatorial election.
B. The Planning Board shall hold public hearings on all proposed
amendments.
Section IX. Validity, Effective Date, Conflict of Ordinances
A. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of this Ordinance, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby declared to be severable.
B. The effective date of this ordinance shall be upon adoption by the
Governing Body.
C. This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove
the necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or
provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail. The current Building Lots Standards will still apply.
Lots created before June 11, 1997 will not be required to acquire a building
permit, but a Building Notification Permit will need to be applied for.
Section X. Appeals Process
A. Any aggrieved person or party may appeal to the Board of Appeals.
B. Filing Procedures: In all cases, a person aggrieved by a decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer shall commence the appeal within 30 days after
the decision. The appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals, and the
aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds for
appeal.
6
Definitions:
A. Adequate Water Supply: Running water piped thereto in an approved
manner so as to keep the residential structure in a clean and sanitary
condition, year round.
B. Commercial Structure: A structure utilized for the buying or selling of
goods or services or the provision of facilities for a fee. Commercial uses
shall include, but not limited to: professional and business offices; retail
outlets; services such as barber or beauty shops; laundromats; repair shops;
restaurants; hotels, etc.
C. Lot:. A parcel described on a deed, plot or similar legal document.
D. Mobile Home: Structures transportable in one or more sections, which
in the traveling mode are 14 body feet or more in width and are 750 or more
square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a residential structure, with or without permanent foundations, when
connected to the required utilities including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
or electrical systems contained in the unit.
E. Modular Home:. A residential structure of one or more prefabricated
sections designed for location and a permanent foundation.
F. New Structure: Any structure which is placed, constructed or
substantially reconstructed within the Town, or first occupied, after the
effective date of this ordinance.
G. Outbuilding: Structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any process, animals,
equipment, goods or materials of any kind associated with these types of
buildings.
H. Principle Structure: The structure in which the principle use of the lot is
located.
I. Residential Structure: Any residential structure that all or part of which is
designed for use as a living quarters. Factory built homes, mobile homes,
modular homes and site built homes shall be considered residential
structures.
7
J. Site-built Structure: A structure which is constructed on the site on which
it is to be located.
K. Structure: Any residential, commercial, or outbuildings 200 square feet
or larger having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosures of any process, animals, equipment, goods or
materials of any kind associated with these types of buildings (garages and
barns are included).
Adopted June 15, 2005
1
2
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Article I. Definition: Coin Operated Amusement Device
A coin operated amusement device shall include all of those machines
whether mechanical or electronic which upon insertion of a coin, slug, token
plate or disc may be operated by the public generally for the use as a game,
entertainment or amusement whether or not registering the score; and which
are operated for amusement only and do not dispense any form of payoff,
prize or reward except free replays, excluding machines whose primary
function is musical entertainment.
Article II. Licenses
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
keep for public patronage or to permit or allow thereupon any coin operated
amusement device in or on any premises or location under his or its charge,
control or custody without having first obtained a license therefore from the
Municipal Officers of the Town of Livermore Falls. Said license shall be
issued by the Municipal Officers upon the payment of an annual fee of
$20.00 for each machine located at said premises and said license shall
expire on May 1st of each year. License fees shall be prorated to ½ fee when
obtained six or fewer months prior to the May 1st deadline.
B. A seven day temporary license may be issued to a bonafide non-profit
organization, fraternal, church or fair association so long as that organization
is located in Androscoggin or Franklin Counties. Said license shall not
exceed seven days in any calendar year. Said license shall be issued by the
Municipal Officers upon payment of a fee of $10.00 per machine.
C. The license required by this ordinance shall be posted securely and
conspicuously on the premises for which it is granted. Said license shall not
be transferable to any other person, firm, corporation, association or from
location to location and shall be valid only at the location and for the person,
firm, corporation, association designated therein. Such license shall not be
granted to any persons under the age of eighteen years nor to any firm,
corporation or association whose officers are under said age.
3
D. Minors under the age of thirteen years, unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian, shall not be allowed to play said machines. The licensee
shall be responsible for assuring conformance to this section.
E. Licenses granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be non-transferable
between individuals and shall apply only to the premises and specific
number of machines for which the licenses are originally granted. The
addition of machines shall require the issuance of additional licenses
covering the added machines prior to installation.
F. All licenses issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be valid between the
hours of 7 a.m. and 1 a.m. and no such coin operated amusement device
shall be licensed for operation during the period from 1:01 am through 6:59
am.
Article III. Violations
A. Any person, firm or in the case of a corporation or association, any
official or agent hereof, violating any of the provisions of this ordinance,
shall upon conviction in a court of law be punished by a fine not to exceed
$100 for each offense and each day such violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. All said fines shall be recovered on complaint to the use of
the Town of Livermore Falls.
B. Any such license issued herein may be revoked by the Municipal
Officers after duly called hearing when any of the following violations are
found:
1. The machines located on the premises exceed the number
described in the license.
2. That minors under the age of thirteen (13) years have been allowed
to operate said machines in violation of the terms of the ordinance.
3. That any violation of the other specifics of this ordinance have
been violated.
Article IV. Effective Date
The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of enactment.
Adopted February 23, 1983





1
2
AN ORDINANCE TO ESTABLISH A CURFEW WITHIN
THE TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
WHEREAS, there has been an increase in juvenile violence and property
crimes, and an increased presence of juvenile gang activity in the Town of
Livermore Falls; and
WHEREAS, persons under the age of eighteen are particularly susceptible,
because of their lack of maturity and experience, to participation in unlawful
activities and gang-related activities, and to victimization by older
perpetrators of crime; and
WHEREAS, the Town of Livermore Falls is obligated to provide for: the
protection of minors from each other and from other persons, the protections
of the health, safety and welfare of the general public, and the reduction of
juvenile crime, violence and gang-related activity in the Town; and
WHEREAS, a curfew for those under the age of eighteen will aid in the
achievement of these goals, and will be in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDERED BY THE LEGISLATIVE BODY
OF THE TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS, MAINE:
Section I. Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Curfew Ordinance of
the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine.
Section II. Definitions
A. Curfew hours means the hours from:
9:31 PM until 6:00 AM for minors 11 or less years of age
10:01 PM until 6:00 AM for minors 12 or 13 years of age, and
10:31 PM until 6:00 am for minors 14 or more years of age
On Friday and Saturday evenings the hours specified above
shall be extended by 1 hour.
B. Emergency means unforeseen circumstances, or the resulting
situation calling for immediate action. This includes, but is not limited to,
3
fire, natural disaster, or vehicular accident, as well as any situation requiring
action to avert serious injury or the loss of life.
C. Guardian means a person or a public or private agency who either
pursuant to court order or acceptance of testimony appointment, is the legal
guardian of the minor. This definition also includes a person to whom
parental powers have been delegated under MRSA Title 18-A, Section 5-
104.
D. Minor means any person who is seventeen years of age or younger.
E. Parent means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent
of the minor.
F. Public place means a place located in the Town of Livermore Falls to
which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access, including,
but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parking lots, vacant lots,
parks, and the common areas in and about apartment buildings, office
buildings, schools, shops and places of entertainment.
G. Remain means to linger or stay, as well as refuse to leave when
requested to do so by a police officer, or the owner or other person in control
of a public place. This term also encompasses activities which may be
mobile, such as walking, driving and riding about in a public place.
H. Time of night referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard of
time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the Town of Livermore
Falls, prima facia the time then observed in the Livermore Falls municipal
building and police station.
Section III. Offenses
A. It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in a public place during curfew
hours.
B. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit, or allow by exercising insufficient control, the minor to remain in a
public place during curfew hours.
4
Section IV. Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under Section III of this ordinance that the
minor was:
A. Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
B. Involved in an emergency or on an errand necessitated by an emergency;
C. Engaged in an employment activity, or on the way to or from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop except to drop off or pick
up a co-employee;
D. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
E. On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s home;
F. On an errand directed by a parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
G. Attending a school, religious, or governmental activity, which is
supervised by adults, or traveling to and from such a school, religious, or
governmental activity without detour or stop;
H. Attending a recreational activity sponsored by the Town of Livermore
Falls, MSAD #36, a civic organization or similar entity, which is supervised
by adults, or traveling to or from such an activity without detour or stop;
I. Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution;
J. Married, or otherwise legally emancipated;
K. When authorized by special permit from the Police Chief or the Police
Lieutenant, which must be in writing and carried on the person of the minor
while not complying with the curfew. Permit must state times and dates of
exception.
5
Section V. Enforcement
Before taking any action to enforce this ordinance, a police officer shall ask
the apparent offender’s age. The officer may ask for proof of the apparent
offender’s age, and shall be justified in taking action to ascertain the
apparent offender’s age in the absence of identification, such as taking the
apparent offender into custody while contacting his or her parent or
guardian, or accompanying the apparent offender to his or her residence for
the purpose of obtaining identification.
If the apparent offender is a minor, or cannot produce identification proving
otherwise immediately, the officer shall ask the reason for the apparent
offender’s being in a public place. The officer shall not take any action to
enforce this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and, based on any response as well as other circumstances, no
defense provided in Section IV is applicable. If the officer does not have
such a reasonable belief, the officer may take the minor into custody for the
purposes of contacting the minor’s parent or guardian to come to take
control of the minor. The police officer shall summons the minor and the
minor’s parent to the District Court for violation of this ordinance. During
this period, the officer may require the minor or the minor’s parent or
guardian or both to remain in the officer’s presence for a period of up to two
hours so long as the office complies with all requirements of law, including,
without limitation, MRSA Title 17-A, Sections 1-7.
Section VI. Penalties
A. The penalty for a minor who violates this ordinance shall be:
1. For the first offense, five hours of community service and/or a fine
of up to $50.00; and
2. For each subsequent offense, ten hours of community service
and/or a fine of up to $100.00
B. The penalty for a parent or guardian who knowingly permits a minor to
violate this ordinance shall be:
1. For the first offense, a fine of $50.00; and
6
2. For each subsequent offense, a fine of $100.00
Section VII. Severability
If any provision of this ordinance is determined to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not render invalid the
remaining provisions.
Section VIII. Repealed
This ordinance shall supercede all previous curfew ordinances, which are
hereby repealed from and after the effective date of adoption of this
ordinance.
Adopted June 12, 2002
1
2
DOG CONTROL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section I. Purpose
This ordinance is adopted in the exercise of municipal home rule power
under the Maine Constitution and 30-A MRSA Section 3001. The purpose
of this ordinance is to regulate dogs in the Town of Livermore Falls, to end
the problems caused by dangerous dogs, dogs running at large, barking dogs,
and property damage occasioned by dogs held to a minimum or eliminated,
for the protection of the health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the residents of the town, without unreasonably restricting owners
and their dogs in their normal activities, while holding owners responsible,
where it is appropriate to do so, for the deleterious conduct of their dog.
Section II. Definitions
As used in this ordinance, unless the text clearly otherwise indicates, the
following words and phrases have the following meanings:
A. “Attack”, “attacks”, and “attacking” means an unprovoked actual
biting; they also mean, where they occur without provocation, a mere
showing of the teeth, or growling and barking, or any combination of these
acts, from which a person reasonably receives an impression of impending
or imminent physical harm by the dog to himself or herself, to another or
others, or to a domestic pet or farm animal.
B. “Dog” includes both genders of dogs.
C. “Owner” means any person or persons, firm, association, or
corporation, or other legal entity amenable to civil process, owning, keeping,
or harboring, or in possession of, or having the control of a dog, and includes
the parent or parents, or guardian of a minor who owns, keeps, harbors, or is
in possession or control of a dog.
D. “Dangerous dog” means the following, regardless of whether the
dog is on or off the premises of its owner at the relevant time:
3
1. A dog that attacks a person regardless of whether it causes
physical harm to that person, provided at the time of the attack the person is
not trespassing with criminal intent on the owner’s premises.
2. A dog that attacks a domestic pet or farm animal and causes
harm to that domestic pet or farm animal.
It is irrelevant to these definitions of a dangerous dog that an attack occurs
outside the Town of Livermore Falls, or even outside the State of Maine.
E. “Running at large” means off the premises of the dog’s owner and
not under the control of an owner of the dog who is physically capable of
controlling and restraining the dog by a leash, cord or chain.
Section III. Nuisance
Dangerous dogs, dogs running at large, and barking dogs are hereby
declared a public nuisance.
Section IV. Identification
An owner shall ensure that the owner’s dog, if two months old or older and
out of doors, whether on or off the premises of the owner, unless confined
within a secure enclosure or container, wears a collar or harness which there
must be securely attached an identification tag with the owner’s name,
address (if any), and telephone number (if any). Alternatively, an owner
may provide for identification by having the dog wear such a collar that it is
at all times clearly and legibly embroidered with the information which in
combination with one or more security tags shows the required information.
Section V. Running at Large
Special restrictions governing dogs on municipal property. No owner of a
dog shall cause or permit a dog to run at large within the town. A dog, while
in or on the way or place other than a public way or other municipal
property, shall be deemed to be under restraint within the meaning of this
ordinance if it is controlled by a leash, cord, or chain. An owner of a dog
shall ensure that the dog, when on any public way, and on all municipal
property, including but not limited to the town parks and public ways,
municipal sidewalks and recreational and athletic fields, is on a leash or
4
tether at all times and is accompanied by an owner who is physically able to
control and restrain the dog from an attack and who tends the leash or tether
at all times while the dog is on municipal property, and who does not permit
the dog to run at large on municipal property. An owner accompanying a
dog on municipal property, other than an owner with visual acuity
accompanying a seeing eye dog, so called, on municipal property, shall
collect any feces or vomits deposited by the dog and dispose of same in a
sanitary, lawful manner.
Nothing in the ordinance shall be held to require the leashing or restraint of
any dog other than a dangerous dog while on the owner’s premises.
Section VI. Dangerous Dogs
An owner who is given notice in writing by the Town’s Animal Control
Officer, any Law Enforcement Officer, or any State Official that the owner’s
dog has bitten or is reasonably believed to have bitten any person, or has or
is reasonably believed to have in any way injured any person so as to cause
an abrasion of the skin to that person, shall not without further written
authorization by an officer or official, sell, give, or otherwise convey the
ownership or possession of that dog, or remove or suffer or permit that dog
to be moved beyond the boundaries of the town, except or under the care of
a licensed veterinarian, or of an animal control officer, or a law enforcement
officer. An owner receiving such notice shall immediately place the dog
under confinement for a period of at least 10 days and shall promptly obey
all rabies detection and control directions of an animal control officer,
licensed veterinarian, law enforcement officer, or state official concerning
that dog. An owner receiving such notice shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the Maine Commissioner of Agriculture and the Maine
Commissioner of Human Services and their authorized officials, employees,
and agents in matters of rabies detection and control.
Section VII. Special Restraint of Dangerous Dogs
An owner of a dog that has been determined by a court to be a dangerous
dog shall ensure that the dog is restricted at all times to the premises of the
owner, except when being transported by a secure motor vehicle to a
veterinarian or to some other premises of that owner, or to the custody of the
animal control officer or law enforcement officer. The owner of such a dog
will ensure that the dog, when out of doors on the owner’s premises, is either
5
contained within secure enclosures or is fastened with a secured latch to a
reinforced chain restraint, the length of which is such that the dog may in no
event approach any closer than three (3) feet from the sidewalk or road edge,
whichever is applicable. The owner shall ensure that the restraint is
maintained and secure at all times the dog is out of doors on the owner’s
premises and not in a secured fenced-in enclosure.
Section VIII. Barking Dogs
No owner of a dog shall suffer or permit that a dog, by loud, frequent, or
habitual barking, howling or yelping to disturb the peace of another person.
(An incident of such disturbance of the peace occurring less than twelve (12)
hours after is another violation of this ordinance.)
Section IX. Penalties
For an initial violation of this ordinance by an owner, the owner shall be
ordered to pay a penalty of not lees than fifty dollars ($50.00) not more than
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). In determining the amount
forfeited, the court shall consider any evidence in mitigation, extenuation, or
aggravation it considers pertinent to the offense, including but not limited to
the civility and degree of cooperation exhibited by the owner. The penalty
shall be increased by a minimum of $50.00 above the penalty for the
immediate proceeding violation. All penalties awarded, and all the sums
recovered, shall accrue to benefit the Town of Livermore Falls. An owner
found to have violated this ordinance shall pay all fees and surcharges
assessed or required by a court or court order or rule and shall pay court
costs.
For purposes of illustration of the penalty provision only, if an owner were
found, in a single court proceeding, to have committed 4 violations, and if
the penalty for the initial violation were set at $100.00 then the penalties for
the succeeding violations would be $150, $200, and $250 for a total of $700
in penalties; similarly, if there occurred thereafter a second enforcement
action for a new single violation against the same owner and if there were a
finding of a violation, then the penalty for the violation would be $300.
6
Section X. Procedure on Violation
Any law enforcement officer, on complaint of any person on his or her own
initiative, may initiate prosecution for violation of this ordinance by filing a
complaint with the Maine District Court for the division that includes the
Town of Livermore Falls and serving a summons and a copy of the
complaint upon the owner. Any law enforcement officer certified by the
Maine Criminal Justice Academy may represent the Town in District Court
in the prosecution of alleged violations of this ordinance. In the alternative,
the municipal officers may, if they desire and if the funds are available,
engage and appoint counsel to prosecute the alleged violations.
A. ORDER OF THE COURT. If upon hearing, the court determines
that the ordinance has been violated, the court shall impose an appropriate
penalty. If the court determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, the court may
order the owner to muzzle the dog, and to restrain it, and confine it to the
owner’s premises; however, if the court finds that the dog has killed,
maimed, or inflicted more than de minimis bodily injury upon a person, or
upon a domestic pet or farm animal, or the court determines that the dog has
a history of attacks, then the court should ordinarily order the dog to be
euthanized. Such euthanasia shall be at the owner’s expense, by a licensed
veterinarian or other licensed official.
B. FAILURE TO ABIDE BY A COURT ORDER. An owner’s
failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to paragraph A, immediately
above, constitutes a violation of this ordinance, and may be punishable upon
a new summons or as contempt, following issuance of a show cause order on
affidavit of a law enforcement officer. If an order of euthanasia is not
complied with by the time set by the court, the court may, upon application
by any law enforcement officer or other person, upon notice to the owner,
issue a warrant to any law enforcement officer or constable in the
municipality where the dog is found, to destroy the dog and make return of
the warrant to the court within 14 days from the date of the warrant. The
owner shall pay all costs for any supplementary proceedings and all
reasonable costs for seizure and euthanasia of the dog. A failure to pay such
costs by any time stated in the order of the court for making such a payment
constitutes a distinct violation of this ordinance, which may also be punished
on proceedings for contempt after issuance of a show cause order.
7
C. COMPLAINT FOR DOGS PRESENTING IMMEDIATE
THREAT TO PUBLIC. After filing a complaint in District Court and before
hearing, the dog shall be subject to muzzling, restraint, or confinement upon
its owner’s premises upon order of the law enforcement officer who filed the
complaint to the owner, if that officer’s belief is that the dog poses
immediate threat to the public. The officer may proscribe the degree and
means of restraint or confinement. Failure to comply shall constitute a
distinct violation of this ordinance. Upon failure to comply, and after notice
to the owner, the officer may apply to the district court for an order of
authorization to take possession of the dog that poses immediate threat to the
public and turn it over to the care of a suitable person or organization, at the
owner’s expense. The court in its final order shall include an order to pay
such expense in a stated amount.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to bar or limit the right of the
individuals to make written complaints concerning dangerous dogs pursuant
to State Law, or bar or limit any law enforcement officer from proceeding to
act upon such a written complaint in accordance with the State Law.
Section XI. Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage.
Section XII. Severability
Should any portion of this ordinance be found invalid for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then all portions not found invalid shall
remain unaffected and continue in full force effect.
Section XIII. Repealed
This ordinance shall supersede all previous dog ordinances, which are
hereby repealed from and after the effective date of adoption of this
ordinance.
Public Hearing: March 18, 2002
Adopted: June 12, 2002
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS, MAINE
ORDINANCE EXEMPTING ELIGIBLE ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL
FROM VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly authorizes such
ordinances.
Section 2. Excise tax exemption; qualifications.
Vehicles owned by a resident of this municipality who is on active duty serving in the United
States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a military or naval post, station
or base outside this State or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days
and who desires to register that resident’s vehicle(s) in this State are hereby exempted from the
annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1482.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the municipal excise tax collector
certification from the commander of the resident’s post, station or base, or from the
commander’s designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that post, station
or base or is deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days.
For purposes of this section, “United States Armed Forces” includes the National Guard and the
Reserves of the United States Armed Forces.
For purposes of this section, “deployed for military service” has the same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
For purposes of this section, “vehicle” has the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5) and
does not include any snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
Section 3. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the Livermore Falls annual
Town Election, unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect unless and until it or 36
M.R.S.A. § 1483-A is repealed.
Approved at Town Election on: _______________________, _________
______________________, Selectman ______________________, Selectman
______________________, Selectman ______________________, Selectman
______________________, Selectman
Attest: A True Copy:
_______________________________
Susan Sapiel, Town Clerk
1
2
FEE SETTING ORDINANCE
The Shoreland Zoning Ordinance is amended by adding a new section,
Section 16K, to read as follows:
Permit Fees
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Code Enforcement
Officer permit and Planning Board permit fees, and Board of Appeals application
fees.
The Board of Appeals Ordinance is amended by adding a new section, Section
10, to read as follows:
Permit Fees
The selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees not established in other ordinances.
The Ordinance for the Acceptance of Streets and Ways is amended by adding
a new section, Section XIV, to read as follows:
Permit Fees
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
The Manure Control Ordinance (if not repealed) is amended by adding a new
section, Section 3 under the heading “Administration”, to read as follows:
Permit Fees
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
The Building Lot Standards Ordinance (if not repealed) is amended by adding
a new article, Article IX, to read as follows:
Permit Fees
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
3
The Site Plan Review Ordinance is amended by removing the existing
sentence in Section IV B and replacing with a new sentence to read as follows:
Existing sentence
An application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee of $10
plus $10 per 2000 square feet or portion thereof of gross floor area for commercial,
institutional and industrial projects.
Replacement sentence
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
The Subdivision Ordinance is amended by removing the existing Section VA2
and replacing with a new sentence to read as follows:
Existing sentence
The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 plus $10 per lot or unit
for the first 10 lots and a fee of $15 for each lot or unit over 10. All checks shall
be made payable to the Town of Livermore Falls, stating the specific purpose of
the fee.
Replacement sentence
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
The Floodplain Management Ordinance is amended by removing the existing
Article IV sentence and replacing with a new sentence to read as follows:
Existing sentence
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk
and a copy of the receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
Replacement sentence
The Selectmen shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for the
administration of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, Board of Appeals
application fees.
Adopted May 19, 1999






















LIBRARY MATERIAL RECOVERY ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Whoever detains any book, audio visual material or other property of the
Town of Livermore Falls Treat Memorial Public Library for seven (7) days
after written notice to return same, delivered by certified mail or in hand by
a police officer given after the expiration of the time which by the rules of
the Livermore Falls Treat Memorial Library such article or other property
may be kept, shall be subject to a fine equal to $25.00 (per item) plus all
overdue charges, and mailing and service costs, to be recovered in District
Court to the use of the Livermore Falls Treat Memorial Public Library upon
Complaint and Summons issued by any law enforcement officer of the Town
of Livermore Falls.
Adopted March 7, 1983
1
MANURE CONTROL ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
(THIS ORDINANCE WAS REPEALED ON JUNE 9, 1999)
Purpose: The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety and
public welfare of the residents of the Town of Livermore Falls and to protect
the environment by ensuring adequate disposal/application of manure for use
as fertilizer.
Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to: Title 30 MRSA Section 1917
Administration
Section 1. The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the
administration of this ordinance.
Section 2. The functions and powers of the Board of Selectmen shall
include the following:
a. The Board of Selectmen may appoint an agent or agents to conduct
all administrative functions relating to this ordinance on their behalf.
b. The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the enforcement of
this ordinance.
Applicability
Section 1. This ordinance shall apply to the disposal of manure, and the
stockpiling and spreading of manure within the Town of Livermore Falls for
agricultural fertilization purposes, excepting that manure which is generated
on the site where the disposal, stockpiling, and/or spreading is to take place.
Regulations
Section 1. Any person or persons, company or companies which dispose of
manure within the Town of Livermore Falls or utilize manure as fertilizer
2
shall obtain a permit from the Town of Livermore Falls prior to any
disposal, stockpiling or spreading of same.
Section 2. Permits shall be obtained from the Town Office and shall contain
the following information:
A. Applicant’s name, address and phone number.
B. Location of property to be fertilized.
C. Owner of property to be fertilized.
D. Manure to be obtained from: Name, Address, Type
E. Date of delivery.
F. Date(s) of spreading (no later than 5 days after delivery date).
G. Amount to be delivered.
H. Number of acres to be covered.
Section 3. Manure may not be stockpiled for more than 5 days between May
30th and September 30th of any year.
Section 4. Manure must be finely divided and spread thinly on ground (1-2
inches in depth) in order that it should dry quickly, within 5 days of delivery
to site.
Section 5. Manure stockpiled prior to spreading dates must be at least +/-
300 feet from the nearest residence or business.
Section 6. Manure shall not be stockpiled within 200 feet of any brook,
stream, river, well or natural watercourse.
Section 7. Manure may be utilized as field fertilizer during the entire year.
However, such utilization during the months of June 1 – October 1 shall be
under the terms and conditions outlined in this ordinance. Variances may be
granted upon application to the Selectmen or their designated agent.
Violation, Enforcement and Penalties
Section 1. Non-compliance with any section of this ordinance shall be
considered a violation. Each day in which a violation is proved to exist shall
constitute a separate offense under this ordinance.
3
Section 2. The fines for violation of this ordinance shall be not less than
$100 or more than $300 for each separate violation.
Section 3. Any persons operating in violations of this ordinance shall be
subject to the immediate revocation of their permit and shall be liable for all
costs associated with cleanup of the material, plus fines and penalties.
Section 4. Any persons operating without a permit shall be deemed in
violation of this ordinance and shall be liable for all costs associated with the
cleanup of the material, plus fines and penalties.
Section 5. Any person or persons, company or companies operating in
violation of this ordinance shall cease such operations immediately upon the
request of the Livermore Falls Board of Selectmen or its designated agent.
Failure to comply with such request shall be deemed a separate
violation of this ordinance and shall carry the maximum penalty allowed.
Appeal/Hearing
The Board of Appeals shall, upon written application of the aggrieved
party and after public notice, hear appeals from determinations of the Board
of Selectmen or its agent in the administration of this ordinance. Such
hearings shall be held in accordance with State laws.
Validity and Severability
If any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other sections or provisions of this
ordinance.
Effective Date: The effective date of this ordinance is the date of adoption
by Town vote. A certified copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk.
Adopted November 24, 1987
Repealed June 9, 1999
4
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS, MAINE
ORDINANCE EXEMPTING ELIGIBLE ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL
FROM VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly authorizes such
ordinances.
Section 2. Excise tax exemption; qualifications.
Vehicles owned by a resident of this municipality who is on active duty serving in the United
States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a military or naval post, station
or base outside this State or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days
and who desires to register that resident’s vehicle(s) in this State are hereby exempted from the
annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1482.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the municipal excise tax collector
certification from the commander of the resident’s post, station or base, or from the
commander’s designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that post, station
or base or is deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days.
For purposes of this section, “United States Armed Forces” includes the National Guard and the
Reserves of the United States Armed Forces.
For purposes of this section, “deployed for military service” has the same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
For purposes of this section, “vehicle” has the same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5) and
does not include any snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
Section 3. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the Livermore Falls annual
Town Election, unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect unless and until it or 36
M.R.S.A. § 1483-A is repealed.
Approved at Town Election on: _______________________, _________
______________________, Selectman ______________________, Selectman
______________________, Selectman ______________________, Selectman
______________________, Selectman
Attest: A True Copy:
_______________________________
Susan Sapiel, Town Clerk
1
2
Minimum Lot Size Ordinance
Article I. Purpose
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of
Livermore Falls, Maine by establishing a minimum lot size for sewered and
non-sewered areas.
Section II. Authority and Administration
A. This ordinance is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to and
consistent with Article VIII-A, of the State of Maine Constitution,
Title 30, M.R.S.A. Section 1917, “Ordinance Power Limited”
(Home Rule).
B. This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Minimum Lot Size
Ordinance for the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine.
C. This ordinance is enacted in accordance with Title 30 M.R.S.A.
Section 2153, “Enactment Procedure, (Enactment of Ordinance)”.
Section III. Applicability
A. This ordinance applies to all lots in the town of Livermore Falls
upon which a seasonal home, permanent home; mobile home,
commercial building or institutional building is to be erected. Lots
in mobile home parks shall conform with the provisions of the
Livermore Falls Mobile Home Park Ordinance and as hereafter
amended
B. Enactment of this ordinance shall constitute a repeal of the
Minimum Lot Size Ordinance currently in effect.
C. This ordinance shall not be interpreted to prevent, or prohibit the
erection of the following on any lots of any size.
1. Special purpose, small (not over 100 square feet)
buildings, such as gate houses, well houses and pump
houses.
3
2. Shelters open to the weather for sheep, cattle, horses or
other animals.
3. Outbuildings such as garages, sheds, barns, workshops,
etc… on lots with existing dwellings, or buildings.
D. Non-Conforming Lots of Record : A lot of record which is shown
on a deed or plan recorded in accordance with law prior to March
3, 1975, may be built upon. All other single lots of record which at
the effective date of this ordinance may be built upon provided that
such lot shall be in separate ownership and that Federal and State
Statutes permit requirements herein, and to extent practicable, the
other provisions of this ordinance shall be met.
Section IV. Minimum Lot Size Specifications
A. For those areas served by municipal sewer , a minimum of 10,000
square feet shall be required with a minimum frontage of 100 feet
on a roadway of body of water
B. For those areas not served by municipal sewer, a minimum of
40,000 square feet shall be required with a minimum frontage of
150 feet on a roadway or body of water.
Section V. Enforcement
A. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Livermore Falls
shall act in all cases of violations of this ordinance by notifying in
writing the owner, or lessor of the lot, the Board of Selectmen and
the Planning Board of the nature of the violations and the
correction, if possible, required
B. The Board of Selectmen is charged with the prosecution for all
violations of the provisions of this ordinance. In cases where such
notices referred to in section V-A are not promptly complied with
after receipt of said notices, the Board of Selectmen shall take such
complaint to the courts as, in their judgment, is proper, or the
Board may institute such actions or proceedings at law or in equity
as are proper to restrain, correct, remove or punish such violations.
4
C. Any persons or party who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less
than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, and each day on which such
violations shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Section VI. Appeals
A. Any aggrieved person or party may appeal the provisions of this
ordinance to the Board of Appeals for the Town of Livermore Falls
B. The Board of Appeals for the Town of Livermore Falls shall
function in accordance with Title 30, M.R.S.A. Section 2411 and
4963
C. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
1. Administrative appeals: to consider alleged error (s) in procedures
by the Selectmen or Code Enforcement Officer in the administration
or enforcement of this ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals: to consider if, in specific cases, a relaxation of
the terms of this ordinance would be contrary to the public interest
and intent of this ordinance or if, owing to the unique conditions of
the property and not to the result of actions of the applicant, literal
enforcement would cause undue hardship.
a. The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique
circumstances applying to the property. Both of these elements must
be present to grant a variance.
b. A variance is only authorized for area and dimensional
requirements of this ordinance.
D. Filing process
In all cases, a person aggrieved by a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall commence the appeal within 30 days after
5
the decision is made by the Code Officer. The appeal shall be filed
with the Board of Appeals on forms approved by the Board, and the
aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds
for the appeal.
E. Hearing
Following the filing of an appeal and before taking action on any
appeal, the Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within 30 days. The Board of Appeals shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer, Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board, at
least 20 days in advance of the time and place of the hearing and shall
publish notice of the hearing at least 10 days in advance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area.
Section VII Validity and Severability and Conflict with other
Ordinances
A. Shall any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other
section or provision of these regulations and to this end, the
provisions of these regulations are hereby declared to be severable.
B. The effective date of this ordinance shall be upon adoption by the
governing body of the Town of Livermore Falls.
C. This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or
remove the necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation,
bylaw, permit or provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a
higher standard for the promotion and protection of health and
safety, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
Section VIII. Amendments
A. This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at a town
meeting. Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the
Planning Board, by request of the Board of Selectmen, or by
6
petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the number
of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election.
B. The Planning Board shall hold public hearings on all proposed
amendments.
Section IX. Definition of Terms
A. In general, words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their
customary dictionary meanings. More specifically, certain words
and terms used herein are defined as follows.
Code Enforcement Officer: a person appointed by the municipal
officers to administer and enforce the ordinance.
Lot: a parcel of land in single ownership, described on a deed, plot or
similar legal document.
Non-Conforming Lot of Record: A lot existing at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance which does not conform to
all applicable provisions of this ordinance.
Roadway: The word “roadway” means and includes such wavs as
streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads and other rites of
way.
Adopted
February 27, 1981
1
2
MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE
OF THE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section I. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Mobile Home Park
Ordinance of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine.”
Section II. PURPOSE
To protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the people; to
protect the environment; and provide for the orderly development of mobile
home parks.
Section III. APPLICABILITY
No provision of this ordinance shall apply to trailers as defined under
Section XII D (1-4).
Enactment of this ordinance shall constitute a repeal of the “Mobile
Home Park Ordinance” currently in effect.
The provisions of this ordinance, after adoption, shall not apply to
existing mobile home parks, but shall apply to further additions to existing
mobile home parks.
No person shall establish, conduct, maintain or operate a mobile home
park without first obtaining a permit.
Section IV. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
Application for a permit shall be submitted to the Planning Board. A
copy shall be forwarded to the Board of Selectmen and the Plumbing
Inspector for review and comments. If the application is complete and
approved, the Board will issue a permit. The application shall contain the
following:
a. Interested Party. The name and address of the applicant and the
name and address of the real party in interest if other than the applicant.
3
b. Plot Plan. A preliminary and final planning process shall be
undertaken with the Planning Board and the Planning Board’s approval must
be obtained.
c. Certification. Certification of Approval of the Plumbing Inspector
as to the compliance with the sanitary requirements of the Town.
d. Proof. Proof of ownership, option, or valid lease of the premises to
be used as a mobile home park.
e. The initial fee for a permit for a mobile home park shall be $25.00
plus $10.00 per lot or unit for the first 10 units and a fee of $15.00 for each
lot or unit over 10.
Section V. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
Each mobile home park or extension thereof, and any mobile home
subdivision or development, shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Lot Size, Width and Density
1. All lots will be designated on a mobile home park plan.
2. Lots served by public sewer shall have a minimum lot area of
6,500 sq. ft. The lots will have a minimum lot width of 50 ft.
3. Lots served by individual subsurface sewage disposal systems will
have a minimum lot area of 20,000 sq. ft. and a minimum lot width of 100
feet.
4. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal system
will have a minimum lot area of 12,000 sq. ft. and a minimum lot width of
75 feet.
5. The overall density of a mobile home park served by a central
subsurface sewage disposal system shall be no greater than one unit per
20,000 square feet of total park area.
4
6. Where lots front on a curved right-of-way or are served by a
driveway, the frontage requirement shall be measured in a straight line
perpendicular to the setback line.
7. Lots within a shoreland zoning district shall meet the lot area, lot
width, setback and shore frontage requirements for that district.
8. The overall area of the mobile home park shall be the combined
area of the mobile home lots plus:
a. The area required for road rights of way;
b. The area required for buffer strips, if any;
c. The area required for open space;
d. The area within the municipality’s shoreland setback.
B. Lot Setbacks
Mobile homes in a mobile home park, but adjacent to a public road,
shall be set back from the road a distance equal to the setback requirements
for other residential developments.
C. Open Space Requirements
The Board may require that within mobile home parks on a public
sewer an area of land be reserved as an open space and/or recreational area
for use by all residents of the park. This requirement will be in accordance
with provisions relating to other residential developments. No more than
10% of the total area devoted to individual lots shall be set aside for open
space and/or recreation.
D. Buffer Strips
The Board may require a buffer strip up to 50 feet in width, such as
natural vegetation, where separation is desirable. The width of the buffer
strip must comply with the requirements of Title 30-A, MRSA, Section
4358, Regulations of Manufactured Housing.
5
E. Parking Requirements
For each mobile home lot there shall be provided and maintained at
least 2 off-street parking spaces. Each parking space shall contain a
minimum area of 200 square feet with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 20
feet. This requirement may be waived if an equivalent number of spaces is
provided by a parking lane.
In addition to occupant parking, off-street guest and service parking
shall be provided within the boundaries of the parK at a ratio of 1 space for
each 4 mobile home lots. This requirement shall be waived if a parking lane
provides an equivalent number of spaces.
F. Road Standards
The main entrance of the mobile home park shall be from a State,
State Aid or Town Road. All mobile home park lots shall abut on a roadway
designed in accordance with the Town of Livermore Falls Streets and Ways
Ordinance (see Section XIII, Privately Owned Roads – Mobile Home
Parks). Parks generating more than 500 vehicle trips per day will require a
traffic impact analysis by a Professional Engineer, registered in the State of
Maine.
G. Street Lights
Mobile home park streets shall be illuminated by street lighting
installed at regular intervals of 300 +/- feet. These lights shall be provided
and maintained by the mobile home park owner.
H. Storm Drainage
A storm drainage plan will be prepared by a Professional Engineer,
registered in the State of Maine, showing ditching, culverts, storm drains,
easements, and other proposed improvements sufficient to accommodate a
25-year storm.
I. Ground Water
For mobile home parks not served by a public sewer, an assessment of
the impacts of park development on ground water quality shall be submitted
prior to the final approval of the park. The assessment shall be prepared by
6
a certified geologist or registered Professional Engineer, and shall include all
the required information as outlined in a booklet entitled “Maine’s New
Mobile Home Park Law, A Guidebook for Local Officials” by the
Department of Economic and Community Development, September 1989,
pages 50-53.
J. Utility Requirements
All mobile home parks shall provide permanent electrical, water and
sewage disposal connections to each mobile home in accordance with
applicable state and local rules and regulations.
1. An adequate and potable supply of water, with a minimum of 30
pounds per square inch pressure at all times, shall be provided for each
mobile home space or lot. The water source shall be capable of producing
300 gallons of potable water per mobile home lot per day.
2. All mobile homes in a mobile home park shall be connected to the
municipal sewer system or a centralized private system by means of an
approved system of collector and interceptor sewer lines.
3. Where municipal sewer or a centralized private sewer system is not
used an approved septic sewage disposal system shall be provided for each
lot in a mobile home park.
K. Refuse
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so handled or managed by the permittee as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding area, accident hazards or area
pollution. One refuse can with a tight fitting cover for each occupied mobile
home lot or space shall be furnished by the mobile home owner.
L. Aesthetics
1. Skirting. An underskirt of a substantial material must be installed
within 90 days from installation of mobile home.
2. Storage. At least 300 cubic feet of enclosed tenant storage
facilities shall be conveniently provided on or near each mobile home lot for
the storage of materials and equipment.
7
M. Records
Each permittee shall keep a written record, subject to inspection at any
reasonable time by a duly authorized officer of the Town of Livermore Falls,
which shall contain the date of arrival, the name, make, year, model, serial
number (where applicable) and length of mobile home, and also the names
of the occupants thereof. A complete list of the above shall be furnished to
the Assessor’s Office on April 1 of each year.
N. Certification of Payment of Sales Tax
No municipality may allow the construction or location of any new
manufactured housing within the municipality by any person other than a
dealer licensed by the State with a sales tax certificate, without:
1. A bill of sale indicating the name, address, dealer registration
number and sales tax certificate number of the person who sold or provided
the manufacturing housing to the buyer locating the housing in the
municipality; or
2. If no such bill of sale is presented, evidence of certification of
payment of the sales tax in accordance with Title 36, Section 1760,
Subsection 40, and Title 36, Section 1952-B.
The permit is deemed to be not approved or valid until payment of the sales
tax has been certified.
Section VI. PLANNING BOARD ACTION ON APPLICATION
A. Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall
notify the applicant in writing either that the application has been found to
be complete or, if the application is incomplete, that certain specific
additional material is needed to make the application complete. When the
Planning Board is satisfied that it has a complete application, it shall notify
the applicant in writing and begin its review of the proposed development.
B. The Planning Board may hold a public hearing within 30 days after the
Planning Board has notified the applicant that the application is complete.
The Planning Board shall publish the time, date and place of the hearing in a
8
newspaper of area-wide circulation. The applicant shall send notice of the
hearing by certified mail, return receipts requested, to abutting landowners,
including owners of property on the opposite side of the road, a minimum of
10 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
C. Within 30 days of the public hearing or if no public hearing is held
within 60 days after the Planning Board has notified the applicant that the
application is complete, the Planning Board shall either approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the application. The time limit for review
may be extended by mutual agreement between the Planning Board and the
applicant.
D. Within seven days of reaching their decision, the Planning Board shall
notify the applicant in writing of any action taken and the reason for taking
such action.
Section VII. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
A. Authority
1. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 2151-A (Home Rule).
2. This ordinance is enacted in accordance with Title 30-A, MRSA,
Section 2153, “Enactment Procedure” (Enactment of Ordinance) and Section
4358, “Regulation of Manufactured Housing”.
3. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be charged with the
responsibility of enforcing this ordinance.
B. Administration
1. This ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board for the
Town of Livermore Falls hereafter referred to as the “Board”.
2. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all of the land areas
within the Town of Livermore Falls.
9
Section VIII. ENFORCEMENT
A. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Livermore Falls shall act
in all cases of violation of this ordinance by notifying in writing the owner
or lessor of the lot, the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board of the
nature of the violation and the correction, if possible, required.
B. The Board of Selectmen is charged with the prosecution for all violations
of the provisions of this ordinance. In cases where such notices referred to
in Section VIII A are not promptly complied with after receipt of said
notices, the Board of Selectmen shall make such complaint to the courts as,
in their judgment, is proper, or the Board may institute such actions or
proceedings at law or in equity as are proper to restrain, correct, remove or
punish such violations.
C. Any persons or party who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$100, and each day on which such violations shall continue shall constitute a
separate fine.
Section IX. APPEALS
A. Any aggrieved person or party may appeal the provisions of this
ordinance to the Board of Appeals for the Town of Livermore Falls.
B. The Board of Appeals for the Town of Livermore Falls shall function in
accordance with Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 2411.
C. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
1. Administrative Appeals: to consider alleged error(s) in procedures
by the Selectmen or Code Enforcement Officer in the administration or
enforcement of this ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals: to consider if, in specific cases, a relaxation of
terms of this ordinance would be contrary to public interest and intent of this
ordinance or if, owing to unique conditions of the property and not to the
result of actions of the applicant, literal enforcement would cause undue
hardship.
10
a. The crucial points of variance are undue hardship and unique
circumstances applying to the property. Both of these elements must be
present to grant a variance.
b. A variance is only authorized for area and dimensional
requirements of this ordinance.
D. Filing Procedures
The aggrieved person or party shall commence his appeal within 30 days
after a decision is made by the Code Enforcement Officer. The appeal shall
be filed with the Board of Appeals on forms approved by the Board, and the
aggrieved person shall specifically set forth on the form the grounds for
appeal.
E. Hearing
Following the filing of an appeal, and before taking action on any appeal, the
Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days.
The Board of Appeals shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer, Board of
Selectmen and the Planning Board at least 20 days in advance, of the time
and place of the hearing, and shall publish notice of the hearing at least 10
days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the area.
Section X. AMENDMENTS
A. This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at Town Meeting.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the Planning Board, by
request of the Board of Selectmen or by a petition of a number of voters
equal to 10% of the numbers cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial
election.
B. The Planning Board shall hold public hearings on all proposed
amendments.
11
Section XI. VALIDITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, CONFLICT OF
ORDINANCES
A. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of these regulations, and to this end, the provisions of these
regulations are hereby declared to be severable.
B. The effective date of this ordinance shall be upon adoption by the
Governing Body of the Town of Livermore Falls.
C. This ordinance shall not repeal, annul or in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or
provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
D. Adoption of this ordinance shall repeal any and all previously adopted
Mobile Home Park ordinances.
Section XII. DEFINITIONS
A. Manufactured Housing. A structural unit or units designed for
occupancy and constructed in a manufacturing facility and transported, by
the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis, to a building site where
it is used for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the
interim. Manufactured housing includes:
1. Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called
“newer mobile homes”, which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in
compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development standards, meaning structures transportable in one or more
sections, which in the traveling mode are 14 body feet or more in width and
are 750 or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as dwellings, with or without permanent foundations,
when connected to the required utilities including the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit;
a. This term also includes any structure which meets all the
requirements of this subparagraph, except the size requirements and with
12
respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by
the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et seq.; and
2. Those units commonly called “modular homes,” which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with Title 10, Chapter
957, and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning structures, transportable
in one or more sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis
and are designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to
required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or
electrical systems contained in the unit.
B. Mobile home park. A parcel of land under unified ownership approved
by the municipality for the placement of 3 or more manufactured homes.
C. Mobile home park lot. The area of land on which an individual home is
situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the
occupants of that home.
D. Trailer. The following shall be considered a trailer:
1. Travel Trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation, having
body width not exceeding 8 feet and body length not exceeding 32 feet.
2. Pick-up Coach. A structure to be mounted on a truck chassis for
use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
3. Motor Home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for
travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a selfpropelled
vehicle.
4. Camping Trailer. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels
and designed for travel, recreation and vacation.
E. Person. The word “person” shall include individuals, corporations,
owners, lessees, licensees and agents of each term.
13
F. Permittee. “Permittee” shall be deemed to be any person, firm or
corporation receiving a permit to conduct, operate or maintain a mobile
home park.
Adopted June 3, 1991

Moose Hill Pond Watershed Protection Ordinance
I. Authority
The Moose Hill Pond Watershed Protection Ordinance is created pursuant to Title
30-A MRSA §4352 (Zoning ordinances).
II. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to prevent contamination of Moose Hill Pond
(Pond), a public drinking water supply located on the Town of Livermore Falls
(Town), Maine, by preventing contamination of the surface water and ground
water that feed the Pond.
III Definitions
A. Agricultural use: any activity that includes the production, keeping or
maintenance, for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals, including but not limited
to: forages and sod crops: grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products;
poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
green house products. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber
harvesting activities.
B. Commercial use: the use of lands, building or structures, other than a
“home occupation”, defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the
production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services,
exclusive of rental or residential buildings and/or dwelling units. Commercial use
does not include activities covered by the agricultural use section above.
C. Home occupation: an occupation or profession which is customarily
conducted on or in a residential structure or property and which:
i. Is clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses: and
ii. Employs no more than two persons other than family members
residing in the home; and
iii. Impacts surface water and ground water no more than a residential
land use customarily would.
D. Industrial use: the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods.
E. Residual: material from an industrial source which is agronomically used
by land-applying it in order to increase the nutrient content of soil at a rate
commensurate with the nutritional needs of the crop to be grown and the
assimilative capacity of the soil; otherwise improve agricultural soil conditions; or
provide some other horticultural benefit.
IV. Applicability
The provisions in the Ordinance apply to:
1.) All proposed industrial and/or commercial land uses in the
Moose Hill Pond watershed; and
2.) All agricultural operations in the Moose Hill Pond
watershed.
This Ordinance does not apply to essential operations of the Livermore Falls Water
District (Water District) and emergency and enforcement operations conducted by
official federal, state or local entities.
V. Administration and Enforcement
The Livermore Falls Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance. The Town of Livermore Falls Planning Board (PB) shall review
and act upon permit applications as designated under this ordinance.
VI. Delineation
The Moose Hill Pond watershed is the land area draining to Moose Hill Pond. The
Moose Hill Pond Watershed Protection Zone (MWP Zone) is defined as the Moose
Hill Pond watershed, and is delineated on a map entitled “Moose Hill Pond
Watershed Protection (MXP) Zone, Livermore Falls, Maine.” This map is kept on
file with this Ordinance at the Town Office.
VII. Provisions
A. General: Per Public Law 761, the Town shall send copies of plans for all
projects requiring a permit within the MWP Zone to the Water District for
review.
B. Agricultural Land Uses:
1. Over-wintering of uncovered residuals in the MWP Zone is
prohibited. Use of residuals must comply with applicable State
and local regulations.
2. Per Maine Department of Agriculture Manure Utilization
Guidelines, no manure field stacking sites shall be located with
500 feet of the Pond.
3. As of the effective date of this ordinance, no new manure
storage facilities shall be located within 500 feet of the Pond.
C. Commercial and Industrial Land Uses
An application and $50 application fee must be filed with the CEO for any
proposed commercial or industrial land use in the MWP Zone. A copy of the
application shall be given by the CEO to the PB and the Water District for review.
The PB may require an applicant to submit a hydrogeological study. The study
must be prepared by a licensed geotechnical engineer or geologist with proven
experience in hydrogeology. The PB may hire an expert to review all information
submitted by the applicant and may charge the applicant the cost of the consultant.
A permit for a commercial or industrial land use required under this section may be
denied by the PB if the operation is determined by the PB to pose an unnecessary
risk to the quality of surface water and/or ground water in the MWP Zone. The PB
agrees to permit commercial and industrial land uses in the MWP Zone only with
the consent of the Water District.
VIII. Relationship with Other Laws and Regulations
In any case in which a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with a provision of any
other State or local law or regulation, the provision which establishes the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
IX. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this
Ordinance.
X. Effective Date
The effective date of this ordinance is July 1, 2011


1
Town of TURNER – Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance – for April 2012 Town Meeting.
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
Administration by the Efficiency Maine Trust
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, “An
Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known
as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying
property can access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the
Town, financed by funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds available for
this purpose, and to enter into a contract with the Trust to administer functions of its PACE
program; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality wishes to establish a PACE program; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Municipality hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
§ XX-1 Purpose
By and through this Chapter, the Town of LIVERMORE FALLS declares as its public purpose
the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property
Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access
financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the Town. The Town
declares its purpose and the provisions of this Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and
State laws.
§ XX-2 Enabling Legislation
The Town enacts this Ordinance pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th Maine
State Legislature -- “An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and
Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”
(codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
Town of TURNER – Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance – for April 2012 Town Meeting.
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
§ XX-3 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the Town of LIVERMORE FALLS
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
§ XX-4 Definitions
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an
improvement to qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property
and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or similar
energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements
of residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the
Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that
meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the Town of LIVERMORE FALLS
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of
qualifying property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on
qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying
property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against
qualifying property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality
establishes a PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s
boundaries.
Town of TURNER – Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance – for April 2012 Town Meeting.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to
the owner(s) of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made
pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying
property.
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State
statute by the Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy
savings improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the
PACE district of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a
fixture, product, system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter
at a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy
systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems
eligible for funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean
Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
1. Establishment; funding. The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program
allowing owners of qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to
access financing for energy saving improvements to their property through PACE loans
administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available from the Trust in
municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE Ordinance, 2) adopt and implement a local public
outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust
to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the municipality’s
PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration
of the municipality’s PACE program.
2. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the Municipality may from time to
time amend this Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it or
appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality
shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those other funding sources.
Town of TURNER – Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance – for April 2012 Town Meeting.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
1. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust adopts
standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to the
Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model documents
substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality shall take necessary steps to
conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model
documents.
ARTICLE VI – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the Municipality will enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program for the
Municipality. The PACE administration contract with the Trust will establish the
administration of the PACE program including, without limitation, that:
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the Municipality’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE
mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
vii. the Municipality, or the Trust or its agent on behalf of the
Municipality, promptly shall record the discharges of PACE mortgages
upon full payment of the PACE loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with
adopting this Ordinance, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an education
and outreach program so that citizens of the Municipality are made aware of
Town of TURNER – Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance – for April 2012 Town Meeting.
home energy saving opportunities, including the opportunity to finance energy
saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust
and consistent with applicable law.
2. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and
tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for
claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a PACE program,
including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above,
a municipality has no liability to a property owner for or related to energy savings
improvements financed under a PACE program.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
1
Adopted July 28, 1980
Grace Period for Enforcement
Thru August 25, 1980
Amended September 11, 1980
Amended October 30, 1980
Proposal July 16, 1981
Amended July 30, 1981
Proposal December 18, 1981
Amended December 30, 1981
Amended January 10, 1983
Amended February 21, 1984
Amended January 21, 1985
Amended February 17, 1987
Amended March 02, 1987
Amended March 28, 1988
Amended September 19, 1994
Proposal May 01, 2000
Amended May 15, 2000
Amended July 19, 2004
Amended June 06, 2005
Amended September 17, 2012
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
2
I. Title: This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Parking and Traffic
Ordinance of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine.
II. Authority: This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 30 Section 2151 of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
III. Purpose: This ordinance is designed to update existing parking and traffic
regulations thereby allowing better control over vehicle use patterns in Livermore
Falls, Maine.
IV. Intent: The Selectmen of Livermore Falls, Maine shall maintain in said Town
suitable parking signs and markings indicating time, manner, and place of parking
motor vehicles in accordance with the ordinance, and such additional signs and
markings as they may deem necessary to control and direct traffic and parking
within the municipal boundaries. No person shall park motor vehicles contrary to
this ordinance and such signs and/or markings. Parking and traffic ordinances
adopted in all previous years and other Town ordinances pertaining to motor
vehicle traffic and parking are hereby repealed and superseded by this ordinance.
V. Definitions:
1. The designation of Municipal Officer shall mean a majority of the Board
of Selectmen.
2. The word “Parked” as used in this ordinance shall mean allowing a motor
vehicle to remain stationary in or on a highway, public way, street, or
other public property whether attended or unattended.
3. Automobile: Automobile shall mean any motor vehicle designed for the
conveyance of passengers with a seating capacity of not more than 14
persons.
4. Motor Truck: Shall mean any motor vehicle designed and used for the
conveyance of property, and or passengers.
5. Motorcycle: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
riding and designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a farm tractor and a parking control vehicle.
6. Road Tractor: Shall mean any motor vehicle designed and used for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load
so drawn.
7. Bus: Motor vehicles designed for carrying more than 14 passengers and
used for the transportation of said passengers for compensation.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
3
8. Semi Trailer: Shall mean any vehicle without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and
so designed that some part of its weight and/or its load rests upon or is
carried by such motor vehicle, and shall include pole dollies, pole dickeys
so-called, and wheels commonly used as a support for the ends of logs or
other long articles.
9. Motor Vehicle: When the term “motor vehicles” is used in the ordinance it
is intended to encompass the types of vehicles defined in sections 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and 8.
VI. General Regulations:
Sec.1. No motor vehicle shall be parked within 15 feet of a public hydrant.
Sec.2. No motor vehicle shall park during specified times in any area marked as
loading zones other then vehicles servicing the business (es) immediately
adjacent to the loading zone (s).
Sec.3. No motor vehicle shall be parked:
A. On any highway, public way, street, or other public property
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. from the 15th day of
November to the 15th day of April of each year; between said dates
unoccupied and locked vehicles parked properly within parking
spaces in the municipal lot during the designated “No Trespassing”
period will be allowed to facilitate snow removal activities;
B. so as to obstruct any driveway, crosswalk, private way, street,
highway, right of way, public way or other public property;
C. in yellow painted zones or along curbing marked in yellow, or in
parking spaces marked with yellow paint.
Any motor vehicle parked contrary to the prohibition listed in this
section or contrary of any other section of this ordinance shall be
subject to removal by the authority of a duly appointed law
enforcement officer at the expense of the owner of such vehicle.
Sec.4. No motor vehicle shall be parked within twenty feet of an intersection or
junction of street, highways, public ways, or other public property, except
as otherwise may be indicated.
Sec.5. No motor vehicle shall be parked fully or partially on any sidewalks.
Sec.6. No motor vehicle shall be parked on any street between any NO
PARKING signs.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
4
Sec.7. No motor vehicle shall be parked overnight or more than 24 consecutive
hours in any public parking lot, or on any highway, public way, street, or
other public property without written permission of a local law
enforcement officer.
Sec.8. No “U” turn (s) may be made on any highway, public way, street, or other
public property except when otherwise designated.
Sec.9. Motorcycles may at the owners risk be parked singly or 2 or 3 to a marked
parking space, provided that no part of the cycles extend outside of the
space markings in which case the owner of the cycle in violation may be
summoned for improper parking.
Sec.10.No motor vehicle shall be double parked on any highway, public way,
street, or other public property in the municipality.
Sec.11.Motor vehicles parked parallel with the curb shall be parked within
eighteen inches thereof, and within spaces marked therefore, if any.
Sec.12.The parking and traffic signs and markings provided for by this ordinance
and appearing in any street or way in this Town shall be prima facie
evidence that such signs and markings were erected and marked in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and by authority of the
Selectmen. The map in Appendix A is designed to show the general
location of parking and no parking areas. The actual placement of the
signs and pavement marking define the areas for enforcement purposes.
Sec.13.No motor vehicle shall be operated contrary to the posted directions and
regulations for entering or exiting municipal parking areas, or parked
contrary to said directions or regulations.
Sec.14.No motor vehicle shall be parked with its left hand side to the curb, except
on designated one way streets.
Sec.15.The Board of Selectmen in responding to parking and traffic problems
may establish parking time, or motor vehicle size limitations in any area or
zone after notice and hearing. Signs will be posted in areas so limited in
such a manner as to notify the public of the limitation.
VII. Specific Regulations
Sec.1. Parking on Main, Depot, Union, Bridge, and Church Streets shall be
limited to the parking spaces provided and areas specifically posted which
allow parking.
Sec.2. Time of parking on Main and Depot Street, from the intersection of Bridge
Street and Main Street to the railroad tracks on Depot Street, shall be
limited to 2 hours from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm, except on Fridays when this
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
5
parking limit shall be extended to 9:00 pm.. Time of other streets in
Section 1 shall be limited to one hour from 8:00 am to 6:00 pm, except on
Fridays when this parking limit shall be extended to 9:00 pm. This section
however, shall not be applicable on Sundays or legal holidays nor shall it
apply to areas specifically provided with and posted for other time limits
based on other sections of this ordinance.
Sec.3. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the West side of Main Street
beginning from a point opposite Gagnon Street to the parking area of
120 Main Street, and from a point opposite Gordon Street to the corner
on Franklin and Main Streets, except duly lined parking spaces falling
within said zone.
Sec.4. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the East side of Main Street from the
last designated parking pace adjacent to the 41 Main Street to a point
opposite the entrance to 66 Main Street except for duly lined parking
spaces falling within said zone.
Sec.5. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the West side of Park Street from the
intersection of the Fayette Road to the designated point beyond the
intersection of Park and Birch Streets, and also from a point marking the
northerly boundary line of 85 Park Street to a point opposite the southerly
property line of 63 Park Street, and then from a point opposite the
northerly corner of the property line of 61 Park Street to the intersection of
Depot and Park Streets. Any vehicle parked in the area from 63 Park
Street through 61 Park Street must be parked so that it is completely
outside of the traveled way as designated by pavement marking lines.
Sec.6. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the East side of High Street from the
intersection of the Fayette Road to the intersection of Depot and Park
Streets
Sec.7. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the East side of High Street
beginning from the intersection of High and Upper Depot to a point
opposite the intersection the intersection of High and School Streets.
Sec.8. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North or South side of Water
Street.
Sec.9. No motor vehicle shall travel in an easterly direction on Millett Street, and
Reynolds Avenue, and no motor vehicle shall travel in a westerly direction
on Green Street, and no motor vehicle shall travel in a northerly direction
on Sewall Street, said town ways being designated as one-way streets.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
6
Sec.10.No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North side of Millett Street,
Green Street, and Reynolds Avenue, and the West side of Sewall Street
except in the area from 7 Sewall Street to a location between 9 and 15
Sewall Street.
Sec.11.No motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of Pleasant Street.
Sec.12.No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North or South side of Upper
Depot Street from the intersection of Pleasant and Depot Streets to the
intersection of Sewall and Depot Streets.
Sec.13.No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North side of Upper Depot from
the intersection of High and Depot to a designated point beyond the
intersection of Jones Road and Depot Street.
Sec.14.No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North or South side of Upper
Depot Street from the intersection of Pine Avenue and Depot Street to a
designated point beyond the intersection of Jones Road and Depot Street.
Sec.15. No motor vehicle shall be parked on the North or South sides of Depot
Street from the intersection of Depot and Pleasant Street to the designated
parking spaces in the vicinity of 18 Depot Street.
Sec.16. No motor vehicle shall be parked on either side of the Griffin Field Road
Sec.17.No motor vehicle shall be parked, in the throughway directly to the North
and West of the Livermore Falls Police Station exit doors in an area
generally described as the traveled way between the northern corner of the
Livermore Falls Municipal Building and the Central Maine Power
Company Pole 2 and further identified with the placement of “No
Parking” signs.
Sec.18.No motor vehicle other than official Town of Livermore Falls police
cruisers shall be parked in either of the two (2) reserved parking spaces
directly adjacent to the Town of Livermore Falls police station exit doors
which shall be posted “Police Car Only”.
Sec.19.No motor vehicle shall be parked in the 3 designated parking spaces at the
southwest corner of the Municipal Building for a period to exceed twenty
(20) minutes. This provision shall apply only during normal business
hours of the municipal offices, specifically from 8:00 a.m. through 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday inclusive and excepting legal holidays.
Said designated spaces shall be clearly marked with signs indicating a
twenty (20) minute parking limit.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
7
Sec.20.The following locations has been established as No Parking/Tow Away
Zones, and should be posted as such.
A. The intersection of Main Street and Water Street.
B. From 41 Main Street to 127 Main Street, with the exception of
marked spaces.
C. The Main Street/Depot Street intersection in front of the 2 Depot
Street
D. From 16 Main Street to the intersection of the Foundry Road.
Sec.21.The following area on Cargill, Sewall and High Streets have been
designated “No Parking Area”:
A. Cargill Street on the South side from 17 to 21 Cargill Street.
B. High Street on the West side from the intersection of School and
High Street South to an area between 10 and 12 High Street.
C. Sewall Street on the East side from the intersection of Depot and
Sewall Street to an area between 14 and 16 Sewall Street.
Three maps were included to identify the general area were sign need to
be posted.
Sec.22.All School Busses and all trucks with a gross registered weight of 23,000
lbs. or more are prohibited thru use of Water Street.
All trucks with a gross registered weight of 23,000 lbs. or more are
prohibited on the following roadway without a permit.
Heritage Lane, Tradition Way, and Legendary Lane
Sec.23.No Parking is allowed as follows:
A. the North side of Cedar Street
B. the South side of Maple, Oak, Walnut, Chestnut, and Birch Streets.
C. the West side of Highland Avenue.
VIII. Snow Removal
The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized to designate specific
roadways and parking areas as Temporary Snow Emergency No Parking Areas.
These areas shall be designated by placement of temporary signs indicating the
area closed to parking. The Road Commissioner shall cause the signs to be
removed as soon as the closing of the area to parking is no longer necessary to
facilitate snow removal activities.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
8
The intent and purpose of this article is to facilitate safe, efficient, and
timely snow removal activities; these provisions should be liberally interpreted to
that purpose.
IX. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, if they
desire to avoid court action pay the appropriate fees set forth below:
1. Exceeding time limit $ 5.00
2. Parking within 20’ of a crosswalk 5.00
3. Parking in a No Parking /Tow Away Zone 10.00
4. Double Parking 10.00
5. Parking left wheel to curb on a 2 way street 10.00
6. Obstructing driveway, sidewalk or crosswalk 10.00
7. Improper parking 5.00
8. Overnight Parking 5.00
9. Improper entry or exit 15.00
10. Nov. 15 to April 15 Restricted area 15.00
11. Prohibited zone or place 5.00
12. Within 15’ of a fire hydrant 15.00
13. Parking in Temporary Snow Emergency No Parking Area 5.00
14. Parking in “Police Car Only” area 5.00
Any person who receives a ticket for a violation of this ordinance and who does
not pay the designated fee within 10 day of said violation will be summoned to
court for said violation. Payment of the fee within the time allotted obviates court
action. In the event of non-payment of said fee a court summons shall be obtained
and anyone convicted of a violation of any portion of this ordinance shall be
punished by a fine not less than $25 or more then $100, and/or a jail sentence at
the Androscoggin County Jail of not more then 10 days.
LIVERMORE FALLS
PARKING AND TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
9
Upon evidence of payment to the clerk of court prior to the hearing of the
appropriate fine set forth in the following schedule the Town may accept said fine
and wave court action, through the prosecuting officer.
OFFENSE VIOLATION FINE VIOLATION FINE VIOLATION FINE
1st 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 11 $25 4, 5, 6 $30 9, 10, 12, 13, 14 $40
2nd 35 40 50
3rd 45 50 60
4th 55 60 70
5th 65 70 85
6th 75 85 100
7th 85 95 100
8th 100 100 100
X. Separability : The invalidity of any provision or portion of this ordinance shall not
invalidate any other.
XI. Effective Date: The effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of adoption
by the Board of Selectmen.


1
2
PAWNBROKERS ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Pawnbrokers Title 30-A, MRSA , Chapter 183
Section 1. Pawnbrokers
A. License: The Town of Livermore Falls may grant licenses to persons of
good moral character to conduct pawn transactions. MRSA 30-A, Section
3963, 3964.
License to be for one year, unless sooner revoked for violation of law.
B. License Fee: The annual license fee for pawnbrokers shall be set from
time to time by the Board of Selectmen; and such fee amount is on file in the
Municipal Office.
C. Penalty: Whoever carries on such business without a license shall be
punished in accordance with 30-A MRSA, Section 3961.
D. Compliance: Any business licensed to conduct pawn transactions shall
follow all requirements of MRSA 30-A, Section 3961, et seq.
Adopted: June 9, 2004
1
2
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
PLANNING BOARD
1. Establishment:
Pursuant to Article VII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution
and 30-A MRSA Section 3001, the Town of Livermore Falls hereby
establishes the Planning Board.
2. Appointment:
A. Board members shall be legal registered voters of the Town of
Livermore Falls and shall be appointed by the Municipal Officers and sworn
by the Clerk or other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. The Board shall consist of five (5) members.
C. New board members shall be appointed. The term of each
member thereafter shall be three (3) years for three (3) of the members and
two (2) years for two (2) of the members.
D. When there is a permanent vacancy, the Municipal Officers shall
within sixty (60) days of its occurrence appoint a person to serve for the
unexpired term. A vacancy shall occur upon the resignation or death of any
member, or when a member ceases to be a legal registered voter of the town,
or when a member fails to attend four (4) consecutive regular meetings, or
fails to attend at least seventy-five (75) percent of all meetings during the
preceding twelve (12) month period. When a vacancy occurs the
Chairperson of the Board shall immediately so advise the Municipal Officers
in writing. The Board may recommend to the Municipal Officers that the
attendance provision be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy will
then exist until the Municipal Officers disapprove of the recommendation.
The Municipal Officers may remove members of the Planning Board by
unanimous vote, for cause, after notice and hearing.
E. A Municipal Officer or full-time employee of the Town of
Livermore Falls may not be a member.
3. Organization and Rules:
A. The Board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from
among its members. The Board may either elect a secretary from among its
members, hire a non-board member, or instruct the Code Enforcement
3
Officer to serve as a secretary. The term of all offices shall be one (1) year
with eligibility for re-election.
B. A member who has a direct or indirect personal or pecuniary
interest in any question or matter on which he or she must in an official
capacity act shall make full disclosure of that interest for the record and shall
abstain from voting or attempting to influence a decision of the Board.
C. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from
voting on a particular matter shall be decided by a majority vote of the
members present except the member who is being challenged.
D. The chairperson shall call at least one (1) regular meeting of the
Board each month.
E. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consisting
of three (3) members authorized to vote. Any action of the Board shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of its members present unless
otherwise provided by law.
F. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and the
secretary shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, correspondence,
findings and determinations. All records shall be deemed public and may be
inspected at reasonable times.
4. Duties and Powers:
A. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as
are provided by the Town of Livermore Falls’ ordinances and the laws of the
State of Maine.
B. The Board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper
function within the limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
C. The Board shall perform and update a comprehensive plan as
defined in 30-A MRSA, Section 4324.
D. The Board shall conduct planning studies and prepare reports,
make recommendations, advocate local and State public policies, and advise
the citizens and Municipal Officers of planning and community issues
pending for consideration or discussion. The Board may take such actions
either at the volition of the members or at the request of the Municipal
Officers or voters assembled at the Town Meeting.
5. Repeal of Prior Ordinances and Ratification of Prior Board Actions.
Any ordinance enacted or legislative act prior hereto and establishing
or purporting to establish a Planning Board by that or another name, or
4
governing or purporting to govern its membership, authority or procedure, is
hereby repealed, it being the intent of this ordinance to abolish and replace
any such Board with a Planning Board lawfully established and authorized.
Any act prior hereto of that Board commonly known as the Planning Board
and abolished hereby is hereby ratified and confirmed.
Adopted May 19, 1999
Amended June 14th, 2011
5
Bylaws of the Planning Board
Town of Livermore Falls
Section 1. Purpose and Scope
The purpose of these bylaws is to establish reasonable rules of procedure for
Board meetings and to promote the fair, orderly, and efficient conduct of the
Board's proceedings and affairs. These bylaws shall govern the Board's
practices and procedures except as otherwise provided by law and shall be
liberally construed so as to accomplish their purpose.
Section 2. Officers and Duties
Officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and
Secretary to be chosen at the first board meeting following the annual town
meeting by and from among Board members unless otherwise provided by
law. The Chairperson shall preside at all board meetings and shall have the
authority to rule on questions of evidence and procedure, to maintain order
and determine the course of proceedings, and to take such other action as
may be necessary and consistent with these bylaws or other law to enable the
Board to perform its duties and conduct its affairs. In the absence of the
Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside and shall have the same
authority. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board
meetings and all correspondence of the Board, which shall be a public record
except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 3. Meetings
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held on the third Wednesday of each
month or as otherwise necessary or as required by law. Special meetings
may be called at the discretion of the chairperson or upon the request of a
majority of the Board, provided, however, that notice thereof shall be given
to each member and the press at least 48 hours in advance and no business
may be connected other than as specified in said notice.
Notice of all board meetings shall be given as required by law, and all such
meetings shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided by law.
6
No business may be conducted by the Board except in a duly called and
noticed meeting or without a quorum consisting of a majority of the Board
being present. The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows:
1. Roll-call and determination of a quorum.
2. Minutes of the previous meeting and communications.
3. Old (unfinished) business.
4. New business.
5. Other business.
6. Public participation.
7. Adjournment.
Section 4. Hearings
Public hearings of the Board shall be called as required by law or on such
other occasions as a majority of the Board may deem appropriate. Notice of
all such hearings shall be given as required by law and shall include the date,
time, and place of the hearing and a general description of the subject matter.
The chairman shall convene all hearings by describing the purpose of the
hearing and the general procedures to be followed. The Board may receive
any oral or documentary evidence but shall exclude irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence, provided, however, that formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. Every party shall have the right to present its case
in the order determined by the Chairman and without interruption, provided,
however, that the Chairman may impose such reasonable time limits as may
be necessary to ensure that all parties have an adequate opportunity to be
heard. In any adjudicatory proceeding, including proceedings on licenses,
permits, or other approvals, every party shall also have the right to submit
rebuttal evidence and to conduct cross-examination of any other party
through the Chair, provided, however, that the Chairman may impose such
other reasonable limitations as may be necessary to prevent an abuse of
process.
7
Section 5. Participation and Voting
Any action of the Board shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of its
membership unless otherwise provided by law.
No member may participate or vote in any matter in which the member has a
conflict of interest or other disqualification as defined by law. Any question
of whether a member has such a conflict of interest or other disqualification
shall be decided by majority vote of the remaining members.
No member may participate or vote in any adjudicatory proceeding,
including proceedings on licenses, permits, or other approvals, unless the
member was present during all hearings.
All members who are present and qualified as provided herein shall vote in
every matter to be voted on unless excused by the Chairman for good cause
shown.
Section 6. Decisions
All decisions of the Board shall be made within the time limits, if any,
established by law. All final decisions shall be in writing, shall become a
part of the Board's permanent record, and shall, where required by law,
include a statement of findings and conditions and the reasons or basis
therefore. All such decisions, together with any tape recording or transcript
of testimony and deliberations and any documents and exhibits, shall
constitute a public record.
Notice of any decision, if required, shall be given as prescribed by law.
The Board may reconsider any decision within 30 days of its original
decision, provided, however, that both a vote to reconsider and any action
taken pursuant thereto shall occur and be completed within said 30 days.
Notice of any reconsideration shall be given to any party thereto a
reasonable time in advance of the reconsideration. The Board may conduct
additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony as
provided herein.
8
Section 7. Conflict with Laws
Any conflict or inconsistency between these bylaws and any applicable law
shall be resolved in favor of the law.
Section 8. Waivers and Amendments
These bylaws, or any provision thereof, may be waived on any occasion by
majority vote of the Board unless otherwise provided by law. These bylaws
may be amended at any time in writing by majority vote of the board.
Adopted November 18, 1998
Section 3 amended by the Board on December 15, 1999.
1
BYLAWS OF THE PLANNING BOARD OF THE TOWN OF
LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose and Scope
The purpose of these bylaws is to establish reasonable rules of
procedure for Board meetings and to promote the fair, orderly and efficient
conduct of the Board’s proceedings and affairs. These bylaws shall govern
the Board’s practices and procedures except as otherwise provided by law
and shall be liberally construed so as to accomplish their purpose.
Section 2. Officers and Duties
Officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and Secretary to be chosen at the first Board meeting following the annual
Town Meeting by and from among Board members unless otherwise
provided by law. The Chairperson shall preside at all Board meetings and
shall have the authority to rule on questions of evidence and procedure, to
maintain order and determine the course of proceedings, and to take such
other action as may be necessary and consistent with these bylaws or other
law to enable the Board to perform its duties and conduct its affairs. In the
absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside and shall
have the same authority. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of
all Board meetings and all correspondence of the Board, which shall be a
public record except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 3. Meetings
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held on the third (3rd)
Wednesday of each month or as otherwise necessary or as required by law.
Special meetings may be called at the discretion of the Chairperson or upon
the request of a majority of the Board, provided however that the notice
thereof shall be given to each member and the press at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance and that no business may be conducted other than as
specified in said notice.
Notice of all Board meetings shall be given as required by law, and all
such meetings shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided by
law.
No business may be conducted by the Board except at a duly called
and noticed meeting or without a quorum consisting of a majority of the
2
Board being present. The order of business at regular meetings shall be as
follows:
1. Roll call and determination of quorum.
2. Minutes of the previous meeting and communications.
3. New business.
4. Old (unfinished) business.
5. Other business.
6. Public participation.
7. Adjournment.
Section 4. Hearings
Public hearings of the Board shall be called as required by law or on
such other occasions as a majority of the Board may deem appropriate.
Notice of all such hearings shall be given as required by law and shall
include the date, time and place of the hearing and a general description of
the subject matter.
The Chairman shall convene all hearings by describing the purpose of
the hearing and the general procedures to be followed. The Board may
receive any oral or documentary evidence but shall exclude irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence, provided, however that formal
rules of evidence shall not apply. Every party shall have the right to present
its case in the order determined by the Chairman and without interruption,
provided however that the Chairman may impose such reasonable time
limits as may be necessary to ensure that all parties have an adequate
opportunity to be heard. In any adjudicatory proceeding, including
proceedings on licenses, permits or other approvals, every party shall also
have the right to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct cross-examination
of any other party through the chair, provided however that the Chairman
may impose such other reasonable limitations as may be necessary to
prevent an abuse of process.
Section 5. Participation and Voting
Any action of the Board shall require the affirmative vote of a
majority of its membership unless otherwise provided by law.
No member may participate or vote in any matter in which the
member has a conflict of interest or other disqualification as defined by law.
Any question of whether a member has such a conflict of interest or other
disqualification shall be decided by majority vote of the remaining members.
3
No member may participate or vote in any adjudicatory proceeding,
including proceedings on licenses, permits or other approvals, unless the
member was present during all hearings.
All members who are present and qualified as provided herein shall
vote in every matter to be voted on unless excused by the Chairman for good
cause shown.
Section 6. Decisions
All decisions of the Board shall be made within the time limits, if any,
established by law. All final decisions shall be in writing, shall become a
part of the Board’s permanent record and shall, where required by law,
include a statement of findings and conclusions and the reasons or basis
therefore. All such decisions, together with any tape recording or transcript
of testimony and deliberations and any documents and exhibits, shall
constitute a public record.
Notice of any decision if required shall be given as prescribed by law.
The Board may reconsider any decision within thirty (30) days of its
original decision, provided however that both a vote to reconsider and any
action taken pursuant thereto shall occur and be completed with the said
thirty (30) days. Notice of any reconsideration shall be given to any party
thereto a reasonable time in advance of the reconsideration. The Board may
conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony
as provided herein.
Section 7. Conflict with Laws
Any conflict of inconsistency between these bylaws and any
applicable law shall be resolved in favor of the law.
Section 8. Waivers and Amendments
These bylaws or any provision thereof may be waived on any
occasion by majority vote of the Board unless otherwise provided by law.
These bylaws may be amended at any time in writing by majority vote of the
Board.
Adopted by the Board on November 18, 1998
Section 3 amended by the Board on December 15, 1999
4

PROHIBITING POSSESSION OF LIQUOR ON
MUNICIPALLY –OWNED OUTDOOR AREAS ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the general public health
and welfare by prohibiting the possession and use of liquor in parks and
other municipally-owned outdoor areas within the Town of Livermore Falls.
Section 2 Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule Authority
granted to municipalities by 30 MRSA Section 1917.
Section 3. Definitions
a. Liquor – “Liquor” means and includes any alcoholic, spirituous,
vinous, fermented or other alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquor and
mixed liquors intended for human consumption, which contains more than ½
of 1% of alcohol by volume.
b. Municipally-owned outdoor area – “Municipally-owned outdoor
area” means those and only those areas of property owned by the Town of
Livermore Falls which are specifically designated by the municipal officers
from time to time as being subject to this ordinance pursuant to the
delegation of authority contained in the following section.
Section 4. Delegation
The municipal officers are hereby empowered to designate those areas
of municipally-owned property which shall be subject to this ordinance,
provided that such designations shall be made only after a public hearing,
and provided that such areas are described by reference to the Town Tax
Maps or by other means sufficient to define the bounds of the area, and
provided further that said designation shall not take effect until 10 days after
a report of said designation as filed with the municipal clerk.
Section 5. Prohibition
The possession or use of liquor in parks and other municipally-owned
outdoor areas is designated by the Selectmen pursuant to this ordinance is
hereby declared to be illegal.
Section 6. Severability
If any portion of this ordinance is declared to be illegal, the remaining
portions of this ordinance shall continue in full force and in fact to the extent
that said remaining provisions may be applied in the absence of the
provision so declared to be illegal.
Section 7. Penalty
Whomsoever violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject
to a $50.00 fine, recoverable in Maine District Court upon complaint and
summons issued by any law enforcement officer of the Town of Livermore
Falls.
Adopted March 7, 1983


PROPOSED AMENDMENTS
SECTIONS IIIA, IIIB AND IVA
SITE PLAN REVIEW ORDINANCE
Change the order of Section IIIA and IIIB and amend Section IVA
Section III Applicability
A. The following uses and structures are exempt from this ordinance, as determined by
the Planning Board:
1. The normal and customary practices involved in the growing and harvesting of
field crops and timber.
2. Home Occupations, as defined.
3. Existing buildings and land uses legally established prior to the adoption of
this ordinance unless one or more of the factors described in the following Section III B
is present.
B. This ordinance shall apply to all development proposals for:
1. New buildings, structures and land uses for commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional, recreational, utility, state, municipal or public.
2. New uses or changed uses of land or of existing structures if such new or
changed uses would generate significantly greater traffic volumes, employ new material
or processes, or generate any new impacts (glare, noise, odor) not normally associated
with the previous use.
3. Resumption of conforming uses that have been discontinued for at least two
years.
Section IV Application Procedure
A. Pre-application meeting
1. Prior to submitting an application for development the property owner, the
property developer or an authorized agent shall meet with the Planning Board at a regular
or special meeting to discuss the proposed development.
2. The developer may present to the Planning Board at this time a sketch plan of
the proposed development. The sketch plan should consist of a rough outline of the
development, and may be a free-hand, penciled sketch of the parcel, showing the
proposed layout of the buildings, roads and other features. The sketch shall show enough
information to aid the Planning Board in fully understanding the nature of the
development proposal.
3. The Planning Board may request that the developer arrange for an inspection
of the site by the Planning Board, or by an individual appointed by the Board Chairman
to act as the Board’s representative.
4. No binding commitments shall be made between the developer and the
Planning Board at this stage. The purpose of the pre-application meeting shall be to
understand what is proposed.
5. However, if the Planning Board finds that the proposed development meets the
provisions of Article IIIA, above, then the Board shall waive the review requirements
altogether and note in the town’s record that the development, as proposed, is exempt
from this ordinance. The Planning Board, at this time, may also waive any of the
submission requirements if the Board finds that certain submission requirements are not
necessary for the review of the proposed development.
Amended on June 13, 2001
1
2
RENTAL HOUSING CODE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose and Authority
A. Purpose
The purpose of this code is to safeguard the health and safety of the
inhabitants of Livermore Falls through the establishment and enforcement of
minimum standards of construction, occupancy and maintenance for rental
units.
B. Authority
The code is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to and consistent with:
Title 30 MRSA, Chapters 201-A and 209; Title 30 MRSA, Chapter 239,
Subchapter VI; Title 4 MRSA, Chapter 17; Title 12 MRSA, Chapter 424 and
Title 25 MRSA, Chapters 313 to 321.
Section 2. Scope
A. Application of Standards
All rental units constructed after the enactment of this ordinance shall
conform to these regulations. All rental units existing or under construction
at the time of enactment of this ordinance shall conform to these regulations
within two years of the date of enactment.
Where application of the standards of this ordinance, as ordered by the
administering officer, will result in hardship to the owner or occupant, such
person may appeal to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 7.
B. Minimum Standards
The standards set forth herein are intended to be minimum only, and they
shall not apply wherever a greater standard is required by another ordinance
or law.
C. Enforcement
3
This ordinance shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer who
may obtain from any qualified person or persons such advice or other
assistance as he deems necessary in the carrying out of his duties under this
ordinance; and said person or persons shall be reimbursed for their services
in such a manner as the selectmen shall determine.
D. Penalty for Non-compliance
Any person failing or refusing to obey any order of notice of the Code
Enforcement Officer issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $10 not more than $100 and each day's violation shall be considered to
be a separate offense.
B. Dwelling's Unfit for Human Habitation
Any dwelling unit or rooming unit which is in violation of the provisions of
this ordinance to the extent that it is unfit for human habitation in the
opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer may be condemned for habitation
and posted against occupancy by the said Code Enforcement Officer. The
following shall be considered to be unfit for human habitation:
1. Properties which are damaged, decayed, dilapidated, and unsanitary,
overcrowded, unsafe, or vermin infested in such a manner as to create a
serious hazard to health and safety of the occupants.
2. Properties which lack plumbing, ventilating, the lighting, and heating
facilities or equipment adequate to protect the health and safety of the
occupants.
Section 3. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
another meaning:
"Basement" shall mean the portion of a building below the ground floor
having not more than half of its clear height below the adjoining grade.
"Cellar" shall mean the portion of a building below the ground floor or
basement having more than half of its clear height below the adjoining
grade.
4
"Dwelling" shall mean any house, building or part thereof, which is
occupied, or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part for living and
sleeping by one or more occupants. A dwelling may include one or more
dwelling units or rooming units or a combination of both.
"Dwelling Premises" shall mean the land and auxiliary building thereon used
or intended to be used in conjunction with a dwelling.
"Dwelling Unit" shall mean one or more rooms within a dwelling which
forms a single and separate habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
"Extermination" shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents,
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing, or making
inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food; poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
"Floor Area" shall mean the floor area inside of and between exterior walls
or petitions or any combination thereof, as measured within a habitable
room.
"Habitable Room" shall mean a room used, or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, or eating. A bathroom, toilet room, laundry, pantry, hall,
closet, heater room, utility room, or other shall not be considered to be a
habitable room.
"Code Enforcement Officer" shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Livermore Falls or his duly authorized representative.
"Infestation" shall mean the presence within a dwelling or on premises of a
dwelling of rodents, vermin, or other pests, as determined through actual
observation of them or by the evidence of their presence.
"Multiple Dwelling" shall mean any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
"Occupant" shall mean any person, including an owner or operator residing
in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
5
"Operator" shall mean any person who has charge, care, management, or
control of any dwelling or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let or offered for occupancy.
"Owner" shall mean any person or persons who:
a. Shall have legal or record title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or
dwelling premises;
b. Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit,
or dwelling premises as an agent of the owner, executor, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner;
c. Shall have an equitable interest in a dwelling, dwelling unit, or
dwelling premises under a contract or bond for a deed with the person
having legal or record title.
"Person" shall mean and include any individual, group of individuals, firm,
corporation, association, or partnership
"Rooming House" shall mean any dwelling, or part thereof, containing two
or more rooming units in which space is rented or offered for rent by the
owner or operator to be occupied or intended to be occupied by two or more
persons who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator.
For the purposes of the ordinance, homes for the aged and other institutions
licensed by the State shall not be regarded as "rooming houses".
"Rooming Unit" shall mean any habitable room or rooms forming a single
unit used, or intended to be used, for living exclusive of cooking or eating,
whether by a separate family or by two or more persons living in common or
by a person living alone.
"Supplied" shall mean installed, furnished, or provided by the owner or
operator at his expense.
Section 4. Minimum Standards of Design, Construction and Repair
A. Minimum Standards for Structural Elements
6
a. Foundations, Basements, Cellars, Exterior Walls, Roofs
Every foundation, basement, cellar, exterior wall, and roof shall be
substantially weathertight and watertight; shall be structurally sound, shall
be safe for the intended use and capable of supporting whatever load normal
use may cause to be placed thereon. Water from roofs shall be so drained
and conveyed therefrom so as not to leak nor create a hazard to adjacent
buildings or occupants thereof.
b. Floors, Interior Walls, Ceilings and Doors
Every floor, interior wall, ceiling, and door shall be in structurally
sound condition and in good repair
c. Windows, Exterior Doors and Skylights
Every window, exterior door, including basement or cellar door and
hatchway, and skylight shall be substantially weathertight and watertight,
and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
d. Stairways, Stairwells, Stairs and Porches
Every inside and an outside stairway, stairwell, stairs, and porch and
any appurtenances shall be structurally sound, in good repair, and safe to
use.
e. Chimneys, Flues and Vents
Every chimney and every flue, vent and smokepipe and any
attachments thereto shall be structurally sound, in good repair, and safe to
use.
A. Minimum Standards for Space and Occupancy
a. Space per Person
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 100 square feet of habitable
floor area for the first occupant and at least 70 square feet of additional
habitable floor area for each additional occupant. For the purpose of this
paragraph, a child under the age of 1 shall not be counted as an occupant.
b. Area per Habitable Room
Every habitable room, other than a kitchen or dining alcove, shall
contain at least 64 square feet of floor area. The least horizontal dimension
of such room shall be not less than 7 ft.
7
c. Excluded Areas
In the computing of floor area for the purpose of this Section, the
space used for closets or other enclosed spaces and, in the case of rooms
with sloping ceilings, portions of such rooms which are less than 4 ft. in
height shall be excluded.
d. Habitable Rooms in Basements and Cellars
Every room in any cellar or basement used for the purpose of a
habitable room shall meet the following conditions:
1. the ceiling shall be at least six and a half feet above the floor.
2. unless adequate mechanical ventilation is provided, there shall be
one or more openable wndows containing an area equal to not less than 4%
of the floor area, and the ceiling shall be a least 2 ft. above grade where the
required window or windows are located.
3. the floor and walls shall be water and a damp-proof and the room
shall be well-drained and dry.
C. Minimum Plumbing Standards
a. Basic Facilities
Every dwelling unit, except as provided below, shall contain a kitchen sink,
a flush toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower. Each occupant of a
rooming unit shall have access to a flush toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub
or shower.
1. The occupants of not more than two dwelling units, each of which
contains not more than 340 square feet of habitable floor area and each of
which contains no more than two rooms, may share the use of a single flush
toilet, a lavatory basement and bathtub or shower.
2. One room dwelling units shall be considered as rooming units and
not dwelling units for the purpose of determining the number who may share
such facilities.
3. Rooming houses and dwelling houses containing rooming units
shall contain at least one flush toilet, one lavatory basin, and one bathtub or
8
shower for each five persons or fraction thereof, living within said rooming
units, which shall include members of family of the owner or operator if
they share the use of such facilities.
b. Location of Facilities
The flush toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower shall be conveniently
located within a room or compartment which affords privacy and is separate
from habitable rooms in which each occupant can reach without going out of
doors, or passing through a dwelling unit or rooming unit other than his
own, or ascending or descending more than one flight of stairs. Where
practicable, the lavatory basin and toilet shall be in the same room or
compartment.
c. Water Supply
Every dwelling unit and rooming house, or combination of the same, shall
be provided with a potable water supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin,
and bathtub or shower required by this ordinance shall be properly
connected with hot and cold water lines with adequate supply of pressure.
Water heating facilities shall be such as to permit an adequate amount of hot
water to be drawn at every required fixture at all reasonable times.
d. Maintenance of Plumbing Fixtures
All fixtures shall be properly maintained in sanitary and sound mechanical
condition.
D. Minimum Ventilation Standards
Every habitable room shall have a window or windows opening to the
outdoors which shall be so constructed that an area equal to not less than 4%
of the floor area of the room (excluding any portion of the room that has a
height of less than 4 ft. above the floor) can be opened fully. A mechanical
ventilating system capable of changing the air at least once per hour may be
substituted for such window or windows.
D. Minimum Lighting Standards
a. Habitable Rooms
9
Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate duplex convenience
outlets or at least one duplex convenience outlets and one ceiling type or
wall type electric light fixture.
b. Bathrooms, Utility Rooms, Cellars and Basements
Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnished room,
cellar and basement shall contain at least one ceiling type or wall type of
electric light fixture.
c. Passageways and Common Stairways
Every passageway and stairway shall have at least one ceiling type or wall
type electric light fixture which can illuminate it adequately for safe passage
by the occupants.
d. Maintenance of Lighting Fixtures
All fixtures required by this ordinance and all fixtures installed in addition
thereto shall be maintained in good and safe working condition.
F. Minimum Heating Standards
a. Heating Facilities Required
Every habitable room shall be served by heating facilities capable of
providing a minimum temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a
height of 3 ft. above floor level. When heat is not furnished with a central
heating system, each dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be provided with
one or more masonry flues and smoke or vent pipe connections, or equal
arrangement.
b. Seasonal Dwellings Excepted
A building used solely for seasonal occupancy between March 1st and
October 31st shall be excepted from the requirement above.
c. Maintenance of Equipment
10
All stoves, furnaces, room heaters, or domestic water heaters operated by
solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel shall be properly vented and maintained in safe
operating condition by the owner, operator and/or occupant, or both.
d. Electric Space Heating Equipment
Dwellings which are occupied, or intended to be occupied, in whole or in
part for living and sleeping by one or more occupants, when heat is
furnished entirely by electric space heating equipment, shall be excepted
from the use of masonry flues and smoke or vent pipe connections, as
provided under part (a) of the Minimum Heating Standards.
Section 5. Minimum Standards to Ensure Safety from Fire
a. Flammable Liquids, Toxic Gases
No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a building
containing any establishment handling, dispensing, or storing flammable
liquids, or producing toxic gases or vapors in any quantity, which may
endanger the lives or safety of the occupants.
b. Means of Egress for One and Two-family Dwellings
Means of egress from one and two family dwellings shall conform to the
requirements set forth in NFPA 101-Life Safety Code, Chapter 22, 1985
edition.
c. Means of Egress for Apartment Buildings, Lodging or Rooming Houses
1. Means of egress for new apartment buildings shall conform to the
requirements set forth in NFPA 101-Life Safety Code, Chapter 18, 1985
edition.
2. Means of egress for existing apartment buildings shall conform to the
requirements set forth in NFPA 101- Life Safety Code, Chapter 19, 1985
edition.
3. Means of egress for lodging or rooming houses shall conform to the
requirements set forth in NFPA 101-Life Safety Code, Chapter 20, 1985
edition.
11
d. Unobstructed Egress
Every hallway, stairway, corridor, exit, fire escape door, used or intended as
a means of egress from a habitable room shall be kept clear of obstructions
at all times.
e. Temporary Wiring, Extension Cords
No temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords which run directly
from portable electrical fixtures to convenience outlets, ceiling or wall type
fixtures, and which do not lie under rugs or other floor coverings, nor extend
through doorways, transoms or openings through structural elements.
f. Storage of Waste Material
Storage rooms and storage lockers shall not be used for storage of refuse,
rubbish or waste.
g. Space Heaters
Flueless oil or gas space heaters are prohibited.
h. Smoke Detectors Required
The owner shall install, or cause to be installed, not less than one approved
and operable smoke detector upon or near the ceiling areas within, or giving
access to, bedrooms in:
1. any single family dwelling rented to others, including mobile
homes, regardless of the date of construction.
2. each apartment in any building of multifamily occupancy,
including an apartment occupied by the owner.
In multifamily buildings more than three stories in height, approved and
operable smoke detectors shall also be installed in each corridor and hallway
on each floor.
Section 6. Minimum Standards of Sanitary Maintenance
12
A. Insect, Rodent and Vermin Control
a. General. Structure shall be maintained free of insect, vermin, and rodent
harborage and other infestation.
b. Grounds. Grounds shall be maintained free of garbage and wastes
attractive to rats and vermin. So far as practicable, food to be left for birds
and animals shall be placed in containers so as to prevent the scattering of
such food upon the ground.
c. Screening. Screens of wire mesh or other suitable material shall be
provided for openings used to ventilate basements or, in order to prevent the
ingress of insects, rodents and other vermin. From May 1st to October 1st
all openings used for the ventilation of dwelling shall be appropriately
screened.
d. Use of Poison Gas, Etc., in Extermination
No person shall employ for disinfestation or for extermination of rodents or
vermin in any dwelling any highly toxic chemical; any poisonous or
dangerous gas; any substance emmitting poisonous gas, fumes or vapor,
cyanide in any form, or sodium flouroacetate (commonly known as "1080");
without first obtaining a permit for each such use from the Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall notify the police and fire departments.
B. Disposal of Garbage and Waste
a. Containers
Watertight garbage containers made of metal or plastic shall be provided for
each dwelling unless all garbage is otherwise disposed of. Garbage
containers shall be kept covered in order to reduce their attraction to vermin
and rodents, and shall be cleaned periodically in order to prevent their
becoming foul or offensive.
b. Storage
13
No garbage or refuse shall be stored or allowed to accumulate in any hall or
stairway used in common by the occupants of two or more dwelling units or
rooming units.
C. Division of Responsibility for Sanitary Maintenance
a. Maintenance of Assigned Areas
Every occupant of a dwelling, which is subject to the regulations of this
ordinance shall maintain a clean and sanitary manner that part of the
dwelling, and dwelling premises which he occupies and controls and shall
share the responsibility for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition any
areas and facilities available in common.
b. Maintenance of Shared Areas
Every owner or operator of a multiple dwelling or rooming house shall
maintain a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the
dwelling and dwelling premises.
c. Maintenance of Supplied Facilities
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied facilities, including
plumbing and cooking equipment, in a clean and sanitary condition and shall
be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and
operation.
d. Maintenance of Garbage and Waste Containers
The owner or operator of each dwelling shall provide sufficient containers to
meet the above requirements.
e. Rodent and Vermin Control
1. Every occupant of the dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
termination of such insects, rodents, or other pests where the infestation is
confined to such dwelling unit. When such infestation shall exist because of
the failure of the owner or operator of a dwelling or dwelling premises to
keep the same in a substantially rodent or vermin proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator.
14
2. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for the extermination
of such insects, rodents, or other pests whenever infestation exists in two
more dwelling units, or in shared areas, of any dwelling or upon the dwelling
premises.
3. Every owner or operator of a rooming house shall be responsible
for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests in the dwelling or
upon the dwelling premises.
Section 7. Procedure: Inspection, Notion of Violation, and Legal Provisions
A. Inspections
The Code Enforcement Officer, upon proper identification and reasonable
notice shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time into or upon any
dwelling or premises, where a rental unit exists or is being constructed, for
the purpose of inspecting said dwelling or premises in order to determine
whether or not a violation of this ordinance exists and for the purpose of
examining and inspecting any work performed under the provisions of this
ordinance, and it shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to
interfere with or prevent such inspection.
B. Notices
When any violation is found to exist within the meaning of this ordinance,
said Code Enforcement Officer shall give the owner, operator, or occupant,
or both a written order or notice by certified letter which shall set forth the
violation and shall specify a reasonable time limit for correction thereof.
C. Reinspections
After the expiration of the time for correction of such violation the Code
Enforcement Officer shall make a reinspection of the premises and if the
violation has not been corrected and no appeal is pending as hereinafter
provided, the Code Enforcement Officer may make such further order as he
deems advisable or he may proceed to take legal action against the person
liable for such violation.
D. Posting against occupancy
15
If, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, a dwelling unit or room
unit is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance to the extent that it is
unfit for human habitation, the Code Enforcement Officer shall condemn it
for habitation and shall post it against occupancy; and he shall give notice in
writing to the owner or operator of such condemnation and posting; and if
such property is occupied, he shall give like notice to the occupant which
shall also include a reasonable time limit within which such property shall
be vacated.
E. Property Not To Be Occupied Again for Habitation
No property which has been condemned and posted against occupancy shall
again be used for the purpose of habitation until the Code Enforcement
Officer shall in writing approve of its use and shall likewise authorize the
removal of the posted notice.
F. Notice Is Not To Be Removed: Property Not To Be Used or Let
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to deface or remove
any such posted notice without the prior approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer, and it shall also be a violation of this ordinance for any person to
occupy or let to another for occupancy any property which has been
condemned and posted as provided above without receiving the prior
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
G. Property To Be Secured If Not Improved
In the event the owner or operator of any property which has been
condemned as unfit for habitation does not proceed to make the necessary
corrections to bringing the property into compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance, he shall make said property safe and secure so that no danger
to life or property and no fire hazard shall exist.
H. Restriction on Conveyance of Property; Exception
It shall be a violation of this ordinance for any person to sell, transfer, or
otherwise dispose of any property against which an order has been issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer under the provisions of this ordinance unless
he shall first furnish to the grantee a true copy of any such order and shall at
the time notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the intent to so
16
transfer either by delivering said notice to the Code Enforcement Officer and
receiving a receipt therefore or by registered mail, return receipt requested,
giving the name and address of the person to whom the transfer is proposed.
In the event of a violation of this section of this ordinance, such person shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 in addition to
any fine which may be imposed for failure to comply with any order of the
Code Enforcement Officer as provided herein.
I. Responsibility Hereunder May Not Be Transferred
No contract or agreement between owner and/or operator and occupant
relating to compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
effective in relieving any person of responsibility for compliance with those
provisions.
J. Appeal to the Board of Appeals
Any person who feels aggrieved by an order or notice of the Code
Enforcement Officer under the provisions of this ordinance may file an
appeal within 10 days from the date of such order or notice to the Board of
Appeals who may, by majority vote, reverse the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer and permit exceptions to or variances from the specific
provisions of this ordinance in cases where the enforcement of the
provisions of this ordinance may result in undue hardship, subject always to
the rule that the Board of Appeals shall give due consideration to the
purposes of this ordinance in promoting public health, safety and welfare.
K. Personal Non-liability
No officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this ordinance and
acting for the Town of Livermore Falls in the discharge of his duties shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may occur to any
person or property as a result of his acts in the discharge of his duties. Any
suit brought against any officer or employee because of any act performed
by him under the provisions of this ordinance shall be defended by the Town
of Livermore Falls until final determination of the proceedings therein.
Adopted June 11, 1986

ROAD OPENING ORDINANCE
To dig in the road right of way a permit is required, as stipulated in this
ordinance.
The issuance of Road Opening Permit is the responsibility of the Town
Road Commissioner or his designee.
The utilities or property owner is responsible for getting the permit in a
timely fashion ( Dig Safe is 72 hours prior). The permit will list the owner's
name, the reason for the opening, and the contractor's name, address, and
phone numbers.
The permit is issued in accordance with Title 35, Section 2346, 2349, 2351,
2352 and 2353 and Title 23, Section 3351 to 3359, MSRA and under the
following criteria:
1. During the opening of a Town street proper traffic control, as defined
by the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), must
be in place. Proper trenching techniques as defined in the OSHA
Federal Register Standards-Excavations Final Rule are to be
followed.
2. All backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted. The top of the
trench shall be of a clean gravel processed to a graduation of no larger
than 3” in size and be of a thickness equal to the present base but
under no circumstances be less than 12” after compaction.
3. All asphalt removed is to be properly disposed of. The opening is to
be squared and repaved using 2” of binder (B mix) with 1” of surface
(D mix), or greater – to match existing pavement depth. Mix design
will meet all MDOT specifications.
4. The permittee assumes total responsibility for the site during
construction and for a period of one (1) year from the date of
completion. Should a problem arise it will be the sole responsibility
of the permittee to take all corrective measures deemed necessary by
the Town of Livermore Falls. Street reconstruction is to be
completed as soon as possible so as not to create an undue hazard to
the motoring public.
5. All surplus material remaining after excavation must be removed,
leaving shoulders and ditches properly graded and free of
obstructions. Any variations of the above listed specifications must
meet with the prior approval of the Town of Livermore Falls.
6. Permittee must notify and follow all Dig Safe rules.
7. Not less than one-half the width of the traveled way shall be open to
traffic at all times.
8. Right is reserved by the Town to do the entire job or the backfilling
part thereof on any specific job and bill the permit holder. If this
right is to be exercised by the Town it must be specifically mentioned
in the first paragraph of this permit, following the purpose for which
the permit is issued.
9. The closing of an emergency opening will be made during business
hours, 7:00 am to 3:00 pm Monday through Friday. Temporary
closing is required for the balance of the weekend.
INSURANCE: The excavator shall furnish a certificate of insurance to the
Road Commissioner prior to undertaking any excavation in a public way.
VIOLATION AND PENALTY: A person or organization who violates this
Ordinance shall be punished for each offense by a fine of not more than
$100.00 plus the cost of any fees or charges for work done, which remain
unpaid. No further permits shall be issued to any person or organization
who violates this Ordinance until all amounts due have been paid. If a
private party fails to complete within a reasonable time any work for which
an opening permit is required, the Town may complete the work and charge
the owner for the cost of doing so.
Adopted June 11, 2003

ROAD USE AND RESTRICTIONS ORDINANCE
VEHICLE WEIGHT ON POSTED WAYS
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose and Authority
The purpose of this ordinance is to prevent damage to town ways and
bridges in the Town of Livermore Falls which may be caused by vehicles of
excessive weight, to lessen safety hazards and the risk of injury to the
traveling public, to extend the life expectancy of town ways and bridges, and
to reduce the public expense of their maintenance and repair.
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A MRSA 3009 and 29-A
MRSA Sections 2395 and 2388.
Section 2. Definitions
The definitions contained in Title 29-A MRSA shall govern the
construction of works contained in this ordinance. Any words not defined
therein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
Section 3. Restrictions and Notices
The Municipal Officers may, either permanently or seasonally erect
STOP or YIELD signs or other signs as necessary, establish No Parking
Zones, Weight Limits, “No Thru Truck” zones or other restrictions as they
see fit to protect the residents and the roadways of the town.
The Municipal Officers may, either permanently or seasonally,
impose such restrictions on the gross registered weight of vehicles as may in
their judgment be necessary to protect the traveling public and prevent abuse
of the highways, and designate the town ways and bridges to which the
restrictions shall apply.
Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person may
thereafter operate any vehicle with a gross registered weight in excess of the
restriction during any applicable time period on any way or bridge so posted
unless otherwise exempt as provided herein.
The notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
the name of the way or bridge, the gross registered weight limit, the time
period during which the restriction applies, the date on which the notice was
posted and the signature of the Municipal Officers.
The notice shall be conspicuously posted on each end of the restricted
portion of the way or bridge in a location clearly visible from the travel way.
Whenever a restriction expires or is lifted, the notices shall be removed
wherever posted. Whenever a restriction is revised or extended, existing
notices shall be removed and replaced with new notices.
No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any notice
so posted except as provided herein.
Section 4. Exemptions
The following vehicles are exempt from this ordinance:
1. Any two-axle vehicle while delivering home heating fuel;
2. Any vehicle while engaged in highway maintenance or repair
under the direction of the State or Town;
3. Any emergency vehicle (such as firefighting apparatus or
ambulances) while responding to an emergency;
4. Any school transportation vehicle while transporting students;
5. Any public utility vehicle while providing emergency service or
repair; and
6. Any vehicle whose owner or operator holds a valid permit from the
Municipal Officers as provided herein.
Section 5. Permits
The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as
provided herein may apply in writing to the Municipal Officers for a permit
to operate on a posted way or bridge notwithstanding the restriction. The
Municipal Officers may issue a permit only upon all of the following
findings:
1. No other route is reasonably available to the applicant;
2. It is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience that
the applicant use the way or bridge; and
3. The applicant has tendered cash, a bond or other suitable security
running to the Town in an amount sufficient, in their judgment, to
repair any damage to the way or bridge which may reasonably
result from the applicant’s use of same.
Even if the Municipal Officers make the foregoing findings, they need
not issue a permit if they determine the applicant’s use of the way or bridge
could reasonably be expected to create a safety hazard or cause substantial
damage. They may also limit the number of permits issued or outstanding as
may in their judgment be necessary to preserve and protect the highways.
In determining whether to issue a permit, the Municipal Officers shall
consider the following factors:
1. The gross registered weight of the vehicle;
2. The current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge;
3. The number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed;
4. The cost and availability of materials and equipment for
repairs;
5. The extent of use by other exempt vehicles; and
6. Such other circumstances as may in their judgment be
relevant.
The Municipal Officers may issue permits subject to reasonable
conditions including, but not limited to, restrictions on the actual load weight
and the number or frequency of vehicle trips, which shall be clearly noted on
the permit.
Section 6. Administration and Enforcement
This ordinance shall be administered and may be enforced by the
Municipal Officers or their duly authorized designee (such as Road
Commissioner, Code Enforcement Officer or Law Enforcement Officer).
Section 7. Penalties
Any violation of this ordinance shall be a civil infraction subject to a
fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Each violation shall
be deemed a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the Town may seek
restitution for the cost of repairs to any damaged way or bridge and
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
Prosecution shall be in the name of the Town and shall be brought in
the Maine District Court.
Section 8. Amendments
This ordinance may be amended by the Municipal Officers at any
properly noticed meeting.
Section 9. Severability; Effective Date
In the event any portion of this ordinance is declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions shall continue in full
force and effect.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the
Municipal Officers at any properly noticed meeting.
Adopted Public Hearing on October 2, 2000
1
2
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purposes
The purposes of this ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and land from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and
maritime industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore
cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland and coastal
waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and
respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
Section 2. Authority
This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
38 Sections 435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated. (MRSA)
Section 3. Applicability
This ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; and within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream. This
ordinance also applies to any structure built on, over, or abutting a dock,
wharf, or pier, or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water
line of a water body or within a wetland.
Section 4. Effective Date and Repeal of Formally Adopted Ordinance
This ordinance, which was adopted by the Town legislative body on June
12, 1991, shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the ordinance,
attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be forwarded to the
Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this
ordinance within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of the ordinance, it shall
3
be deemed approved. Upon approval of this ordinance, all shoreland zoning
ordinances previously adopted are hereby repealed.
Any application for a permit submitted to the Town within the forty-five
(45) day period shall be governed by the terms of this ordinance if the
ordinance is approved by the Commissioner
Section 5. Availability
A certified copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
shall be accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made
available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person making
the request. Notice of availability of this ordinance shall be posted.
Section 6. Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts
to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of the ordinance.
Section 7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive
provision shall control.
Section 8. Amendments
This ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body.
Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be
submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection following adoption by the Town legislative body and shall not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails
to act on any amendment within forty-five (45) days of the department's
receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any
application for a permit submitted to the Town within the forty-five (45) day
period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment
is approved by the Commissioner.
Section 9. Districts and Zoning Map
4
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The areas to which this ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the
following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map which is
made a part of this ordinance:
1. Resource Protection
2. Limited Residential
3. Limited Commercial
4. General Development
5. Stream Protection District
B. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested
signature of the Town Clerk and shall be located in the Town Office.
C. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning
If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map,
such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within
thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 10. Interpretation of District Boundaries
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district
boundary lines are property lines, the center lines of streets, roads and rights
of way, and the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the
Planning Board shall be the final authority as to location.
Section 11. Land Use Requirements
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter
be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new
5
lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
Section 12. Nonconformance
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
nonconforming conditions that legally existed before the effective date of
this ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set
forth in this section.
B. General
1. Transfer of ownership: nonconforming structures, lots and uses may be
transferred, and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or
continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions
of this ordinance.
2. Repair and maintenance: this ordinance allows, without a permit, the
normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and structures
including repairs or renovations which do not involve expansion of the
nonconforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming
use or structure as federal, state or local building and safety codes may
require.
NOTE: See Section 17 for the definitions of nonconforming structures,
nonconforming uses, and nonconforming lots.
C. Nonconforming Structures
1. Expansions: a nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded
after obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new
structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the nonconformity
of the structure.
Further Limitations:
a. After January 1st 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the
required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
6
edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in floor
area or volume, by 30% or more, during the lifetime of the structure.
b. Construction or enlargement of a foundation beneath the existing
structure shall not be considered an expansion of the structure provided; that
the structure and new foundation are placed such that the setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the
Planning Board, basing its decision on the criteria specified in Subsection 2.
Relocation, below; that the completed foundation does not extend beyond
the exterior dimensions of the structure; and that the foundation does not
cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3) additional feet.
c. No structure which is less than the required setback from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a
wetland, shall be expanded toward the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland.
2. Relocation: A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the
boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the
site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Planning Board and provided that the
applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal system
meets the requirements of state law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in
compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be
relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the size of a lot,
the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the
septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type
and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
3. Reconstruction or replacement: any nonconforming structure which is
located less than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a
water body, a tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland and which is
removed, or damaged or destroyed by more than 50% of the market value of
the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, and provided that
such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water setback
7
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board in accordance with the purposes of this ordinance. In no case shall a
structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity.
Any nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by 50% or less
of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place with a permit, from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the
water setback to the greatest practical extent the Planning Board shall
consider in addition to the criteria in paragraph 2 above, the physical
condition and type of foundation present, if any.
4. Change of use of a nonconforming structure: the use of a nonconforming
structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no
greater adverse impact on the water body or wetland, or on the subject or
adjacent properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board
shall require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the
probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation,
water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual
points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management,
archeological and historic resources, and other functionally water-dependent
uses.
D. Nonconforming Uses
1. Expansions: expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except
that nonconforming residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the
Planning Board, be expanded within existing residential structures or within
expansions of such structures as permitted in Section 12 (C)(1)(a) above.
2. Resumption prohibited: a lot, building or structure in or on which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or
which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a
nonconforming use except that the Planning Board may, for good cause
shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period.
8
This provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential
structure provided that the structure has been used or maintained for the
residential purposes during the preceding five (5) year period.
3. Change of use: an existing nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater
adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources, than the
former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no
greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section
12 (C)(4) above.
E. Nonconforming Lots
1. Nonconforming lots: a nonconforming lot of record as of the effective
date of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the
need for a variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not
contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions
of this ordinance except lot size and frontage can be met. Variances relating
to setback or other requirements not involving lot size or frontage shall be
obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous built lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a
single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of this ordinance,
if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this
ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists on each lot, the
nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that
the State Minimum Lot Size Law and Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record
on the effective date of this ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot
provided that the above referenced law and rules are complied with. When
such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible
to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance.
3. Contiguous lots - vacant or partially built: If two or more contiguous lots
or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, if any of these do not individually
meet the dimensional requirements of this ordinance or subsequent
amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal
9
structure the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the
dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two more contiguous lots, at least one of
which is nonconforming, owned by the same person or persons on the
effective date of this ordinance and recorded in the Registry of Deeds if the
lot can be served by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, and:
a. Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least
20,000 square feet of lot area; or
b. Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of
subparagraph a. are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot
contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
Section 13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District
The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development
would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological
ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district shall include the
following areas when they occur within the limits of the shoreland zone,
except that areas which are currently developed and areas which meet the
criteria for the Limited Commercial or General Development Districts need
not be included within the Resource Protection District.
1. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers,
which are rated "moderate" or "high" by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as of January 1st, 1973.
2. Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great
ponds along rivers, defined by the 100 year floodplain as designated on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils and/or
local knowledge.
10
3. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or
greater.
4. Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and
which are not surfically connected to a water body during normal spring
high water.
5. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or
river bed movement.
B. Limited Residential District
The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for residential
and recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the
Resource Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which
are used less intensively than those in the Limited Commercial District or
the General Development District.
C. Limited Commercial District
The Limited Commercial District includes areas of mixed, light commercial
and residential uses, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which
should not be developed as intensively as the General Development District.
This district includes areas of two or more contiguous acres in size devoted
to a mix of residential and low intensity business and commercial uses.
Industrial uses are prohibited.
D. General Development District
The General Development District includes the following types of areas:
1. Areas of two more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or
intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not
limited to the following:
a. Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating, or other industrial
activities;
11
b. Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and
service activities, or other commercial activities; and
c. Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities,
such as, but not limited to, amusement parks, racetracks, and
fairgrounds.
2. Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial,
industrial or recreational uses.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential
development. However, no area shall be designated as a General
Development District based solely on residential use.
D. Stream Protection District
The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of
those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a great pond or river, or within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated
shoreland area is located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the above
water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of
the shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland.
Section 14. Table of Land Uses
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone A, shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in
Section 15. The district designation for a particular site shall be determined
from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes: Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply
with all applicable land use standards.)
No: Prohibited
PB: Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO: Requires permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI: Requires permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
12
Abbreviations:
RP: Resource Protection
LR Limited Residential
LC: Limited Commercial
GD: General Development
SP: Stream Protection
13
14
15
Section 15. Land Use Standards
All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the
following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
1.
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Minimum
(square feet) Shore Road
Frontage Frontage
(feet) (feet)
Residential per 40,000 200 150
dwelling unit
Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial
or Industrial per Principal
Structure 60,000 300 250
Public and Private
Recreational Facilities 40,000 200 150
2. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of
a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two lots shall not be
included toward calculating minimum lot area.
3. Lots located on opposite sides of the public or private road shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was
established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22,
1971.
4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a
lot with the proposed use.
16
5. If more than one residential dwelling unit or more than one principal
commercial or industrial structure is constructed on a single parcel, all
dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit or
principal structure.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least 100
feet from the normal high-water line of great ponds and 75 from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge
of a wetland, except that in the General Development District, the setback
from the normal high water line shall be a least 25 feet.
In addition:
a. The water body or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to
structures which require direct access to the water as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally
water-dependent uses.
b. The Planning Board may increase the required setback of a
proposed structure, as a condition to permit approval, if necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. Instances where a greater
setback may be appropriate include, but not be limited to, areas of steep
slope; shallow or erodible soils; or where an adequate vegetative buffer does
not exist.
2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures
which are permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential,
Limited Commercial, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed 35
feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as
transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no
floor area.
3. The first floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures
including basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of
the 100 year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood
as defined by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
17
4. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone shall not exceed 20% of the lot or a
portion thereof, located within the shoreland zone, including land area
previously developed, except in the General Development District adjacent
to the Androscoggin River, where a lot coverage shall not exceed 70%.
5. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar
structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer, to provide shoreline access in the areas of steep slopes or unstable
soils provided; that the structure is limited to a maximum of four feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal highwater-
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by
the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, Title 38, Section 480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending
Over and Beyond the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a
Wetland
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use
and constructed so as to control erosion.
2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach
areas.
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fish
habitat.
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the
activity and be consistent with existing conditions, use, and character of the
area.
5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or
other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body
or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water as
an operational necessity.
6. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or
other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body
18
or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any
district.
7. Except in the General Development District structures built on, over or
abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed 20 feet
in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
D. Campgrounds
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under
State licensing procedures and the following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum 5000 square feet of land, not
including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland
vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a water body shall
not be included in calculating land area per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter,
and utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from the normal high-water line of the great pond, and 75 feet from the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
D. Individual Private Campsites
Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are permitted
providing the following conditions are met:
1. One camp site per lot existing on the effective date of this ordinance, or
30,000 square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less,
may be permitted.
2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet from the
normal high-water line of a great pond, and 75 feet from the normal highwater
line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland.
19
3. Recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure(s) except canopies shall
be attached to the recreational vehicle.
4. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tents
or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to 1000
square feet.
5. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and
location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Where disposal is off-site,
written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required.
6. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for
more than 120 days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall
be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in
compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules
unless served by public sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses
The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within the
shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds:
a. Auto washing facilities
b. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including
body shops
c. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
d. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers
other than amounts normally associated with individual households or
farms
e. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
f. Dry cleaning establishments
g. Electronic circuit assembly
h. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
i. Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
j. Petroleum or petroleum products storage and/or sale except storage
on same property as use occurs and except for storage and sales
associated with marinas
k. Photographic processing
20
l. Printing
G. Parking Areas
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline setback requirements for structures
for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for
parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in districts other than
the General Development District may be reduced to no less than 50 feet
from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning
Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be
designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water
body, and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the
following shall apply:
a. Typical parking space: approximately 10 feet wide and 20 feet
long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be 40 feet
long.
b. Internal travel aisles: approximately 20 feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet from the normal
high-water line of a great pond, and 75 feet from the normal high-water line
of other water bodies, tributaries streams, or the upland edge of a wetland
unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board.
If no other reasonable alternative exists, the Planning Board may reduce the
road and/or a driveway setback requirement to no less than 50 feet upon
clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to
prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include, but
not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
21
On slopes of greater than 20% the road and/or a driveway setback shall be
increased by 10 feet for each 5% increase in slope above 20%.
This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to
roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities
located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way
regardless of its setback from a water body.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District
except to provide access to permitted uses within the district, or as approved
by the Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or
location is available outside the district, in which case the road and/or a
driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water
line of a water body, a tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road banks shall be no steeper than a slope of 2 horizontal to 1 vertical,
and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for
erosion and sedimentation control contained in Subsection Q.
5. Road grades shall be no greater than 10% except for short segments of
less than 200 feet.
6. In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, roads shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto
an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet plus two times the average slope,
in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland. Road surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer
strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and
to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnout
shall be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified
buffer strips before the flow in the road or ditches gains sufficient volume or
head to erode the road or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall
apply:
22
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts
shall be spaced along the road at intervals no greater than indicated in the
following table:
Road Grade Spacing
(percent) (feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only
where the road grade is 10% or less.
c. On road sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed across the road at approximately a 30 degree angle
down slope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet
ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water
runoff control installations associated with roads shall be maintained on a
regular basis to assure effective functioning.
I. Signs
The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource
Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential and Limited Commercial
Districts:
1. Signs and billboards relating to goods and services sold on the premises
shall be permitted, provided that such signs shall not exceed 6 square feet in
23
area and shall not exceed 2 signs per premises. Billboards and signs relating
to goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
2. Name signs shall be permitted, provided such signs shall not exceed 2
signs per premises.
3. Residential users may display a single sign not over 3 square feet in area
relating to the sale, rental or lease of the premises.
4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be permitted without
restriction as to number provided that no such sign shall exceed 2 square feet
in area.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be permitted without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than 20 feet above the ground.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize
storm water runoff from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment
conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as
berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce
runoff and encourage infiltration of storm waters.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to
ensure proper functioning.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance
with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules).
L. Essential Services
1. Where feasible, the installation of the essential services shall be limited to
existing public ways and existing service corridors.
24
2. The installation of the essential services is not permitted in a Resource
Protection District or Stream Protection District, except to provide services
to a permitted use within said district, or except where the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse
impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
Note: this includes mining of topsoil and loam. For additional information
see the definition of Mineral Extraction in Section 17.
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources
shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
which create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet ground
surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for
mineral exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations,
including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled or secured
by other equally effective measures, so as to restore disturbed areas and to
protect the public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the Planning
Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail
procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of paragraph 3 below.
2. Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title
38, M R S A, Section 480-C no part of any extraction operation, including
drainage and runoff control features shall be permitted within 100 feet of the
normal high-water line of a great pond, and within 75 feet of the normal
high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge
of a wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted within 75 feet of
any property line, without written permission of the owner of such adjacent
property.
3. Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at
any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less
than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve
25
months, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the
following:
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials
generated on-site may be buried or covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1) slope or flatter.
c. Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas,
which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area.
Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained from off site sources if
necessary to complete the stabilization project.
4. In keeping with the purposes of this ordinance, the Planning Board may
impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts
associated with mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and
resources.
N. Agriculture
1. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in
conformance with the Maine Guidelines for Manure and Manure Sludge
Disposal on Land published by the University of Maine Soil and Water
Conservation Commission in July 1972.
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond, or within 75 feet horizontal distance, of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. Within five years of the
effective date of this ordinance all manure storage areas within the shoreland
zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no
discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water. Existing facilities which
do not meet the setback requirement may remain, but must meet the no
discharge provision within the above five-year period.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square
feet in surface area, or the spreading, disposal or storage of manure within
the shoreland zone shall require a Soil and Water Conservation Plan to be
filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said
plan shall be considered to be a violation of this ordinance.
26
4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from other water bodies; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of
tributary streams, and wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective
date of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained.
5. After the effective date of this ordinance, newly established livestock
grazing areas shall not be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a great pond; within 75 feet, horizontal
distance of other water bodies, nor; within 25 feet, horizontal distance of
tributary streams, and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing
farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback
provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in
accordance with a Soil and Water Conservation Plan.
O. Timber Harvesting
1. Within in the strip of land extending 75 feet inland from the normal highwater
line in a shoreland area zoned for Resource Protection abutting a great
pond there shall be no timber harvesting, except to remove safety hazards.
2. Except in areas as described in paragraph 1 above, timber harvesting shall
conform with the following provisions:
a. Selective cutting of no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
4 inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground
level on any lot in any 10 year period is permitted. In addition;
i. Within 100 feet, horizontal distance of the normal highwater
line of a great pond, and within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall
be no clear-cut openings and a well distributed stand of trees
and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be
maintained.
ii. At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a
great pond, and greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
27
normal high-water line of other water bodies or the upland
edge of a wetland, harvesting operations shall not create single
clear-cut openings greater than 10,000 square feet in the forest
canopy. Where such openings exceed 5000 square feet they
shall be at least 100 feet apart. Such clear-cut openings shall
be included in the calculation of total volume removal. For the
purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
b. No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet of the normal
high-water line of a water body. In all other areas slash shall either
be removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground
and no part thereof extends within 4 feet above the ground. Any
debris that falls below the normal high-water line of water body shall
be removed.
c. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as
travel routes except when:
i. Surface waters are frozen; and
ii. The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
d. All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert,
except in areas with low banks and channel beds which are composed
of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which would not be eroded or
otherwise damaged.
e. Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and
designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering the
water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber
harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and
areas of exposed soil revegetated.
f. Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the
operation of machinery used in the timber harvesting results in the
exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an unscarified
stripped of vegetation of at least 75 feet in width for slopes up to 10%
shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil and the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For
28
each 10% increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by
20 feet. The provisions of this paragraph apply only to face sloping
toward the water body or wetland, provided, however, that no portion
of such exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than 25
feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of wetland .
g. Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40% limitation in
paragraph a. above, may be allowed by the Planning Board upon a clear
showing, including a forest management plan signed by a Maine licensed
professional forester, that such an exception is necessary for good forest
management and will be carried out in accordance with the purpose of this
ordinance. The Planning Board shall notify the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection of each exception allowed, within
14 days of the Planning Board decision.
P. Clearing of Vegetation for Development
1. Within a shoreland area zoned for Resource Protection abutting a great
pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land
extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water
line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection the clearing of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that
district.
2. Except in areas as described in paragraph 1, above, and except to allow
for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending 100
feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great
pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary
stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be
preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in
the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed 10 feet in width as measured
between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared line of sight
to the water through the buffer strip is not created. Adjacent to a
great pond, the width of the footpath shall be limited to six feet.
29
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted
provided that a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is
maintained. For the purposes of this section a "well-distributed stand
of trees and other vegetation" adjacent to a great pond shall be
defined as maintaining a rating score of 12 or more in any 25 foot by
25 foot square (625 square feet) area as determined by the following
rating system.
Diameter of tree at 4 1/2
feet above ground level Points
(inches)
2-4 1
>4-12 2
>12 4
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a
“well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation" is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 8 per 25-foot square area.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40 percent of the
total volume of trees 4 inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2
feet above the ground level may be removed in any 10 year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, adjacent to
great ponds, existing vegetation under 3 feet in height and other
ground cover shall not be removed, except to provide for a footpath
or other permitted uses as described in paragraphs 2 and 2a above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
permitted.
e. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal
of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the
creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with
native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
30
The provisions contained in paragraph 2 above shall not apply to those
portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas.
Cleared areas, however, shall be limited to the minimum area necessary.
3. At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond,
and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, except
to allow for the development of permitted uses, there shall be permitted on
any lot, in any 10 year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the
volume of trees 4 inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above
ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of
permitted uses shall be included in the 40% calculation. For the purposes of
these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for development, including but not
limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways and sewage
disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25 percent of the lot area or 10,000
square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously developed. This
tradition shall not apply to the General Development District.
4. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted
by this ordinance.
5. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody
vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section.
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation, or other similar
activities which results in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a
permit shall require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall
include, where applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetaion of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing
or diversion ditches.
31
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be
designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. The areas of steep
slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of
the proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation
during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase
of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized
within one week from the time it was last actively worked, the use of riprap,
sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent
stabilization shall occur within nine months of the initial date of exposure.
In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one
bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable
method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to
avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of
staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be
protected from erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways
shall be designed and constructed in order to carry water from a 25 year 24
hour storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with
riprap.
R. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse
environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement,
32
improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction.
Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or
industrial development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a
soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state
certified professionals. Certified persons may include Maine certified soil
scientists, Maine registered professional engineers, Maine State certified
geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the
recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon
the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and water
areas, maximum groundwater elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate.
The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to
counteract soil limitations where they excess.
S. Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of
the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities
or substances will impair designated uses or the water classification of the
water body.
T. Archaeological Sites
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting
authority shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least 20 days prior to
action being taken the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall
consider comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a
decision on the application.
Section 16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
1. Code Enforcement Officer: a Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed or reappointed annually by July 1st.
33
2. Board of Appeals: a Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with
the provisions of Title 30-A Section 2691.
3. Planning Board: a Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of State law.
B. Permits Required
After the effective date of this ordinance no person shall, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure
requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or use would occur;
or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure; or renew a
discontinued nonconforming use.
It permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as
long as:
1. The replacement culvert is not more than 25 percent longer than the
culvert being replaced;
2. The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
3. Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of
the water, and the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
C. Permit Application
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including
a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate
official as indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by the owner or owners of the property or
other person authorizing the work, certifying that the information in the
application is complete and correct. If the person signing the application is
not the owner or lessee of the property then that person shall submit a letter
of authorization from the owner or lessee.
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and
time of its receipt.
34
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or
a completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation
approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature
of the proposed structure would require the installation of a subsurface
sewage disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits
1. Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14,
shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a complete
application, or, if the application is incomplete, what specific additional
material is needed to make the application complete.
2. For applications which are the authority of the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Officer shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application in writing within 45 days of receiving a completed application.
3. For applications which require Planning Board review, the Planning
Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within
45 days except that:
a. If the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision
on the application shall occur within 45 days after the first available
date on the Planning Board's agenda following receipt of the
completed application, or
b. If the Board deems appropriate, a public hearing is scheduled for
the application. In which case, a public hearing shall be scheduled
within 35 days of the date on which the completed application first
appears on the Planning Board agenda, and a decision shall be
rendered and the applicant notified in writing within 35 days of the
public hearing. (Refer to Subsection H. for public hearing procedures
and notification requirements).
4. Permits shall be approved if the proposed use or structure is found to be
in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this ordinance.
35
5. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land-use
activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions of this ordinance.
6. After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the
Board shall approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes
a positive finding based on the information presented that the proposed use:
a. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
b. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
c. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
d. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
e. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of
access to inland and coastal waters;
f. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in
the comprehensive plan;
g. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and
use; and
h. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use
Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well
as conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an
application involving a structure if the structure would be located in an
unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance or
regulations or any State law which the municipality is responsible for
enforcing.
E. Special Exceptions
In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16 D. above, the Planning
Board may approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a
36
Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates all of
the following conditions are met:
1. There is no location on the property, other than the location within the
Resource Protection District, where a structure can be built.
2. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was
established and recorded in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds
before the adoption of the Resource Protection District.
3. The proposed location of all buildings, sewage disposal systems and
other improvements are:
a. Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
b. Located outside the floodway of the 100 year floodplain along
rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings,
including basements, are elevated at least 1 foot above the 100
floodplain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance
with the Town of Livermore Falls Floodplain Management
Ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency maps, it is deemed to be 1/2 the of the 100 year flood plain.
4. The total ground floor area of all principal and accessory structures is
limited to a maximum of 1500 square feet.
5. All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set
back from the normal high water line or upland edge of a wetland to the
greatest practical extent, but not less than 75. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the
slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site elevation in regard to
the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit
37
Following the issuance of a permit, if no substantial start is made in
construction or in the use of the property within one year of the date of the
permit, the permit shall lapse and become void.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service
No public utility, water district, sanitary district, or any utility company of
any kind may install services to any new structure located in the shoreland
zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all
local permits required under this or any previous ordinance has been issued
by the appropriate Town officials. Following installation of service, the
company or district shall forward the written authorization to the town
officials, indicating that installation has been completed.
H. Appeals
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board in the administration of this ordinance.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the
limitations set forth in this ordinance.
2. Variance Appeals
Variances may be permitted only under the following conditions:
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements
including but not limited to, lot width, structure height, percent of lot
coverage, and setback requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses
otherwise prohibited by this ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
38
1. the proposed structure or use would meet provisions of
Section 15 except for the specific provisions which has created
the nonconformity and from which relief is sought; and
2. the strict application of the terms of this ordinance would
result in undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" to shall mean:
i. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted;
ii. That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions
in the neighborhood;
iii. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
iv. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
d. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly
as possible in order to insure conformance with the purposes and
provisions of this ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and in
doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply with any
conditions imposed.
e. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a
dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a
person with a disability who is living in the dwelling or regularly uses
the dwelling. The Board shall restrict any variance granted under the
subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction
of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by
the person with the disability. The Board may impose conditions on
the variance, including without limitations the variance to the duration
of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives
in or regularly uses the dwelling. The term "structures necessary for
39
access to or egress from the property" shall include railing, wall or
roofs systems necessary for safety or effectiveness of the structure.
f. A copy of all variances granted by the Board of Appeals shall be
submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection within 14
days of the decision.
3. Appeal Procedure
a. Making an Appeal
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the
Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board. Such
appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the date of the decision
appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon
a showing of good cause, may waive the 30 day requirement.
2. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of
Appeals a written notice of appeal which includes:
i. A concise written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why it should be granted.
ii. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of
existing buildings and structures and other physical features of
the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
3. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of
the decision appealed from.
4. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the
appeal within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request. (Refer to
Subsection H 4 public hearing procedures and notification
requirements).
b. Decision by Board of Appeals
40
1. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
purpose of deciding an appeal. A member who abstains shall
not be counted in determining whether a quorum exists.
2. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Appeals present and voting shall be necessary to reverse an
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer, or Planning Board, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter on which it is required to decide under this
ordinance, or to affect any variation in the application of this
ordinance from its stated terms. The Board may reverse the decision,
or failure to act, of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
only upon a finding that the decision, or failure to act, was clearly
contrary to specific provisions of this ordinance.
3. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof .
4. The Board shall decide all appeals within 35 days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals .
5. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall
include a statement of findings and conclusions as well as the
reasons or basis therefore, and the appropriate order, relief or
denial thereof.
4. Appeal to Superior Court
Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings
before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in
accordance with State laws within 30 days from the date of any decision of
the Board of Appeals.
5. Reconsideration of
The Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within 30 days of its
prior decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive
additional evidence and testimony.
41
I. Public Hearing Procedures and Notification Requirements - Board of
Appeals and Planning Board
The reviewing authority for the subject request shall have notice of the date,
time and place of the hearing :
1. Given to the applicant;
2. Mailed to all property owners within 500 feet of the property
boundaries; and
3. Published, at least one time, in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town. The date the publication must be at least
seven days prior to the hearing.
J. Enforcement
1. Nuisances
Any violation of this ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall
find that any provision of this ordinance is being violated, he or she
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings
or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such
notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained
as a permanent record.
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to
ensure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to
permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also
investigate all complaints of alleged violations at of this ordinance.
42
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all
essentials transactions of the office, including applications submitted,
permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied, revocation actions,
revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated,
violations found, and fees collected. Once every two years, a summary of
this record shall be submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land Quality
Control within the Department of Environmental Protection.
3. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in a correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Town Officers, upon notice from the
Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all
actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate
and necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby
authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of this ordinance and recovering fines without Court
action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to
continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the legal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous
advice given by an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence
that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure or
use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and safety or will result
in substantial environmental damage.
4. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowners agent or
a contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of this
ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, M R S A,
Subsection 4452.
Note: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than
$2,500 per violation for each day that the violation continues.
Section 17. Definitions
43
Accessory structure or use: a use or structure which is incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
Agriculture: the production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale or lease, of
plants and/or animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops;
grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and green house
products. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber
harvesting activities.
Aggrieved party: an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly
affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under this
ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance
has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered
particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or
variance.
Aquaculture: the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine or marine plant or animal species.
Boat Launching Facility: a facility designed primarily for the launching and
landing of watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area,
and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Campground: any area or tract of land to accommodate 2 or more parties in
temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational
vehicles or other shelters.
Commercial use: the use of lands, buildings or structures, other than a
“home occupation”, defined below, the intent and result of which activity is
the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Dimensional requirements: numerical standards relating to spatial
relationships including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage
and height.
44
Driveway: a vehicular access-way less than 500 feet in length serving two
lots or less.
Emergency operations: operations conducted for the public health, safety or
general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction
or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property
and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services: Gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel,
electric power, or water transmission or distribution lines, towers, and
related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment;
gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines,
collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems
may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar
accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are
necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of structure: an increase in the floor area or volume of a
structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached:
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use: the addition of one month to a use’s operating season;
additional hours of operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area
devoted to a particular use.
Family: one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
Floor area: the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forest management activities: timber cruising and other forest resource
evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management
planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of
forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber
harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads.
45
Forest wetland: A fresh wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is 6
meters tall or taller.
Foundations: the supporting substructure of a building or other structure
including but not limited to basements, slabs, sills, post, or frost walls.
Freshwater wetland: freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas
other than forested wetlands which are:
1. Of 10 or more contiguous acres; of less than 10 contiguous acres and
adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such
that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and for a
duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do
support, the prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of
land that cannot conform to the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses: those uses that require, for their primary
purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or
location in, inland waters and which cannot be located away from these
waters. The uses include, but not limited to recreational fishing and boating
facilities, waterfront dock facilities, boatyards and boat building facilities,
navigation aids, industrial uses requiring large volumes of cooling or
processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or operated at an
inland site.
Great pond: any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface
area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed
or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres except for the
purposes of this ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland
body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Height of a structure: the vertical distance between the mean original grade
at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure,
excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances which
have no floor area.
46
Home occupation: an occupation or profession which is customarily
conducted on or in a residential structure or property and which is:
1. Clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses; and
2. Which employs no more than two persons other than family members
residing in the home.
Individual private campsite: an area of land which is not associated with the
campground, a which is developed for repeated camping by only one group
not to exceed 10 individuals and which involve site improvements which
may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fire places, and
tent platforms.
Industrial: the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging
or processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
Lot area: the area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus
land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
Marina: a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as
its principal use, providing for offshore moorings or docking facilities for
boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as boat and
related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor storage of
boats and equipment, boat and tackle shops, and fuel service facilities.
Market Value: the estimated price a property will bring in the open market
and under prevailing market conditions in the sale between a willing seller
and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with prevailing
general price levels.
Minimum lot width: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
Mineral exploration: hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of
determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal
disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to restore the
land to its original condition.
47
Mineral extraction: any operation within any 12 month period which
removes more than 100 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay,
rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location, and to transport
the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Multi-unit residential: residential structure containing 3 or more residential
dwelling units.
Nonconforming lot: a single lot of record which, at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage,
or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming structure: a structure which does not meet any one or more
of the following dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage,
but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
this ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming use: use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts
thereof which is not permitted in the district in which it is situated, but which
is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this
ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal high-water line: that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or
changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly
aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of wetlands adjacent
to rivers and great ponds, the normal high-water line is the upland edge of
the wetland, and not the edge of the open water.
Person: an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust,
estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or
common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or
beyond the normal high-water line or within a wetland:
Temporary: structures which remain in or over the water for less than
seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
48
Permanent: structures which remain in or over the water for seven
months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months.
Principal structure: a building other than one which is used for purposes
wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building for use on the
same premises.
Principal use: a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to
another use on the same premises.
Public Facility: any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise
operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
Recent floodplain soils: the following Soil series is described and identified
by the National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles Fryeburg Hadley
Limerick Lovewell Medomak Ondawa Podunk
Rumney Saco Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility: a place designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational
activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle: a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be
towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or
more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent
trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle
and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and
must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system: a system intended to replace:
1. An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
49
Residential dwelling unit: a room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for
only one family. The term shall include mobile homes, but not recreational
vehicles.
Riprap: rocks, irregularly shaped, at least 6 inches in diameter, used for
erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two
units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
River: a free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of 25
square miles to its mouth.
Road: a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
asphalt, flood or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the
repeated passage of motorized vehicles.
Service drop: any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath
any portion of a water body provided that:
1. In the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service
or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
2. In the case of telephone service
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet. in length.
Setback: the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line to
the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object
or area.
50
Shore frontage: The length of a lot bordering on a water body measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline at
normal high-water elevation.
Shoreland zone: the land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within 75 feet of a
stream; or within 250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
Significant River Segments: See Title 38 M R S A Section 437.
Stream: a free-falling body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the
confluence of two perennial streams as depicted on the most recent addition
of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minutes series topographic map, or
if not available, a 15 minutes series topographic map, to the point where the
body of water becomes a river.
Structure: anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything constructed
or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences. The
term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks
or satellite dishes.
Substantial start: completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system: a collection of treatment tank(s),
disposal area(s), holding tank(s), and pond(s), surface spray system(s),
cesspool(s), well(s), the surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other
devices and associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose
of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth.
The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under
38 M R S A Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system licensed
under 38 M RSA Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The
term shall not include a wastewater disposal system designed to treat
wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as defined in 38
MRSA Chapter 13, Subchapter 1.
Sustained slope: a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is
substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
51
Timber harvesting: the cutting and removal of trees from their growing site,
and the attendant operation of cutting and skidding machinery but not the
construction or creation of roads. Timber harvesting does not include the
clearing of land for approved construction.
Tributary stream: a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized
by a lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the
presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on
exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and which flows to a water body or
wetland as defined. This definition does not include the term "stream" as
defined elsewhere in this ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the
tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water
body or wetland.
Upland edge: the boundary between the upland and wetland.
Vegetation: all live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including,
without limitation, trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured
at 4 1/2 above ground level.
Volume of a structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by
roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these
walls and roof.
Water body: any great pond, river, stream.
Water crossing: any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of
a river or stream, whether under, through, or over the watercourse. Such
projects include, but may not be limited to, roads, fords, bridges, culverts,
water lines, sewer lines, and cables, as well as maintenance work on these
crossings.
Wetland: a freshwater wetland.
Wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers: wetlands contiguous with
or adjacent to a great pond or river, and which during normal high water, are
connected by surface water to the great pond or river. Also included are
wetlands which are separated from the great pond or river by a berm,
causeway, or similar feature less than 100 feet in width, and which have a
52
surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the great pond or
river. Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers are considered to be
part of that great pond or river.
Adopted June 3, 1991
Amended June 9, 1999
Amended June 13, 2001
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN
REVIEW
Project Name: _________________________________________
Applicant Information:
1. Name of Applicant: ____________________________
Address: ____________________________
____________________________
Telephone: ____________________________
2. Name of Property Owner: ___________________________
Address: ____________________________
____________________________
Telephone: ____________________________
3. Name of Applicant’s
Authorized Agent: ____________________________
Address: ____________________________
____________________________
Telephone: ____________________________
NOTE: The applicant shall provide a letter to the Planning Board
granting the authority of the agent to act on behalf of the applicant.
4. Name of person and address to which all correspondence regarding
this application should be sent to:
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
5. What legal interest does the applicant have in the property to be
developed (ownership, option, purchase and sales contract, other)? Attach
evidence of interest.
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
6. Number of employees? ________
7. Does the applicant reside on the property? _____ yes _____no
8. Nature of project. Please describe the nature of the proposed
project including total floor area, type of materials/products to be handled,
hours of operation and other information to familiarize the Board with your
application. (Attach additional pages if necessary)
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
Land Information
9. Location of property
from Maps Map _____ Lot _____
from Registry Book _____ Page _____
10. Acreage of parcel ______
11. Acreage of developed area ______
12. Is any portion of the property within 250 feet of the high water
mark of any pond, river, stream or wetland? _____ yes _____ no
13. Is any portion of the property within a special flood hazard area
as defined by the Town of Livermore Falls Flood Hazard maps?
_____ yes _____ no
Development Information
14. State below the anticipated impacts, including any public costs to
serve the project, as proposed in the application, on the following municipal
facilities and services. Attach additional pages if necessary.
Sewage Disposal _______________ Water Supply _____________
Roads/Parking _______________ Solid Waste _____________
Storm Water/Drainage ____________ Other _____________
15. Gross floor area to be developed __________________________
16. Percentage of lot to be covered by structures and parking: ______
17. Number of parking spaces: ______________________________
18. Describe how the landscape will be preserved and/or enhanced
and how the proposed use will fit in with the neighboring area.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
19. Describe the provisions for emergency vehicle access to the
project.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
20. Describe the provisions to be made for drainage of the project
site.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
21. Describe the amount of water required for the project and how it
will be obtained.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
22. Describe the proposed erosion and sedimentation control methods
to be employed during construction and maintenance of the proposed
project.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
23. Describe the method of sewage disposal.
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________
Additional Submissions
Based on the nature of the proposed project the Planning Board may require
a traffic engineering study and/or performance guarantee.
The application must be accompanied with the following:
1. A development plan drawn at scale of not less than 1 inch equals
100 feet indicating the nature of the project.
2. A location map to show the relationship of the proposed
development to the surrounding area.
To the best of my knowledge all information submitted in this application is
true and correct.
________________________________ ___________________
Signature of Applicant or Agent Date
NOTE: This application form provides the Planning Board with general
information. Applicants are encouraged to review the Site Plan Review
Ordinance Town of Livermore Falls for additional information.
NAME OF APPLICANT:
ADDRESS OF APPLICANT:
NAME OF OWNER:
NAME OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT:
PLANNING BOARD SIGNATURES _________________
DATE
_________________________________
Chairperson
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
CONDITIONS
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
SITE PLAN REVIEW ORDINANCE OF
THE TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section I. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Site Plan Review
Ordinance” of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine, adopted and effective
by vote of the Town Meeting.
Section II. PURPOSE
The purposes of this ordinance are to promote orderly growth in the
Town and minimize adverse impacts of commercial and industrial
development or redevelopment on municipal services and on the
environment of the Town.
Section III. APPLICABILITY
A. This ordinance shall apply to all development proposals for:
1. New buildings, structures and land uses for commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional, residential, recreational, utility, state or
municipal.
2. New uses or changed uses of land or of existing structures if such
new or changed uses would generate significantly greater traffic,
employ new materials or processes or generate any new impacts
(glare, noise, odor) not normally associated with the previous use.
3. Resumption of conforming uses that have been discontinued for at
least two years.
4. Expansion of existing uses by either 1,000 square feet of 25% in
area (whichever is lesser) within any 10 year period, with regard to
floor space, parking area, seating capacity, outdoor storage area or
outdoor use area.
B. The following uses and structures shall be exempt from this
ordinance:
1. The normal and customary practices involved in the growing and
harvesting of field crops and timber.
2. Home occupations.
3. Existing buildings and land uses legally established prior to the
adoption of this ordinance unless one or more of the factors
described in Section III A (1-4) is present.
Section IV. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A. Pre-Application Meeting
1. Prior to submitting an application for development, the property
owner, the property developer or his authorized agent may appear
informally at a regular or special meeting of the Planning Board to
discuss the proposed development.
2. The developer may present to the Planning Board at this time a
sketch plan of the proposed development. The sketch plan should
consist of a rough outline of the development and may be a freehand,
penciled sketch of the parcel, showing the proposed layout of
the buildings, roads and other features which may be of assistance
to the Planning Board in fully understanding the nature of the
development proposal.
3. The Planning Board may request that the developer arrange for an
inspection of the site by the Planning Board, or by an individual
appointed by the Board Chairman to act as the Board’s
representative.
4. No binding commitments shall be made between the developer and
the Planning Board at this stage. The purpose of the preapplication
meeting shall be to understand what is proposed.
However, the Board may waive any of the submission
requirements if it finds they are not necessary to the review of a
specific development proposal. Also, if the Board finds that the
proposal meets the provisions of Section III B (1-3) above, it may
at this time waive the review requirements altogether and approve
the use.
B. Application
Each application shall be considered individually and those items
required will be specified by the Planning Board. Any requirement
may be modified or waived by the Planning Board. The Site Plan
Review application shall be submitted to the Planning Board
together with the appropriate fees. An application for the site plan
approval shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 per 2,000 sq. ft. or
portion thereof of gross floor area for commercial, institutional and
industrial projects. This application fee shall be made by check
payable to the Town. This fee shall not be refundable. The
Planning Board shall not consider an application for site review
until the fees have been received by the Town. The application
shall include as a minimum:
1. A Site Plan consisting of a plan(s) and map(s) prepared at a
scale determined by the Planning Board but which shall not
be less than one inch to 100 feet and supporting documents
that will provide the following information:
a. Name and address of the applicant or his authorized
agent, the name of the owners of the property if
other than the applicant and the name of the
proposed development.
b. Two places (at least 3” X 3” each), one for the
Planning Board signatures and one for conditions of
approval, to be placed outside the drawing.
c. A site plan showing existing uses of the land and
proposed uses of the land. The site plan shall be in
sufficient detail to allow the Planning Board to
determine how the land is currently used and how it
will be used in the future. The details shall be
sufficient to permit the Planning Board to determine
the impacts of the development on the Town’s
infrastructure and surrounding properties.
2. Traffic Data
A site plan may be required to have an accompanying traffic
engineering study if the project could have a significant impact
on the volume or pattern of traffic in the Town. If such a study
is required, it shall be accomplished by a Professional Engineer,
registered in the State of Maine, and a written report prepared
addressing the impact of the proposed development on traffic
patterns.
C. Municipal Facilities Impact Analysis
The Planning Board may require the applicant to conduct an analysis
of the impact of the proposed development upon public or municipal
facilities and services including, but not limited to, sewer, water,
roads, solid waste and drainage, along with all costs estimated for
correcting any negative impact on public or municipal facilities or
decline in the level of public or municipal services resulting from the
development. Once completed the analysis shall be submitted to the
appropriate public agency or municipal board or department for
review and comment. Where it is demonstrated that the development
will result in a negative impact or decline in public or municipal
facilities and services, the Planning Board may require the applicant
to make improvements to community facilities and services or to
provide for acceptable equivalent improvements as a condition of plan
approval.
D. Outside Professional Services
An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board needs
assistance from an attorney, engineer or independent consulting
service. The estimated consultant’s fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant on demand. Monies will be held in an escrow account. All
funds not used for consulting services will be returned to the
applicant.
Section V. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following standards are to be used by the Planning Board in
judging applications for site plan review and shall serve as a minimum
requirement for approval of the site plan. The site plan shall be
approved unless, in the judgment of the Planning Board, the applicant
is not able to reasonably meet one or more of these standards. In all
instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant and such
burden of proof shall include the production of evidence necessary to
complete the application.
A. Preserve and Enhance the Landscape
The landscape including existing earth forms and vegetation shall be
preserved in its natural state insofar as practicable. After construction
is completed, landscaping shall be accomplished and plantings made
that will define, soften or screen the appearance of off-street parking
areas from the public right of way and abutting properties and/or
structures, enhance the physical design of the building or site, and
minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on neighboring land
uses. The proposed development shall not adversely affect the
adjoining neighborhood nor change its character.
B. Vehicular Access
Provision shall be made for providing and maintaining convenient and
safe emergency vehicle access to all buildings and structures at all
times.
C. Drainage
Provision shall be made for drainage so that runoff of surface waters
will not adversely affect neighboring properties, downstream water
quality, soil erosion or the public storm drainage system. The
Planning Board may require the use of stormwater retention structures
if adequate protection of the abutting resources is not provided.
D. Municipal Services
The development shall not have an adverse impact on the municipal
services including water supply, sewage disposal system, storm
drainage system, road system, fire department, police department,
emergency medical unit, solid waste disposal, schools, open spaces,
recreational programs and facilities, and any other municipal services
and facilities.
E. Water Supply
The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board that the development has sufficient water available to meet its
foreseeable needs, and that the development will not cause an
unacceptable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be
utilized.
F. Soil Erosion
The development shall not cause soil erosion or reduction in the
capacity of the land to hold water to the extent that a dangerous or
unhealthy condition may result.
G. Sewage Waste Disposal
The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board that he has made adequate provisions for sewage waste
disposal. If sewage waste will be disposed of on site by means of a
subsurface waste disposal system, the system’s siting, design and
construction shall conform to the “State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules”. No subsurface waste disposal system
with an estimated daily effluent of 2,000 gallons or more shall be
closer than 300 feet to an existing well, municipal or private.
H. Comprehensive Plan
No application for development shall be approved by the Planning
Board which is not in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the
Town of Livermore Falls.
Section VI. PLANNING BOARD ACTION ON APPLICATION
A. Within 30 days of receipt of an application, the Planning Board
shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application has been
found to be complete, or if the application is incomplete, that certain
specific additional material is needed to make the application
complete. When the Planning Board is satisfied that it has a complete
application, it shall notify the applicant in writing and begin its review
of the proposed development.
B. The Planning Board may hold a public hearing within 30 days
after the Planning Board has notified the applicant that the application
is complete. The Planning Board shall publish the time, date and
place of the hearing at least seven days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of area-wide circulation. The applicant shall send notice
of the hearing by certified mail, return receipts requested, to abutting
landowners, including owners of property in the opposite side of the
road, a minimum of 10 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
C. Within 30 days of the public hearing or if no public hearing is held
within 60 days after the Planning Board has notified the applicant that
the application is complete, the Planning Board shall either approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the application. The time limit
for review may be extended by mutual agreement between the
Planning Board and the applicant.
D. Within seven days of reaching their decision, the Planning Board
shall notify the applicant in writing of any action taken and the reason
for taking such action.
Section VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. The Planning Board may modify or waive any of the above
application requirements or performance standards when the Planning
Board determines that, because of the special circumstances of the
site, such application requirements or standards would not be
applicable or would be an unnecessary burden upon the applicant and,
if modified, would not adversely affect the abutting landowners and
the general health, safety and welfare of the Town.
B. The Planning Board may require the applicant to file with the
Board, at the time of the submission of the application or any time
prior to improvements, a performance guarantee in the form of a
performance bond running to the municipality and issued by a surety
company acceptable to the municipality, a cashier’s check payable to
the treasurer of the municipality, an irrevocable letter of credit issued
to the municipality by a banking or other lending institution, or a
guarantee secured by deposits issued by a banking or lending institute
authorized to issue the same, or another acceptable performance
guarantee which is agreed to by both the applicant and the
municipality. The conditions and amount of such performance
guarantee shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen. The
amount shall be at least equal to the total cost of furnishing, installing,
connecting and completing all of the street grading and paving for
roads intended for public acceptance, storm drainage, sewer and water
lines, public street openings; and other utilities or other improvements
shown on the plot or site plan.
C. All construction performed within the scope of this ordinance shall
be in conformance with the approved site plan.
D. A permit granted under this ordinance shall expire if the work or
change is not commenced within 12 months from the date of the vote
on granting the permit, or if the work or change is not substantially
completed within two years from the date of the vote on granting the
permit.
Section VIII. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
A. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided
for in Article VIII Part 2, Section 1 of the Maine Constitution and
Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 3001.
B. Administration
The Planning Board of the Town of Livermore Falls shall administer
this ordinance.
Section IX. ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement Procedure
1. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall
find that any provision is being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures,
or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and
abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be
submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent
record.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to
insure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to
permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also
investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this ordinance.
B. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement
of the violation or nuisance condition, the municipal officers, upon
notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to
institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable,
including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines,
that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance in the name of the municipality. The municipal officers, or
their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this ordinance and recovering fines without court action.
C. Fines
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and
not more than $2,500, and each day on which such violations shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense, as provided in Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4452.
Section X. APPEALS
A. A site plan application shall be presented to the Planning Board or
a formal written request for a decision regarding the provisions of the
ordinance shall be made to the Planning Board before an applicant or
abutting landowner or aggrieved party can appeal to the Board of
Appeals.
If the Planning Board disapproves an application, or grants approval
with conditions that are objectionable to the applicant or abutting
landowner or any aggrieved party, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the ordinance do not apply, or that the true intent and
meaning of the ordinance has been misconstrued or wrongfully
interpreted, the applicant or abutting landowner, or any aggrieved
party may appeal the decision of the Planning Board in writing to the
Board of Appeals within 30 days of the Planning Board’s decision.
B. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days
of receipt of the written request for appeal. The Board of Appeals
shall publish the time, date and place of the hearing in a newspaper of
area-wide circulation. If a site plan application has been presented,
the applicant shall send notice of the public hearing by certified mail
to abutting landowners, including property owners on the opposite
side of the road.
The Board of Appeals, after holding a public hearing, may reverse the
Planning Board’s decision if it is clearly contrary to the ordinance or
not supported by substantial evidence in the record or, if the
requirements of paragraph C below are met, may grant a variance.
The Board of Appeals shall render its decision within 21 days of the
hearing. Time limits may be extended by mutual agreement between
the Board of Appeals and aggrieved parties in the case.
C. A variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals where a
relaxation of the terms of this ordinance would not be contrary to the
public interest and where a strict enforcement of this ordinance would
result in undue hardship as defined in Title 30-A, MRSA, Section
4353. A financial hardship alone shall not constitute grounds for
granting a variance. The crucial points of variance are the public
interest, undue hardship and unique circumstances applying to the
property. A variance is not justified unless all three elements are
present in the case.
D. Appeals involving administrative procedure or interpretation shall
initially be addressed by the Board of Appeals and proceed from the
Board of Appeals to the Superior Court according to the State law.
E. Appeals involving conditions imposed by the Planning Board, or a
decision to deny approval, may go directly from the Planning Board to
the Superior Court.
Section XI. AMENDMENTS
This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the town
meeting. Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of the
Planning Board or by the request of the Board of Selectmen to the
Planning Board or on petition of 10% of the votes who voted in the
town in the last gubernatorial election. The Planning Board shall
conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.
Section XII. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
Failure to substantially complete a project within two years of the date
of approval of a site plan shall render the plan null and void, and the
Board shall have a notice to that effect placed in the Registry of
Deeds.
Section XIII. VALIDITY AND SEPARABILITY AND CONFLICT
WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
A. Validity and Separability: Should any section or provision of this
ordinance be declared by any court to be invalid, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
B. Conflict with other Ordinances: Whenever the requirements of
this ordinance are inconsistent with the requirements of any other
regulation, ordinance, code or statute, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
Section XIV. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
ordinance shall have the same meaning as they have in common usage
and shall be construed to give this ordinance its most reasonable
application. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the
singular. The word “may” is permissive; “shall” is mandatory, not
discretionary.
1. Accessory Use or Structure: A subordinate use of a
building, other structure or land, or a subordinate building or other
structure:
a. whose use is customary in connection with the principle
building, other structure or land or;
b. whose use is incidental to the use of the principle building,
other structure or use of land; and
c. which is located on the same lot with the principle building,
other structure or use of land, or on a lot adjacent to such lot if
in the same ownership or part of the same establishment.
2. Agriculture: Production of crops and livestock.
3. Campground: An area devoted to overnight recreational or
educational use, where the land area is divided into sites or lots for
which a charge is made; either on a short term or a long term basis by
sale, rent or lease or by means of a condominium type ownership.
4. Commercial: Connected with the buying or selling of goods
or services or the provision of facilities for a fee. Commercial uses
shall include, but not be limited to: professional and business offices,
retail outlets, services such as barber or beauty shops, tailors,
laundromats, dry cleaners, restaurants, parking lots, service stations or
repair garages, hotels, motels or inns, storage and horticultural
activities and athletic or recreational facilities for hire.
5. Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as living quarters for one family,
including provisions for living, cooking, eating and sleeping.
6. Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is
customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a
dwelling unit which is incidental to residential use and employs two
or less full-time equivalent outside employees.
7. Industrial: Connected with the assembling, fabrication,
furnishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods or the
extraction of minerals.
8. Institutional: A building devoted to some public
government, educational, charitable, religious, medical or similar
purpose.
9. Multifamily Dwelling: a building consisting of three or
more dwelling units and their accessory uses and structures.
10. Person: Any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, municipal or other local government entity, quasimunicipal
entity, state agency, educational or charitable organization
or institution or other legal entity.
11. Setback: The area between the property line or boundary
line of a public right of way and any building or structure located on
the premises. Setbacks are measured from the property line.
12. Structure: Anything constructed, erected or placed on the
ground which is permanent, temporary or mobile. Structures include,
but are not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles,
piers and floats, storage and processing facilities.
13. Subdivision: as defined in Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4401 and
as amended, which states in part, “A subdivision is the division of a
tract of land or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5 year
period, which period begins on or after September 22, 1971, whether
accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise,
provided that a division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order
of court, gift to a person related to the donor by blood, marriage or
adoption or a gift to a municipality, unless the intent of that gift is to
avoid the objectives of this section or by transfer of any interest in
land to the owner of land abutting thereon, shall not be considered to
create a lot or lots for the purposes of this section.”
The term “subdivision” shall also include the division of a new
structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more
dwelling units within a 5 year period and the division of an existing
structure or structures previously used for commercial or industrial
use into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5 year period. The area
included in the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a
new structure for the purposes of this paragraph.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, leased dwelling
units are not subject to subdivision review if the units are otherwise
subject to municipal review at least as stringent as that required under
this section.
14. Use: Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a
tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or
occupied; also any activity, occupation, business or operation carried
on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a
tract of land.
15. Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance, granted by
the Planning Board or by the Board of Appeals.
Adopted June 3, 1991
Amended June 13, 2001

1
2
SLUDGE AND SEPTAGE CONTROL ORIDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section I. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article VIII of the Maine Constitution
and Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3001 and shall be known and may be cited as
the “Sludge and Septage Control Ordinance of the Town of Livermore
Falls”.
Section II. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the Town through the regulation and control of
the disposal of certain waste materials.
Section III. Conflict
This ordinance shall be construed to repeal and supercede any provisions of
any other ordinances currently in effect which are in conflict with the
provisions contained herein.
Section IV. Definitions
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined as follows:
A. Sludge – The semi-solid or liquid residual generated from a municipal,
commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant.
B, Stabilized Sludge – Liquid or dewatered sludge containing pathogens
from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant that
has been treated by at least P.S.R.P.
C. Septage – Waste, refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from
septic tanks, cesspools, or any other materials from septic tanks, cesspools or
any other similar facilities.
D. P.S.R.P. – A Process to Significantly Reduce Pathogens.
3
E. Pathogen – An organism, chiefly a microorganism, including viruses,
bacteria, fungi, and all forms of animal parasites and protozoa, capable of
producing an infection or disease in a susceptible host.
Section V. Prohibition
No municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant sludge
(biosolids) or septage may be stockpiled or spread in the Town of Livermore
Falls, including, but not limited to, sewage, paper and pulp mills sludge,
whether it be wet, dry, pelletized, mixed with other materials, or injected on
or into the land within the Town.
Section VI. Qualification
Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, the following
exemptions apply:
1. Residential septage – an individual may spread his own septage on his
own land within the conformance of the town and state regulations.
2. Stabilized sludge and septage generated within the Town of Livermore
Falls will be processed, handled or spread in conformance with the Maine
Department of Environmental Protections’ “Rules for Land Application of
Sludge and Residuals”, in existence at the time of this ordinance, and as may
be from time to time amended in the future and providing adequate
provision has been made for the containment and treatment of leachate and
the prevention of ground or surface water contamination. Also, that the
proposed use, whether individual or town spreading, will not have any
significant detrimental effect on the use and peaceful enjoyment of any
abutting property as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, glare, or other
causes which can be avoided by reasonable modification of a plan.
Section VII. Violations
The Board of Selectmen, on notification by the Code Enforcement Office,
shall institute or cause to be instituted, in the name of the Town, any and all
actions, legal and equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the
enforcement of this ordinance. This regulation, however, shall not prevent
any person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance.
4
Section VIII. Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
ordinance, or who fails to conform to any of the provisions thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00.
Each day such violation or failure to comply is allowed to exist, after
notification by the Code Enforcement Office, shall constitute a separate
offense.
Adopted: June 13, 2001










1
2
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Article 1. Title, Purpose and Definitions
Section 1.1. Title
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as Town of Livermore Falls
Special Amusement Ordinance.
Section 1.2. Purpose and Authority
The purpose of this ordinance is to control the issuance of Special
Amusement Permits pertaining to music, dancing, or entertainment in all
public facilities within the boundaries of the Town of Livermore Falls,
including those facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell liquor. This
section is adopted pursuant to Title 28-A, MRSA 1054 and Title 30-A
MRSA 3001.
Section 1.3. Definitions
A. Entertainment. For the purposes of this ordinance, entertainment shall
include any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion, whether live,
taped or otherwise, for the patrons or customers of the licensed premises
whether provided by professional entertainers, by full-time or part-time
employees of the licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities
with an entertainment value, by patrons induced by prizes or otherwise to act
as entertainers, or by any other.
B. Licensee. For the purposes of this ordinance, licensee shall include any
person, the individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity and shall include the holder of a license issued under Title 28-A
of the Statutes of the State of Maine or any agent or employee of any such
licensee.
C. Licensed Premises. Licensed premises includes all parts of the
contiguous real estate occupied or controlled by a licensee and used by the
licensee in the operation of a business which includes activities covered by
this ordinance.
3
Article II. General
Section 2.1. Permit Required
No licensee shall permit, on the licensed premises, any music, except radio
or other mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort, unless
the licensee shall have first obtained a special amusement permit signed by
at least a majority of the Municipal Officers.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing to
the Municipal Officers and shall state the name of the applicant; applicant's
residence; applicant's address; the name of the business to be conducted; the
business address; the nature of the business; the location to be used; whether
the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business therein described
either denied or revoked and, if so, whether the applicant, including all
partners or corporate officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so,
the applicant shall describe specifically those circumstances; and any
additional information as may be needed by the Municipal Officers in the
issuing of the permit, including but not limited to, a copy of the applicant's
current liquor license and Bureau of Public Safety occupancy permit
showing the facility’s seating capacity.
No permit shall be issued under this ordinance if the premises and building
to be used for the purposes do not fully comply with all ordinances, articles,
bylaws, rules and regulations, of the municipality and state law.
The fee for a special amusement permit shall be $25.
The Municipal Officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within 15
days or such other number of days as the legislature may specify, from the
date the request is received, at which the testimony of the applicant and that
of any interested members of the public shall be taken.
The Municipal Officers shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance of
the permit will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, which
would violate municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, rules and regulations,
or state law.
4
A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant's existing
liquor license, if any, and otherwise for a period of one year.
Section 2.2. Inspections
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of the licensed business which has obtained a special amusement
permit are provided for or required by municipal ordinance, articles, bylaws,
rules and regulations, or state law, or are reasonably necessary to secure
compliance with any of the above, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the
person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit any officer,
official, or employee of the municipality authorized to make the inspection
at any reasonable time and admission is requested.
The inspection shall be preceded by a written demand for inspection, which
shall specify the date and time inspection is sought. The written demand
shall be delivered to the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
be inspected.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary
to secure conformance with any ordinance, rule and regulation or state law
provision, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the
premises, to give any authorized officer, official or employee of the Town of
Livermore Falls sufficient samples of the material or commodity for
analysis.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Municipal
Officers may revoke, after notice and hearing, the special amusement permit
of any licensee in the municipality who refuses to permit any such officer,
official, or employee, to make an inspection or who interferes with such
officer, official or employee, while in the performance of their duty.
Section 2.3. Suspension or Revocation of Permit
The Municipal Officers may, after notice and hearing, suspend or revoke any
special amusement permit which as been issued under this ordinance on the
grounds that the music, dancing or entertainment, so permitted, or activities
related thereto, constitute a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare,
which violates any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, rules and
regulations or state laws.
5
Section 2.4. Officer on Duty
Whenever the licensee shall have on the premises patrons numbering more
than five hundred (500) and when entertainment is in progress, the licensee
shall provide a uniformed constable, approved by the Municipal Officers at a
regular meeting, on the premises at all such times. Duties of the constable
shall include, but not limited to, enforcement of the general laws of the State
of Maine and ordinances of the Town of Livermore Falls, including the
provisions of this ordinance and any rules and regulations adopted by the
Municipal Officers hereunder.
Section 2.5. Rules and Regulations
The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and
hearing, to establish written rules and regulations governing the issuance,
suspension and revocation, of special amusement permits, the classes of
permits, the music, dancing or entertainment permitted under each class, and
other limitations on these activities required to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. These rules and regulations may specifically determine
the location and size of permitted premises, the facilities that may be
required for the permitted activities on those premises and the hours during
which the permitted activities are permitted.
Section 2.6. Permit and Appeals Procedures
A. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the Municipal
Officers shall be notified in writing of their decision no later than 15 days, or
such other number of days as the legislature may specify, from the date his
request was received. In the event the licensee is denied a permit, the
licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in writing. The
licensee may not reapply for a permit within 30 days, or such other number
of days as a legislature may specify, after an application for a permit which
has been denied.
B. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose
permit has been revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial,
suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to Superior Court in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
6
Section 2.7. Admission
A licensee who is been issued a special amusement permit may charge
admission in designated areas approved by the municipal special amusement
permit.
Section 2.8. Live Entertainment Regulations
The purpose of this section is to regulate nudity as a form of live
entertainment and those establishments at which alcoholic beverages are
served or consumed, and which are licensees under this ordinance.
No licensee shall permit entertainment on the licensed premises whether
provided by a professional entertainer, employees of the licensed premises
or any other person, when the entertainment involves:
A. The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law;
B. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals;
C. The actual or simulated displaying or exposing to view of the genitals,
pubic hair, buttocks, anus or any portion of the female breasts at or below
the areola thereof;
D. The permitting by any licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to any public view any portion of his or her
genitals or anus or any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola
thereof.
For the purposes of this section, display or displaying and expose or
exposing shall mean unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by a fully
opaque material and shall include, without limitation, appearing with only an
opaque covering or appearing with only an opaque covering which adheres
to the skin, such as body paint.
7
Section 2.9. Additional Conduct Constituting Offenses by Licensees
A. The licensee shall not knowingly, intentionally or recklessly allow on his
premises, conduct which is in violation of the laws of the State of Maine.
B. Disorderly conduct. The licensee shall not knowingly, intentionally or
recklessly allow in his licensed premises any person or persons to engage in
disorderly conduct, to wit: conduct which intentionally or recklessly causes
annoyance to others by making loud and unreasonable noises or knowingly
accosting, insulting, taunting or challenging any person with offensive,
derisive or annoying words or by gestures or other physical conduct which
would in fact have a direct tendency to cause a violent response by an
ordinary person in the situation of the person so accosted, insulted, taunted
or challenged.
C. Solicitation of drinks. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed
premises any person not a licensee or an employee who is then and there
working, to frequent or loiter with the purpose of soliciting any other person,
customer or patron to purchase any drink of any kind.
D. Gambling. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises the use
or occupancy thereof for gambling or games of chance as prohibited by the
Statutes of the State of Maine or ordinances, articles, by laws or rules and
regulations of the municipality; nor shall any licensee have or keep for
gambling purposes on or about such licensed premises any dice, cards,
bowls, quoits or other implements used in gambling, or allow any person
resorting thereto to use or exercise for gambling purposes any of said games
or any other unlawful game or sport therein.
Article III. Penalty, Separability and Effective Date
Section 3.1. Penalty
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation
occurred shall be considered a separate offense.
8
Section 3.2 Separability
The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any
other provision.
Section 3.3. Effective date
The effective date of this ordinance shall be when enacted.
Adopted: May 22, 1996
1
2
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance shall be: to assure the comfort, health, safety
and general welfare of the people; to protect the environment; to provide for
the orderly development of a sound and stable community; and to establish
an administrative review process which will provide the Livermore Falls
Planning Board with sufficient evidence, data and material to carry out its
responsibilities as required in 30-A MRSA, Section 4401 et esq, and other
ordinances adopted by the Town. The ordinance also has the purpose of
providing a process by which the residents of Livermore Falls and others can
evaluate the impact of the subdivision as well as providing a clear procedure
which applicants for subdivision permits shall follow.
Section II. Authority and Administration
A. Authority
1. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rules Power as provided for
in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30 MRSA, Section
3001.
2. This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance
for the municipality of Livermore Falls, Maine.
B. Administration
1. This ordinance shall be administered by the Planning Board for the Town
of Livermore Falls, hereafter referred to as the "Board".
2. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all of the land area of all
proposed subdivisions, as defined, located in the Town of Livermore Falls.
3. No plans of a subdivision of land within the municipal boundaries of
Livermore Falls shall be hereafter filed or recorded in the County Registry
of Deeds until a Final Plan thereof has been approved by the Board, in
accordance with all of the requirements, design standards and specifications
set forth in this ordinance, and Title 30-A MRSA Section 4404, and
3
approval shall have been entered on such Final Plan by a legal majority of
the Board. The recording of a plan without the approval required by this
ordinance is void.
4. Whenever any subdivision is proposed or before any contract for the sale
of or offer to sell such subdivision or any part thereof shall have been
negotiated, the subdividing owner or his authorized agent shall apply
formally to the Board for approval of a final plan of such subdivision as
provided by this ordinance and shall record an attested copy of the final plan
so approved and so endorsed in the Androscoggin County registry of deeds.
Section III. Definition of Terms
A. In general, words and terms used in these standards shall have their
customary dictionary meanings. More specifically, certain words and terms
used herein are defined as follows:
Comprehensive plan or policy statement: any part or element of the overall
plan or policy for development of the Town as defined in Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4301.
Dedicated Street: a street, alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, or right
of way which is so designed, laid out and constructed to be accepted by the
Town at some future date.
Freshwater: freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas which are:
1. Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and for
duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils;
and
2. Not considered part of a great pond, river, stream or.
Manufactured housing: A sructural unit or units designed for occupancy and
constructed in a manufacturing facility and transported, by the use of its own
chassis or an independent chassis, to a building site where it is used for
housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim.
Manufactured housing includes:
4
1. Those units constructed after June 15th, 1976 commonly called "newer
mobile homes " which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in
compliance with United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development standards, meaning structures transportable in one or more
sections, which and the travelling mode are 14 of body feet or more in width
and 750 or more square feet, and which are built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as dwellings, with a without permanent foundations,
when connected to the required utilities including the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
or electrical systems contained in the unit;
2. This term also includes any structure which meets all the requirements of
this subparagraph, except the size requirements and with respect to which
the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and
complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States
Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et seq; and
3. Those units commonly called "modular homes , which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 957, and rules
adopted under that chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more
sections, which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed
to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities,
including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems
contained in the unit.
Mobile Home Park: a parcel of land under unified ownership approved by
the municipality for the placement of three or more manufactured homes.
Mobile Home Park lot: the area of land on which an individual home is
situated within a mobile home park and which is reserved for use by the
occupants of that home.
Person: includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company operation as well as an individual.
Planning Board: the Planning Board of the municipality created under title
30-A, MRSA, Section 4324 or Section 3001.
5
Preliminary subdivision plan: the preliminary drawings indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for
its consideration.
Resubdivision: the division of existing subdivision or any change of lot size
therein with the relocation of any street or lot in a subdivision.
Street: The word "street" means and includes such ways as alleys, avenues,
boulevards, highways, roads, streets and other rights-of-way. The term
"street" shall also apply to areas on subdivision plans designated as "streets",
etc.
Major streets: included are arterial streets which serve primarily as major
traffic ways for travel through and within the municipality, and collector
streets which serve as feeders to an arterial street, as collectors of traffic
from minor streets, for circulation around a residential neighborhood, or for
circulation and access in commercial or industrial areas.
Minor streets: those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting
residential properties.
Subdivider: an individual, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity
that undertakes the activities governed by this ordinance. Inasmuch as the
subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of assuring a
satisfactory development, the term "sub divider" is intended to include the
term "builder" and "developer" even though the person involved in
successive stages of the subdivision may vary.
Subdivision:
1. Subdivision shall mean the Division of a tract or parcel of land as defined
in Title-30-A, MRSA, Section 4401 and as hereafter amended.
2. The term subdivision shall include developments were there are three or
more units involved such as mobile home parks, multiple family dwellings,
condominiums, shopping centers and industrial parks.
Section IV. Preapplication
6
A. The subdivider shall submit for informal discussion a Sketch Plan and
other data relative to the proposed subdivision to the Board. The Sketch
Plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots,
and other features in relation to existing conditions
Section V. Procedure for Submission and Review of Preliminary Plan and
Final Plan
A. Submission and Review of the Preliminary Plan and Application
The procedure for submission shall be as follows:
1. The applicant shall submit four copies of the Preliminary Plan and four
copies of the Application for the proposed subdivision as detailed in
paragraphs C and D of this section to the Board at a regularly scheduled
meeting. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of not more than
100 feet to the inch. In addition, one copy of the plan reduced to a size of 8
1/2 by 11 inches or 11 by 17 inches, and all accompanying information shall
be mailed to each Board member no less than seven days prior to the
meeting. The Board shall issue a dated receipt to the applicant. Within 30
days from the date of receipt, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing
either that the Preliminary Plan and Application are complete, or if
incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make them complete.
After the Board had determined that the Preliminary Plan and applicant shall
be notified. Determination by the Board that the Preliminary Plan and
Application are complete in no way commits or binds the Board as to the
adequacy of the plan to meet the criteria of Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 404
and this Ordinance.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 plus $10 per lot or
unit for the first 10 lots or units and a fee of $15 for each lot or unit over 10.
All checks shall be made payable to the Town of Livermore Falls, stating the
specific purpose of the fee.
3. The Board shall forward one copy of the completed preliminary plan and
application to the Selectmen, the Plumbing Inspector, Road Commissioner,
Fire Chief, Police Chief, Water District and Sewer District for their review
and comments.
7
4. If after the board has determined that a complete application has been
filed, it shall notify in writing in the applicant and all property owners within
500 feet of the boundaries of the subdivision. Said written notice shall
briefly describe the proposed subdivision, state where the application may be
inspected, and give notice that request for a public hearing must be filed in
writing to the Chairperson of the Board within ten (10) days from the date of
the notice.
5. Within fifteen (15) days of the notice of receipt of the complete
application, the Board shall determine whether it shall hold a public hearing
on an application. The decision to hold a public hearing is discretionary and
in making its decision, the Board may consider the type of subdivision,
community impact, as well as written requests for a public hearing.
In the event that the Planning Board determines to hold a public hearing, it
shall hold such hearings within thirty (30) days of the notice of the receipt of
a completed application, and shall cause written notice of the date, time and
place of the hearing to be given to the applicant and all parties receiving the
notice in Section V (3) all parties who requested a public hearing in writing
and in addition shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in Livermore Falls at least two (2) times, the date of the
first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
6. The Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within
sixty (60) days of having received the completed Preliminary Plan, if no
hearing is held, or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to,
deny or grant approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem
advisable to satisfy the criteria contained in this ordinance and in Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4404, and to preserve the public's health, safety and general
welfare. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the subdivider.
In issuing its decision, the Board shall make a written finding of fact
establishing that the Preliminary Plan does or does not meet the provisions
of this ordinance and Title 30 -A, MRSA, Section 4404. Approval of the
Preliminary Plan in no way commits or binds the Board to approve the Final
Plan.
B. Submission and Review of the Final Plan
The procedure for submission shall be as follows:
8
1. The applicant shall submit the original and three (3) copies of the Final
Plan to the Board at a regularly scheduled meeting, within two (2) years
after the date of approval of the preliminary plan. The Board shall issue a
dated receipt to the applicant. The Final Plan shall include all the
information requested in Section V, paragraph D., and will also include all
changes recommended by the Board in their approval of the Preliminary
Plan. There shall be no other substantial changes between the Preliminary
Plan and a Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be drawn in ink on a
reproducible stable-based transparent original embossed with the seal of the
Surveyor or engineer who prepared the plan suitable for permanent
recording in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds. The final plan
shall be drawn to scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. In addition,
one copy of the plan(s) reduced to a size of eight and a half by 11 inches or
11 by 17 inches, and all accompanying information shall be mailed to each
board member no less than seven days prior to the meeting.
2. The Board has the option of holding a public hearing on the Final Plan.
Regulations for such a hearing shall be according to State Law as provided
in Section V, paragraph A-4.
3. The Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within
sixty (60) days of having received the completed Final Plan, if no hearing is
held, or within such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to, deny or
grant approval of the Final Plan or grant approval on such terms and
conditions as it may deem advisable to satisfy the criteria contained in this
ordinance and in Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4404, and to preserve the
public's health, safety and general welfare. In issuing its decision, the
Board shall make a written finding of fact establishing that the Final Plan
does or does not meet the provisions of this ordinance and Title 30-A,
MRSA, Section 4404.
4. Upon approval of the Final Plan by a majority of the Board, the Board
shall sign the original and three (3) copies of the final plan. The original
shall be filed by the subdivider with the Androscoggin County Registry of
Deeds . One copy shall be retained by the subdivider, one copy shall be
retained by the Board, the one copy shall be filed with the Selectmen. The
Board shall maintain a permanent record of their action on the Final Plan.
C. Application
9
The application form shall be furnished by the Board, filled out by the
applicant and shall include the following information: (Items marked with an
"X" shall be required in all instances; items without an "X" may be required
at the discretion of the Board.)
C. Application
The application form shall be furnished by the Board, filled out by the
applicant and shall include the following information: (Items marked with an
"X" shall be required in all instances; items without an "X" may be required
at the discretion of the Board.)
X 1. Name and address of owner
X 2. Name and address of applicant (if other than owner).
X 3. If applicant is a corporation, state whether the corporation is licensed
to do business in Maine, and attach a copy of Secretary of State's
registration.
X 4. Name of applicants authorized representative.
X 5. Name, address and number of registered professional engineer, land
surveyor or planner who prepared the plan.
X 6. Address to which all correspondence from the Board shall be sent.
X 7. What interest does the applicant half in the parcel to be subdivided
(option, land purchase contract, record ownership, etc.)?
X 8. What interest as the applicant have in any property abutting the parcel
to be subdivided?
X 9. State whether the subdivision covers the entire or contiguous
holdings of applicant or not.
X 10. Location of property: book and page (from Registry of Deeds).
X 11. Location of property: map and lot (from Assessor's Office).
X 12. Current zoning of property if applicable.
10
X 13. Acreage a parcel to be subdivided.
X 14. Proposed method of sewage disposal and the results of an on-site
soils investigation for each lot.
X 15. Soils report for entire area.
X 16. Names and mailing addresses of property owners within 500 feet of
abutting parcel to be subdivided.
X 17. Indicate the nature of any restrictive covenants to be placed on the
deeds.
D. Subdivision Plan
The subdivision plan shall be a map of the tract to be subdivided, certified
by a registered land surveyor and tied to established reference points. Plan
shall not be less than 12"X 22" or more than 24" by 36" and shall be drawn
to scale of 1" equals not more than 100 feet. The subdivision plan shall
include the following information: items marked with an “X” shall be
required in all instances; items without an "X" may be required at the
discretion of the Board.)
Preliminary Final
Plan Plan
1. X X Name of proposed subdivision;
location of subdivision; name of
subdivider; and embossed seal and
signature of Registered Land
Surveyor.
2. X X Lot numbers.
3. X X Date, magnetic north point and
graphic map scale.
4. X X A standard boundary survey of the
parcel made and certified by a
11
registered land surveyor and proposed
lot lines with approximate dimensions
and lot areas, and total area of land to
be subdivided.
5. X X Proposed lot lines with dimensions,
bearings, deflection angles, radii and
central angles sufficient to reproduce
any line on the ground, and lot areas
and total area of land to be
dubdivided.
6. X Location of temporary markers to
enable the Planning Board to locate
each lot rapidly and appraise the basic
lot layout in the field.
7. X Location of permanent markers, both
natural and manmade.
8. X X Location of all parcels to be dedicated
to public use and the conditions of
such dedication.
9. X X Names of abutting property owners
and subdivisions. Reference to record
subdivision plans of adjoining lands
by book and page number.
10. X X Location of freshwater wetlands and
any portion of the subdivision that is
in the boundaries of any flood hazard
area and the 100 year flood elevation.
11. X X Location of all required soil
investigation test pits.
12. X X Location and size of existing
buildings.
12
13. X X Suggested location of buildings,
subsurface sewage disposal systems
and wells.
14. X X Location of all natural features or site
elements including significant wildlife
habitat identified by the Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
historic or rare and irreplaceable
natural areas to be preserved.
15. X X Location of any existing river, stream
or brook within or abutting the
subdivision and other essential
existing physical features.
16. X X Location and size of any existing
sewer and water mains and other
utilities, location and size of culverts
and drains.
17. X X Location, names and widths of
existing and proposed streets,
highways, easements and rights-ofway.
18. X Contour lines at 5 foot intervals (or
other interval as specified by the
Board).
19. X Proposed uses of property.
20. X X Other information not indicated above
as required by the Board.
21. X X Soil erosion and sediment control
plan.
13
22. X X A plan for the disposal of surface
water run-off prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer.
23. X X Any portion of the subdivision located
in the direct watershed of a great
pond.
24. Phosphorous impact analysis.
25. X X The cost of the proposed subdivision
and a statement of the applicant’s
technical and financial capacity to
carry out the project.
26. X X A statement of the type of water
supply and availability.
27. X X Suitable space to record on the
approved Plan and date the conditions
of approval, if any. This space shall
be similar to the following example:
Approved by the Town of Livermore Falls Planning Board:
Signed: _______________________________
_______________________________
_______________________________
_______________________________
Date: ________________________________
Conditions: ______________________________________________
______________________________________________
______________________________________________
14
E. Accompanying Information Documents
The Board may require the following accompanying documents or
information to be included with the Plan:
____ 1. Traffic impact analysis.
____ 2. Statement from the Fire Chief as to the ability to provide adequate
fire protection.
____ 3. Plans, profiles and cross-sections for roadways, sidewalks and
storm drainage facilities.
____ 4. A soil erosion and sediment control plan for construction and for
permanent control.
____ 5. Other information or documents not indicated above, as specified
by the Board.
F. Plan Revision After Approval
1. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any
Final Plan after approval has been given by the Planning Board and
endorsed in writing on the Plan, unless the Plan is first resubmitted and the
Planning Board approves any modifications. In the event that a final plan is
recorded without complying with this requirement, the same shall be
considered null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have
the Plan stricken from the records of the Municipal Officers and a Registry
of Deeds.
G. Public Acceptance of Streets, Recreation Areas
1. The approval by the Planning Board of a Subdivision Plan shall not be
deemed to constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Municipality
of any street, easement, or other open space shown on such Plan.
2. When a park, playground or other recreation area shall have been shown
on the plan, the approval of the plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the
Municipality of such areas. The Planning Board shall require the plan to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board may also
15
require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the
Municipal Officers covering future deed and title, dedication, and provision
for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any
such recreation area.
Section VI. Enforcement
A. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease or
convey for consideration, offer or agreed to sell, lease, or convey for
consideration any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the
Board and recorded in the Androscoggin County Registry of Deeds.
B. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company
of any kind shall install services to any lot in a subdivision for which a final
plan has not been approved by the Board.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers
or agrees to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved
as required by this section are a nuisance and shall be punished in
accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4452.
Section VII. Performance Standards
In receiving applications for subdivision approval the Board shall consider
the following standards. In all instances the burden of proof shall be upon
the person proposing the subdivision.
A. Conformance with Other Laws, Regulations: The proposed subdivision
shall be in conformance with all pertinent local, state and federal ordinances,
statutes, laws and regulations. If the proposed subdivision meets the
definition of a subdivision as defined in the Site Location of Development
Act, Title 38, MRSA, Section 482, the subdivider must secure the approval
of the Board of Environmental Protection and the Board before any
construction activity may begin in the subdivision.
B. Conformance with Comprehensive Plan: Any proposed subdivision shall
be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan or policy statement as
adopted by the Town of Livermore Falls.
16
C. Buffer Strip: The Board may require such as natural vegetation, where
separation is desirable.
D. Easements: The Board may require 30 foot or wider easements for
sewerage, drainage or other utilities.
E. Impact on Community Services and Facilities: Any proposed subdivision
shall be reviewed by the Board with respect to its effect upon existing
community services and facilities including schools and recreational areas.
The Board shall advise the Selectmen and the developer regarding the
designation of space for future community facilities and may withhold
approval of the final plans pending such designation.
F. Land Not Suitable for Development: The total lot area of any lot shall
satisfy the minimum requirements of the Minimum Lot Size Ordinance of
Livermore Falls and the minimum shall be outside:
1. Freshwater wetlands, whether or not filled or drained;
2. Land created by diverting a watercourse; and
3. Land created on filled and drained "great ponds".
G. Subdivision Names
The name of the proposed subdivision shall not duplicate or to close
approximate the name of any other subdivision within the municipality.
H. Open Space Provisions
1. The Board may require that a proposed subdivision design include a
landscape plan that will show the preservation of existing trees and
vegetation, graded contours, streams and the preservation of scenic, historic
or environmentally desirable areas.
2. The Board may require that a subdivider reserve an area of land as open
space and/or recreational area for use by property owners in the subdivision.
a. If such an area is reserved, the final plan shall provide how title to the
reserve land shall be held and how costs of development, maintenance and
taxes shall be met.
17
b. Included in the instrument of conveyance to each property owner of the
subdivision shall be a statement of:
i. The manner of providing for the cost of development and
maintenance and for property taxes of the reserved land.
ii. If appropriate, the individual property owners pro-rata share of
development cost, maintenance cost and property taxes of the
reserved lands.
c. Land designated for public use shall not be subdivided for any other
purpose. This prohibition does not apply to land areas designated for later
development if the subdivision plan includes provision for development in
discreet stages.
d. Any area designated for common use shall be so arranged that each
property owner has access to it.
I. Lots
1. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision
and for the type of development and use contemplated. In all instances, lot
size, width, and depth shall conform with the Livermore Falls Minimum Lot
Size Ordinance and Shoreland Zoning Ordinance and as hereafter amended.
The minimum building setback lines shall be determined with due regard to
the recommended minimum of 25-foot setback for all street rights-of-way.
2. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking facilities
required by the type of use and development contemplated.
3. Where a tract is subdivided into lots substantially larger than the
minimum size required in the Minimum Lot Size Ordinance, the Board may
require that streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision in
accordance with the requirements contained in these standards.
4. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
18
5. The Board may request the subdivider to make provisions in the
subdivision plan to allow for each lot to have access to direct sunlight for
solar energy systems.
J. Lot Access
Any proposed subdivision shall be so designed that every lot has frontage on
a public or dedicated street.
K. Easements for Natural Drainage Ways
Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will assure
that no flooding occurs and all stormwater can be disposed of properly.
Such easement or right-of-way shall be not less than 30 feet in width.
L. Mobile Home Parks
Mobile home parks and expansions of existing mobile home parks shall
conform to the following standards:
1. Lot Size, Width and Density
a. All lots will be designated on a mobile home park plan.
b. Lots served by public sewer shall have a minimum lot area of 6500
square feet. The lots will have a minimum lot width of 50 ft.
c. Lots served by individual subsurface sewage disposal systems will
have a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and minimum lot
width of 100 ft.
d. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal system
will have a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet and minimum lot
width of 75 ft.
19
e. The overall density of a mobile home park served by a central
subsurface sewage disposal system shall be no greater than one unit
per 20,000 square feet of total park area.
f. Where lots front on a curved right-of-way or area served by a
driveway, the frontage requirement shall be measured in a straight
line perpendicular to the setback line.
g. Lots within a shoreland zoning area as defined in the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance shall meet the lot area, lot width, setback and shore
frontage requirements for that district.
h. The overall area of the mobile home park shall be the combined
area of the mobile home lots plus:
1. The area required for road rights-of-way,
2. The area required for buffer strips, if any,
3. The area required for open space, and
4. The area within the municipality's shoreland setback.
2. Lot Setbacks
Mobile homes in a mobile home park, adjacent to a public road, shall be set
back from the road a distance equal to the setback requirements for other
residential developments.
3. Open Space Requirements
The Board may require that within mobile home parks on a public sewer an
area of land be reserved as open space and/or recreational area for use by all
residents of the park. This requirement will be in accordance with
provisions relating to other residential developments. No more than 10
percent of the total area devoted to individual lots shall be set aside for open
space and/or recreation.
4. Buffer Strips
The Board may require a buffer strip to 50 ft. in width, such as natural
vegetation, where separation is desirable. The width of the buffer strip must
20
comply with the requirements of Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4358,
Regulation of Manufactured Housing.
5. Parking Requirements
For each mobile home lot, there shall be provided and maintained at least
two off-street parking spaces. Each parking space shall contain a minimum
area of 200 square feet with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 20 feet.
This requirement may be waived if an equivalent number of spaces is
provided by a parking lane.
In addition to occupant parking, off-street guest and service parking shall be
provided within the boundaries of the park at a ratio of one space for each
four mobile home lots. This requirement shall be waived if the parking lane
provides an equivalent number of spaces.
6. Road Standards
The main entrance of the mobile home park shall be from a state, state aid or
town road. All mobile home park lots shall abut on a roadway designed in
accordance with the Town of Livermore Falls Streets and Ways Ordinance
(see Section XIII, Privately Owned Roads - Mobile Home Parks). Parks
generating more than 500 vehicle trips per day will require a traffic impact
analysis by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine.
7. Street Lights
Mobile Home Park Street shall be illuminated by street lighting installed at
regular intervals of 300 +-feet. These lights shall be provided and
maintained by the mobile home park owner.
8. Ground Water
For mobile home parks not served by public sewer, an assessment of the
impacts of park development on ground water quality shall be submitted
prior to final approval of the park. The assessment shall be prepared by a
certified geologist or registered professional engineer.
9. Utility Requirements
21
All mobile home parks shall provide permanent electrical, water and sewage
disposal connections to each mobile home in accordance with applicable
state and local rules and regulations.
a. An adequate and potable supply of water, with a minimum of 30
pounds per square inch pressure at all times, shall be provided for
each mobile home space or lot. The water source shall be capable of
producing 300 gallons of potable water per mobile home lot per day.
b. All mobile homes in a mobile home park shall be connected to the
municipal sewer system or a centralized private system by means of
an approved system of collector and interceptor sewer lines.
c. Where municipal sewer or centralized private sewer system is not
used, an approved septic sewage disposal system shall be provided
for each lot in a mobile home park.
10. Refuse
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall
be so handled or managed by the permittee as to create no health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or area pollution.
One refuse can with a tight fitting cover for each occupied mobile home lot
or space shall be furnished by the mobile home owner.
12. Aesthetics
a. Skirting. An underskirt of a substantial material must be installed within
90 days from installation of mobile homes.
b. Storage. At least 300 cubic feet of enclosed tenant storage facilities shall
be conveniently provided on or near each mobile home lot for the storage of
materials and equipment.
13. Records
Each committee shall keep a written record, subject to inspection at any
reasonable time by a duly authorized Officer of the Town of Livermore
Falls, which shall contain the date of arrival, the name, make, year, model,
serial number (where applicable) and length of mobile home, and also the
22
names of the occupants thereof. A complete list of the above shall be
furnished to the assessor's office on April 1st of each year.
14. Certification of Payment of Sales Tax
No municipality may allow the construction or location of any new
manufactured housing within the municipality by any person other than a
dealer licensed by the state with a sales tax certificate, without:
a. A bill of sale indicating the name, address, dealer registration number and
sales tax certificate number of the person who sold or provided the
manufactured housing to the buyer locationing the housing in the
municipality; or
b. If no such bill of sale is presented, evidence of certification of payment of
the sales tax in accordance with Title 36, Section 1760, Subsection 40 and
Title 36, Section 1952-B.
The permit is deemed to be not approve or valid until payment of the sales
tax has been certified.
Section VII. Blocks
A. The length of blocks shall not exceed 1,400 ft. or be less than 400 ft. and
the width sufficient to provide for two tiers of lots, but irregularly shaped
lots indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be
acceptable when properly designed and provision made for maintenance of
interior parks.
Section IX. Design Standards
a. Monuments
The subdivider shall install two concrete or stone monuments at least 36
inches in length and 4 inches square with a suitable center point at each
street intersection on the right-of-way line, and iron pan monument 5/8
inches in diameter and 36 inches long, at all points on boundary lines of lots
where there is a change in direction and at all corner lots.
B. Street Names
23
Streets which joined or are in alignment with streets of abutting or
neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of the streets shall
not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets
within the municipality and shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
C. Streets
1. In accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the Municipality and for
the purposes of the standards, streets are classified by function as follows:
a. Major Streets: The term "major streets" includes arterial streets
which serve primarily as major traffic ways for travel between and
through towns; and collector streets, which serve as feeders to arterial
streets, as collectors of traffic from minor streets and for circulation
and access in commercial and industrial areas.
b. Minor Streets: Local streets which are used primarily for access
to abutting residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
C. Layout
1. Proposed streets shall conform, as far as practical, to such
Comprehensive Plan and to the Major Street Plan as may have been adopted
prior to the submission of a Preliminary Plan.
2. All streets in the subdivision shall be so designed that, in the opinion of
the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel while discouraging
movement of through traffic.
3. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall be considered in relation to existing or planned streets, to
topographical conditions to public convenience and safety, and their proper
relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Grades
of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography
4. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial
street, the Board may require marginal access street (parallel to arterial street
providing access to adjacent lots), reverse frontage (that is, frontage on the
street other than the existing or proposed arterial street) with screen planting
24
contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, or such
other treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
5. Entrances onto existing or proposed collector streets shall not exceed a
frequency of one per 200 feet of street frontage. Entrances onto existing or
proposed arterial street shall not exceed a frequency of one per 500 feet of
street frontage.
D. Design and Construction Standards
All streets in a subdivision shall be designed and constructed to meet the
standards of the Town of Livermore Falls Ordinance for the Acceptance of
Streets and Ways and as hereafter amended, for streets according to their
classification as determined by the Board. The Livermore Falls Road
Commissioner or Engineer shall oversee the construction of all streets.
1. Intersections of streets shall be at angles as close to 90 degrees as
possible and in no case shall two streets intersect at an angle smaller than 60
degrees. To this end, where one street approaches another between 60 - 90
degrees, the former street shall be curved approaching the intersection.
2. Street intersections and curves shall be so designed as to permit adequate
visibility for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. A portion of any corner
lot which is necessary to allow 25 foot sight lines between intersecting
streets shall be cleared of all growth (except isolated trees) and obstructions
above the level three feet higher than the center line of the street. If directed,
ground shall be excavated to achieve visibility.
3. Dead and or cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
turn-around having a property line radius of at least 60 feet with an outside
pavement radius of at least 40 feet.
4. Jogs: Streets with center lines offset less than 125 feet shall not be
permitted.
5. All streets shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to provide
for the removal of storm water to prevent flooding of the pavement and
erosion of adjacent surfaces.
25
6. Curb radii at street intersections of 90 degrees or greater shall be at least
25 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a
radius of at least 30 feet shall be required.
E. Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider where the
subdivision abuts or fronts onto a major street at such locations as the Board
may deem necessary.
F. Water Supply
1. Where a public water main is within 1500 feet of the subdivision at its
nearest point, the subdivider shall connect with such water main with a line
meeting the specifications of the Livermore Falls Water District.
2. Where a public water line is not reasonably accessible as defined by the
said Water District, the subdivider shall provide a private water supply
acceptable to the Town Health Officer.
G. Sewage Disposal
1. Where a public sanitary sewer line is within 1,500 ft. of the subdivision at
its nearest point, the subdivider our shall connect with such sanitary sewer
lines meeting the specifications of the Sewer District.
2. Where public sewer is not reasonably accessible as determined by the
Board, the subdivider shall provide proof of soils suitable for subsurface
wastewater sewage disposal on each lot in accordance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
H. Storm Drainage
Adequate means of storm drainage shall be provided by the subdivider, and
such drainage shall be kept separate from any sanitary sewer line.
Section X. Guarantee, Security or Performance Bond
A. The Board may require as a condition of approval that the subdivider file
with the Board at the time of approval and prior to any construction a
26
performance guarantee in an amount sufficient to defray all expenses of the
proposed improvements including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
utilities, storm drains, parks, and publicly held open spaces. This may be
tendered in form of a certified check payable to the Municipality, a savings
account or certificate of deposit assigned to the Municipality or a faithful
performance bond running to the Municipality and issued by a surety
company acceptable to the Municipality. The conditions and amount of
such a security bond shall be determined by the Board of the Municipality
with the advice of various Municipal Officers concerned. The amount shall
be sufficient to ensure the furnishing, installing, connecting and completing
all improvements specified on the approved plan within two years of the
date of the certified check or performance bond. If the subdivision is to be
completed in phases, the Board may require a performance guarantee for
each phase rather than a single guarantee for the entire subdivision provided
each phase conforms to the two-year completion requirement of this section.
B. The Board may recommend a maximum extension of 12 months to the
guaranteed performance. When the subdivider can demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Board and other interested officials or agencies, good
cause for such extension. Such recommendation for extension shall be
referred to the Board of Selectmen for official action .
C. The Board may, at its discretion, waive the requirement of a guarantee,
security or performance bond and recommend a properly executed
conditional agreement with the Municipality. Such agreement, if executed
with the Municipality, shall be endorsed in writing and shall provide that no
lot in such subdivision is sold and no permit shall be issued for construction
of any building on any lot on any street in such subdivision until all agreed
upon improvements have been.
Section XI. Inspection of Required Improvements
A. At least 10 days prior to commencing construction of improvements or
alteration of roads and utilities, the subdivider shall notify the Town
Manager in writing of the time when he proposes to commence construction
of such improvements so that the Municipal Officers can cause inspection to
be made to assure that all municipal specifications and requirements shall be
met during the construction of required improvements and utilities required
by the Board.
27
B. If the Municipal Building Inspector or engineer or appointed engineer
shall find, upon inspection of the improvements performed before expiration
date of the guarantee where security arrangement or performance bond
required by Section X that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with plans and specifications filed by the
subdivider, he shall so report to the Municipal Officers, Building Inspector
and Board. The Municipal Officers shall then notify the subdivider and if
necessary, the bonding company, but take all necessary steps to preserve the
Municipalities rights under the guarantee, security or bond. No plan shall be
approved by the board as long as the subdivider is in default on a previously
approved plan.
C. If at any time before or during the construction of the required
improvements it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Municipal
Building Inspector or engineer or appointed engineer that unforeseen
conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design
of such required improvements the Municipal Building Inspector or engineer
or appointed engineer may, upon approval of the Board, authorize
modifications provided these modifications are within the spirit and intent of
the Board's approval and do not extend to the waiver or substantial alteration
of the function of any improvements required by the Board. The Municipal
Engineer or appointed engineer shall issue any authorization under this
section in writing and shall transmit a copy of such authorization to the
Board at its next regular meeting.
D. The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide
for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of said
improvements by the Town.
Section XII. Release of Guarantee, Security or Performance Bond
Before a subdivider may be released from any obligation required by his
guarantee of performance, the Board will require certification from the
municipal engineer or appointed engineer and whatever other agencies and
departments that may be involved, to the effect that all improvements have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with all applicable standards,
state and local codes and ordinances.
Section XIII. Waivers
28
A. Where the Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships
result from strict compliance with the standards or where there are special
circumstances of a particular Plan, it may very these standards so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secure; provided that
such variations will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Comprehensive Plan or Minimum Lot Size Ordinance.
D. Where the Board finds that, due to special circumstances of a particular
Plan, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite in the
interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, or is inappropriate
because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in
proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such requirements,
subject to appropriate conditions.
C. In granting variances and modifications, the Board shall require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the
requirements to varied or modified.
Section XIV. Validity, Effective Date and Conflict of Ordinance
A. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decisions shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of this ordinance, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby declared to be severable.
B. This ordinance shall take effect and be enforced from and after the date
of its official adoption by the governing body.
C. This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or any way impair or remove the
necessity compliance with any other rule, regulation, by-law, permit or
provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a higher standard for the
promotion and protection of health and safety, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
Section XV. Amendments
This ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Town Meeting.
Amendments may be initiated by majority vote of the Planning Board or by
request of the Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board or on petition of
29
10% of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in the town. The
Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.
Section XVI. Appeals
An appeal may be taken within thirty (30) days from the Board's final
decision in the Preliminary Plan or Final Plan by any party to Superior Court
in accordance with Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Section XVII. Repeal of Existing
Enactment of this ordinance shall constitute a repeal of the Ordinance
entitled Subdivision Regulations, Town of Livermore Falls and Mobile
Home Park Ordinance of the Town of Livermore Falls as amended.
Adopted March9, 1981
Amended June 11, 1997
1
2
WASTE WATER ORDINANCE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
An ordinance regulating the use of public and private sewers and drains,
private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building
sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system;
and providing penalties for violations thereof in the Town of Livermore
Falls.
ARTICLE I. General
Section 1 – Scope
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to and govern sanitary
facilities, sewers and wastewater treatment; the excavation, construction,
installation, usage, maintenance, extension, alteration, repair, or removal of
any building sewer, building drain, or sanitary sewer systems: the type of
wastewater prohibited from public sewers and storm drainage systems;
permitted and prohibited concentrations and strengths of wastewater; and
situations in which use of a private sewage disposal system is permissible.
The facilities affirm that these facilities are regulated by Part Two of the
State of Maine Plumbing Code and that the said code is enforced by the
Town. This ordinance does not impose any additional regulations on non
public sewer systems, except as they relate to connecting such systems to the
public sewer.
Section 2. – Intent and Purpose
It shall be the intent and purpose of this ordinance to reduce to the
extent practicable, existing pollution and to prevent further pollution caused
by inadequate wastewater disposal, and to accomplish the necessary local
legislation to meet the requirements of the State of Maine and the Federal
Government. All this is furtherance of the health, welfare, comfort and
convenience of the inhabitants of the Town.
Section 3. Enforcing Officer
The Superintendent of Sewers as appointed by the Board of Selectmen
shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
3
Section 4. – Protection from Damage
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s)
violating this provision may be subject to arrest under the charge of criminal
mischief as set forth in Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 17-A,
Chapter 33, Subsection 806.
ARTICLE II – Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms in this ordinance shall be as follows:
Section 1. “Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)”means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
Section 2. “Building” shall mean a structure built, erected and framed of
component structural parts designated for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or
support of persons or property of any kind.
Section 3. “Building Drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer. The building drain extends eight (8) feet outside the inner
face of the building wall.
Section 4. “Building Sewer” shall mean the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house
connection.
Section 5. “Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD)” shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of matter under standard
laboratory procedure, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Section 6. “DEP” shall mean State of Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
4
Section 7. “Domestic Wastes” shall mean liquid wastes and liquid-borne
wastes discharged from sanitary convenience such as toilets, washrooms,
urinals, sinks, showers, drinking fountains, home laundry rooms, kitchens
and floor drains free of industrial waste or toxic materials.
Section 8. “Easement” shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific
use of land owned by others.
Section 9. “EPA” shall mean United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
Section 10. “Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG)” shall mean material in a
physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by
treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be
considered free of FOG if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does
not interfere with the wastewater facilities.
Section 11. “Force Main” shall mean any sanitary sewer carrying
wastewater under pressure as in a pump discharge or inverted siphon.
Section 12. “Garbage” shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food.
Section 13. “Hook-up Amount” shall mean amount established by the
Selectmen to be paid upon submission of the application for the first time
physical connection to Town Sewer.
Section 14. “Industrial Wastes” shall mean the wastewater from industrial
processes, trade or business, or any source other than those defined in
“Domestic Wastes”.
Section 15. “Natural Outlet” shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers
into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
groundwater.
Section 16. “Owner” shall mean the owner of record according to the
Town’s Tax Assessor files.
5
Section 17. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation, municipal or quasi-municipal agency, state agency,
federal agency or other legal entity.
Section 18. “Property Line” shall mean curb line if the building sewer is to
connect with the public sewer in a public street. “Property Line” shall mean
the edge of a sewer right-of-way or easement in those instances where the
building sewers connect to the public sewer in a right-of-way or easement.
Section 19. “pH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen
ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH
value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7.
Section 20. “Pollutant” shall mean to include but is not limited to dredged
spoil, solid waste, junk, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or
radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial, municipal,
domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
Section 21. “Private Wastewater Disposal System or Sewer” shall mean
non-public sewage disposal facilities as permitted under the State of Maine
Plumbing Code, Part II, Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Regulations or
non-public wastewater facilities as licensed by the DEP.
Section 22. “Properly Shredded Garbage” shall mean wastes from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of food that have been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
10mm (0.39 inch) in any dimension.
Section 23. “Public Sewer” shall mean a common sewer owned, operated
and maintained by the Town of Livermore Falls Sewer Department.
Section 24. “Readiness to Serve Fee” shall mean an annual fee assessed to a
property which abuts a public sewer having available to it a connection stub.
Section 25. “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
6
plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
Section 26. “Septage” shall mean the water, sludge, grit and all other solid
and liquid substances collecting in the septic tanks, cesspools and other
similar devices.
Section 27. “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.
Section 28. “Sewer User” shall mean the person owning a building
connected to or required to be connected to the public sewer.
Section 29. “Shall” is mandatory; “May” is permissive.
Section 30. “Slug” shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which
in concentration of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five
(5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during
normal operation and/or adversely affects the public sewer system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works.
Section 31. “Storm Drain” shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying
groundwater, surface water or unpolluted water from any source.
Section 32. “Superintendent” shall mean the Superintendent of Sewers as
appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
Section 33. “Suspended Solids (SS)” shall mean total suspended matter that
either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or
other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
“Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater”
published by the American Public Health Association.
Section 34. “Town” shall mean Town of Livermore Falls, Maine and its
elected and appointed officials acting in authorized manner.
Section 35. “Unit” shall mean 1.) One unit is a single family home, three
bedrooms, no more than 2 baths. 2.) Apartment houses are one Unit per
living quarters, or per electrical meter. 3.) Commercial units will be
7
determined by a site visit, actual flow records, and by comparison to other
similar sites.
Section 36. “Unpolluted Water” is water of quality equal to or better than
the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Section 37. “Wastewater” shall mean the spent water of a community.
From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and
industrial establishments together with such ground, surface, and storm
waters as may be present.
Section 38. “Wastewater Treatment Works” shall mean an arrangement of
devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge.
Section 39. “Wastewater Facilities” shall mean pipes, structures, equipment,
and processes required to collect, pump, carry away and treat domestic and
industrial wastes and to dispose of the effluent and by-products.
Section 40. “Water Course” shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the
passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
ARTICLE III – Use of Public Sewers Required
Section 1. Unlawful Disposal or Discharge
Except as provided under the Rules of the Maine Department of
Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, known as The State
Plumbing Code, Part II and except in accordance with provisions for
licensing by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection for the
discharge of suitably treated wastes, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of polluted water, wastewater, or human excrement, or
to discharge such excrement or water to any natural outlet within the Town,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town.
8
Section 2. Connection to Public Sewer Required
The owners of any building used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or otherwise contains plumbing systems for conveying water
borne waste, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, road, or
right-of-way in which there is now located or planned to be located a public
sanitary sewer, excluding force mains, is hereby required to connect, at the
owner’s expense, any said plumbing facilities directly with the public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance within 120 days after
date of notice by the Superintendent to do so.
The building owner may request in writing to the Superintendent,
deferral of this connection requirement on the basis of undue hardship if the
building has as existing properly operating private wastewater disposal
system, in which case the owner shall demonstrate the nature and degree of
hardship.
If the building owner can provide to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent that a suitable private wastewater disposal system is
currently in use, the owner shall be exempt from connection to the public
sewer but shall be assessed a readiness to service fee.
During construction of a public sewer, owners of unimproved lots and
land abutting such sewer, have the option of having a service stub brought to
the edge of the roadway at Town expense, (except as provided in Article IX)
in which case the property owner will be assessed the readiness to service
fee.
ARTICLE IV. Private Wastewater Disposal Systems
Section 1. Public Sewer Not Available
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article III, Section 2, the building shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article and the State of
Maine Plumbing Code, Part II, Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Regulations
or to non-public wastewater facilities licensed by the DEP.
9
Section 2. Permit Required
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system or nonpublic wastewater facilities licensed by the DEP, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the plumbing inspector.
The application for a subsurface wastewater disposal permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the Division of Health Services, which the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are
deemed necessary by the plumbing inspector. A permit and inspection fee
as established by the Board of Selectmen shall be paid to the plumbing
inspector at the time the application is filed.
A permit for a private waste water disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
plumbing inspector. The plumbing inspector shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction and in any event the applicant for the
permit shall notify the plumbing inspector when the work is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered. Inspection
shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the plumbing
inspector.
Section 3. State Compliance
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private waste water
disposal system shall comply with the State of Maine Plumbing Code, Part
II, Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Regulations and minimum lot size
(Maine Revised Statutes Annotated) Title 12, Chapter 423-a or as provided
and licensed by the DEP as may be amended. No private wastewater
disposal system shall be permitted to discharge to any outlet unless approved
and licensed by the DEP.
Section 4. Public Sewer Available
At such time as a building with an existing private waste water
disposal system is connected to the public sewer as provided in Article III,
Section 2, any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater
disposal facilities shall no longer be used and shall be cleaned of sludge, and
filled with clean bankrun gravel or completely removed within 30 days from
connection.
10
Section 5. Private System Operation
The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
Town. The contents from private wastewater disposal systems shall not be
discharged to the public sewer
Section 6. Additional Requirements
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Town's Health
Officer, Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer.
ARTICLE V. Building Sewers and Connections
Section 1. Permit Required
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged
into the system shall notify the Superintendent at least 45 days prior to the
proposed change or connection, and shall comply with Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated, Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, Subsection 361 as
determined by the Superintendent.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 1.) for
residential and commercial service, and 2.) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A
permit for both residential and industrial services as established by the Board
of Selectmen for the appropriate class shall be paid to the Town at the time
the application is filed.
11
Section 2. Costs Borne by Owner
All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner to the
property line easement or right-of-way. The owner shall indemnify the
Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
Section 3. Separate Building Sewer Required
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building requiring a sewer connection; except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
a driveway, and the building sewer from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Section 4. Old Building Sewers
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found to meet all requirements of this ordinance and
such use is authorized by the Superintendent
Section 5. Methods of Construction
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the State of Maine Plumbing Code and other applicable
rules and regulations to the Town.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the wye branch or its equivalent. When connecting a 4 inch
diameter building sewer to any public sewer 8 inches in diameter or less, and
when connecting a 6 inch diameter building sewer to any public sewer 12
inches in diameter or less, a wye branch must be installed in a location
specified by the Superintendent. Where the public sewer has greater than
the maximum diameter for installation of a wye branch as specified above or
no properly located wye branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the
12
upper quadrant of the public sewer to receive the building sewer with entry
to be made in the downstream direction at an angle of approximately 45
degrees, again in a location specified by the Superintendent. A properly
sized wye saddle shall be inserted into the hole so as not to extend past the
inner surface of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and
the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete or as
otherwise approved. Special fittings may be used for the connection only
when approved by the Superintendent.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drainage is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer. If determined by the
Superintendent that a clogged street sewer could cause sewage backflow in
the service line and result in damage to the building and/or contents, the
Superintendent recommends the installation of a backflow preventer valve at
the owner's expense.
Section 6. Building Sewer Inspection
The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect all building sewers
installed pursuant to the Article at any stage of construction and in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when the
work is ready for inspection and before any underground portions are
covered. A timely inspection shall be made by the Superintendent.
No building sewer installation constructed pursuant to the Article can
be approved if such sewer is covered prior to inspection. The owner will be
held in violation of this Section if the Superintendent has not inspected and
approved the installation.
Section 7. Connection by Town
If an existing entrance or connection to the public sewer is not
available or a new building sewer connection, the owner shall notify the
Superintendent two business days before the expected time of connection.
All such connections at the public sewer shall be made by the Town or its
agent at the owner's expense. The above costs are in addition to the "hookup
amount" as established by the Selectmen.
13
Section 8. Storm Drain Connection Prohibited
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sewer unless such connection is approved
by the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
Section 9. Building Demolition
In the case of buildings being removed or demolished, the building
sewer shall be capped at the street to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
Section 10. Street and Public Right-of-way
All street openings, or installations in a public right-of-way shall be
performed in strict accordance with Town regulations and approved by the
Director of Public Works.
Section 11. Connection to Force Main Prohibited
No person shall make connection of a building sewer or pipe of any
type to force main or inverted siphon which is part of the public sewer
system.
ARTICLE VI. Use of Public Sewers
Section 1. Stormwater
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or polluted industrial
process waters to any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted
drainage shall be discharged to storm drains, or to natural outlets approved
by the Superintendent. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process water
may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet; and the discharge shall comply with
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 38, Chapter 3, Subsection 413.
14
Section 2. Prohibited Wastes
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
B. Any waters or pollutants containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, including but not limited
to those substances as defined in standards issued from time to time by EPA
and DEP;
C. Any water or pollutants having a ph lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater facilities;
D. Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size as
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited
to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, disposable diapers, wood, unground garbage, seafood
shells, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entails, and paper or
plastic dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage
grinders;
E. Any waters of pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (DOB,
etc), which released in quantities of flow or concentrations or both constitute
a "slug" as defined herein;
F. Any heated waters or pollutants in amounts which will inhibit or interfere
with biological activity in the wastewater treatment works but in no case
heated waters or pollutants in such quantities that the temperature at the
wastewater treatment works influent exceeds 40 degrees centigrade ( 86
degrees Fahrenheit).
15
Section 3. Limited Wastes
The following describes substances, materials, waters, or pollutants
shall be limited in discharge to the public sewer to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
process, or equipment, will not have an adverse affect on the receiving
stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower than the
limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more
severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. The
limitations or restrictions of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Superintendent are
as follows:
A. Wastewater having a temperature higher than 60 degrees Centigrade
(140 degrees Fahrenheit);
B. Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of petroleum oil, no
biodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin;
C. Wastewater containing fats, oils and grease, whether emulsified or not, in
excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0
and 65 degrees Centigrade);
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may
be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food, in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on
the premises, or one served by caterers;
E. Wastewater containing any hexavalent chromium, aluminum, iron, tin,
fluorides, arsenic, phenols, chlorides, sulfates, or mercury: or the following
metals in concentrations exceeding those listed:
16
MAXIMUM FOR AVERAGE OF DAILY
ANY ONE DAY VALUES FOR 30
METAL (MG/l) CONSECUTIVE DAYS
CADMIUM .064 .016
COPPER 2.87 0.80
LEAD 3.72 1.09
NICKEL 3.51 1.26
SILVER 0.44 .013
ZINC 2.64 0.80
F. Wastewater containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent;
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes which exceed limits established by
applicable state or federal regulations or standards;
H. Wastewater containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable
to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters;
I. Wastewater which, by interaction with other water or pollutants in the
public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which
interfere with the public sewer system, or create a condition deleterious to
the wastewater facilities;
J. Any wastes having color not removable by the treatment works;
K. Any wastes having average BOD in excess of 40 mg/l;
L. Any wastes having average COD in excess of 600 mg/l;
M. Any wastes having average SS in excess of 400 mg/l;
N. Any wastes having dissolved solids in such quantity and character as
compatible with the wastewater treatment works.
17
Section 4. Town Options for Prohibited Wastes
If any waters or pollutants are discharge, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 2 or 3 or this Article, and
which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect
upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
A. Reject the waters of pollutants;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers and/or;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or;
D. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes.
Section 5. Pretreatment or Flow Equalization
If the Superintendent requires or permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the pretreatment
or equalization plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, laws and municipal discharge permit. All such
pretreatment or flow equalization facilities shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner and at his expense.
Section 6. Grease and Sand Traps
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified
in Section 3 C, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful
ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located outdoors as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
18
interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials, not
performed by the owner must be performed by currently licensed waste
disposal firms.
Section 7. Industrial Waste Permit Required
All discharges of industrial wastewater are required to obtain a permit
from the Superintendent. All permits and applications for permits shall be in
a form determined by the Superintendent and shall include an application fee
established by the Board of Selectmen. In cases where the Town incurs
administrative or outside professional costs in preparing such applications,
such costs shall be charged directly to the applicant. Each permit shall have
an annual expiration date. Such permit shall require compliance with all
federal and state pretreatment standards and may include other requirements
imposed by the Superintendent.
Section 8. Industrial Waste Monitoring
A. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial pollutants shall install a
suitable structure together with such necessary meters, and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such located and constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Superintendent. The structure shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
B. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
pollutants to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of " Standard Methods For The
Examination of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the structure as required in
paragraph A of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at the upstream
and downstream manholes in the public sewer nearest to the point at which
the building sewer is connected.
19
C. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent may reasonably require,
including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records, and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent. Such records shall be retained by the owner for a minimum
of three years and made available upon request by the Superintendent.
D. All sampling and testing shall be carried out by the qualified person at
the owner's expense. The method and location of sampling and quality of
testing is subject to approval of the Superintendent. Any users of public
sewers discharging or causing to be discharged into such public sewers any
industrial wastes shall provide the Superintendent with samples, when
requested.
Section 9. EPA Pretreatment Regulations
The Municipality shall develop and the Superintendent shall enforce
pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution that are
discharged or proposed to be discharged into the municipality-owned
wastewater treatment facilities as set forth in Title 40, Chapter 1, Part 128
and Part 403 of the Final Rules of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
Section 10. Exclusion of Industrial Waste
The Superintendent, with approval of the Town Manager, shall have
authority to temporarily exclude any industrial waste, whether pretreated or
not, from the municipal sewers whenever, in his or her opinion, such action
is necessary for the purpose of determining the effects of such wastes upon
the public sewers or wastewater facilities. The Superintendent shall notify
the affected user prior to taking such actions, and shall afford the user a
reasonable time for response. The Superintendent shall have the authority to
take actions necessary to halt the discharge of pollutants from any user to the
treatment works which reasonably appears to present an imminent
endangerment to the wastewater facilities or to the health or welfare of
persons. Such actions shall be preceded by notification, oral or written, to
the user.
20
Section 11. Additional Information Required
The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this ordinance. These
requirements may include:
A. Wastewater discharge rates and volumes (average, minimum, peak) over
a specified time period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
C. Information on raw materials, processes, and projects affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specified liquids, sludge, oil, solvent, or
other materials important to sewer use control.
E. An engineering drawing by a registered engineer on sewers of the user's
property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location and details of
wastewater pretreatment facilities.
F. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through
spills to the public sewer.
Section 12. Special Arrangements
No statement contained in the Article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial
sewer user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the
industrial sewer user; provided that such agreements do not contravene any
requirements of existing federal or state laws and/or regulations promulgated
there under, and are compatible with any user charge system in effect.
ARTICLE VII. Powers and Authority of Superintendent
Section 1. Right of Entry
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of
the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
21
enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewer system in
accordance with the provision of this ordinance.
Section 2. Process Information
The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees or agents are
authorized to obtain information concerning processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewer system. The
user may request that such information be kept confidential. The user must
establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question
might result in an advantage to competitors.
Section 3. Safety on Private Property
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Article VII, Section 1, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees
or agents of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the owner and the owner shall be held harmless for
the injury or death to the Superintendent, employees or agents. The Town
shall indemnify the owner against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions.
Section 4. Easement and Right of Way Entry
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of
the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the Town of Livermore Falls holds
duly negotiated easement or right of way for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance
of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, or right of way, shall
be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement or
right of way pertaining to the private property involved.
ARTICLE VII. Penalties
Section 1. Written Notice of Violation
22
Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance,
except Article I, Section 4 and Article VI, Section 10 shall be served by the
Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
Section 2. Fines
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Article VIII, Section 1, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount of not less than $100 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Section 3. Liability for Public Expense
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
become liable to the town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by
the Town of Livermore Falls. By reason of such offense including:
A. Any physical impairment of the wastewater facilities.
B. Any fines which the Town of Livermore Falls may be required to pay as
a result of such an offense.
Section 4. Injunctive Relief
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the Town of
Livermore Falls may institute any appropriate action including injunction or
other proceedings to prevent, restrain or abate violations hereof.
ARTICLE IX. Sewer Extensions
Section 1. Public sewer extensions may be constructed by the Town under
public contract if, in the opinion of the Selectmen, the number of properties
to be served by such extensions warrants its cost. Under this arrangement
the property owner shall pay for and install the building sewer from the
public sewer to his residence or place of business in accordance with the
23
requirements of Article IV. Property owners may propose sewer extensions
within the Town by drafting a written petition signed by a majority of the
benefiting property owners, and filing with the Selectmen. The cost of such
extensions may be assessed to the benefited property owners in any manner
determined by the Selectmen.
Section 2. If the town does not elect to construct a sewer extension under
public contract, the property owner, builder, or developer may construct the
necessary sewer extension, if such extension is approved by the Selectmen
in accordance with the requirements of Section 3. They must pay for the
entire installation, including all expenses incidental thereto. Each building
sewer must be installed and inspected as previously required and the
inspection fees shall be paid therefore. Design of sewers shall be as
specified in Section 3 and 4. The installation of the sewer extension shall be
subject to periodic inspection by the Superintendent and the expenses for
this inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder or developer. The
Superintendent's decisions shall be final in matter of quality and methods of
construction. The sewer, as constructed, must pass the exfiltration test
required in Section 5 before it is to be used. The cost of sewer extension
thus made shall be absorbed by the developers or the property owners,
including all building sewers.
Section 3. All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and
maintained by the Town shall be properly designed in accordance with the
Recommended Standard for Sewage Works, as adapted by the Great Lakes-
Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers. Plans and
specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to and approval
obtained from the Superintendent before construction may proceed. The
design of sewers must anticipate and allow for flows from all possible future
extensions or developments within the immediate drainage area.
Section 4. Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following
provisions. Pipe material shall be PVC, minimum classification standards to
be SDR 35. No standard strength clay pipe nor non-reinforced concrete pipe
shall be used. Minimum internal pipe diameter shall be 8 inches. Joint
preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. Wye branch fittings shall be installed for connection to
buildings sewers in accordance with Article V Section V. Pipe shall be
firmly and evenly bedded on a minimum of 6 inches of screened gravel with
stone size not exceeding 1 inch.
24
Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at
intervals not exceeding 400 linear feet. The manholes shall be constructed
with a poured 3000 psi concrete base 8 inches thick, steel toweled concrete
or mortar bench walls and inverts, and precast four foot diameter concrete
manhole barrel sections with tapered top sections, as specified by ASTM C-
478. The manhole frame and cover shall be the standard design of the Town
and shall be set with no less than one two inch concrete riser underneath to
allow for later adjustment to elevation. All joints shall be sealed against
infiltration.
Section 5. All public sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final exfiltration
test before they will be approved and sewage flow accepted from them by
the Town. This test can either be conducted hydraulically or pneumatically.
The Hydraulic test consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a
head of at least 5 ft. above the top of the pipe or 5 ft. above the ground
water, whichever is higher, at the highest point of the pipe line under test,
and then measuring the loss of water from the line by the amount which
must be added to maintain at the original level. In this test, the line must
remain filled for least 24 hours prior to taking of measurements. Exfiltration
shall be measured by the drop of water level in a stand pipe with closed
bottom end or in one of the sewer manholes available for convenient
measuring. When a standpipe and plug arrangement is used in the upper
manhole of a line under test, there must be some positive method of
releasing entrapped air in the sewer prior to taking measurements. The
length of sewer shall in no event exceed 1,000 ft. for either type of test and,
in the case of sewers laid on a steep grade, may be limited by the maximum
allowable internal pressure on the pipe and joints at the lower end of the line.
The test period, wherein the measurements are taken, shall not be less than
two hours in either test and the maximum allowable rate of leakage shall not
exceed 100 gallons per mile of pipe per 24 hours per inch of nominal pipe
diameter. For purposes of determining this maximum allowable rate of
leakage, manholes shall be considered as a section of 48 inch diameter pipe
5 feet long, and the equivalent leakage of allowance shall be 4.5 gallons per
manhole per 24 hours.
The pneumatic test consists of blanking both ends of the pipe with air
locks and introducing air through a mechanism in one of the air lock units to
3.5 pounds per square inch pressure. With a known permeability of the pipe,
25
the only variable is the pipe diameter, and the minimum allowable time in
minutes for a 1.0 pound per square inch pressure drop is found by
multiplying the pipe diameter in inches by 0.472.
If leakage exceeds a specified amount by either test, the necessary
repairs or replacements required shall be made to permanently reduce the
leakage to within the specified limit.
Section 6. All extensions of public sewers constructed at the expense of the
property owner, builder, or developer, after approval and acceptance by the
Superintendent, shall become the property of the Town and shall thereafter
be maintained by the Town. Said sewers, after their acceptance by the
Town, shall be guaranteed against defects in materials or workmanship for
18 months. The guarantee shall be in a form provided for by the Town. At
the sole discretion of the Town, a completion bond or certified check may be
demanded as part of the guarantee.
Section 7. No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a
new dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the Town,
unless a suitable and approved method of waste disposal is proposed. All
new developments shall be provided with an approved system of sanitary
sewers.
Section 8. Pump Station Design
Sewer and pump station design shall be in accordance with the sewer
design specifications adopted by the Town. The Town of Livermore Falls
shall approve, prior to installation, all necessary instrumentation for all
pump stations. All pump stations shall be designed and constructed by the
requesting party(s), with the developer or the property owners requiring the
pump station paying all of the costs. Station to be adjacent to public right of
way and on land deeded to the Town.
Section 9. Building Permit Requirement
No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new
dwelling or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the Town, unless a
suitable and approved method of sewage disposal is proposed and approved
by the Town.
26
ARTICLE X. Sewer Fees
Sewer service charge rates shall be determined by the Selectmen on a
year-to-year basis and in general such charges will be determined on a rate
structure based on water consumption as well as a per unit charge assessed
to the property. The sewer service charge will be computed and billed at
regular intervals throughout each calendar year, as established by the
Selectmen.
Section 1. Readings
Sewer bills are based on first quarter readings received from the
Livermore Falls Water District. These readings are used for four quarters of
billing (April to January ). If a new reading is requested from a customer,
the Sewer Clerk must be notified prior to billing, copy of last water bill
supplied, and a $5 administrative request feet must be paid. (This request
will be done for the next two billings).
Section 2. Payment of Bills
Bills are due 60 days from billing date. Interest will be charged on
any unpaid balance after this time period. Lien process will be followed on
any unpaid bill. Liens will be placed against the property where service is
billed in accordance with all applicable State Statutes.
ARTICLE XI. Appeals
Section 1. First Notice to Superintendent
Any person aggrieved by a determination made under the provisions
of this ordinance, or any person questioning the amount of or the validity of
any charge or fee hereunder, shall first contact the Superintendent who may
make such adjustments as he deems appropriate within the limits of his
authorization in this ordinance.
Section 2. Appeal to the Board of Selectmen
Any person dissatisfied with the action of the Superintendent may
appeal in writing within 10 days to the Board of Selectmen, which shall
within 30 days hold a hearing on the appeal. The Board of Selectmen may
27
affirm or amend the Superintendent's action, and it may permit exceptions to
a variance from the specific provisions of this ordinance, including but not
limited to, a requirement for added water or sewerage flow metering and
reporting. All decisions determined by the Board of Selectmen will be
provided in writing and dated.
Section 3. Appeal to Superior Court
An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Board of
Selectmen to the Superior Courts as provided by the laws of the State of
Maine.
ARTICLE XII. Validity of Ordinance
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed. The validity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance
which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
ARTICLE XIII. Ordinance in Force
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and recording.
Adopted June 11, 2003

~ FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS, MAINE
ENACTED: <l11~t I ) lJ.,'-._ d-o 13
~te
EFFECTIVE: . ~11.•_ 1)--t'- j-JJl 3
te .
CERTIFIED BY: ~~'- _)! Jupyi
7 Signature
CERTIFIED BY: Sct-3A!.i G-. ~pie/
Print Name
TREASURER/TOWN CLERK
Title Affix Seal
IIII 60.3(d)
FLOODPLAIN J\ff..ANAGEMENT ORDINA!'~CE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
L PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT ................................................................................ 2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED ......................................................................................................... 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT .......................................................................................... 2
N. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE ...................................................................... 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................. 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ...................................................................................... 6
VII. CERTIFICATE OF COl\fPLIANCE ................................................................................. 10
VIII. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS ......................... 11
IX. APPEALS AND VARIANCES·········-·········································-···········-························ 11
X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES ............................................................................. 13
XI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILlTY ................................................................................. 14
XII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ................................................................... 14
XIII. DEFINrTIONS .................................................................................................................. 14
XIV. ABROGATION ................................................................................................................. 19
60.3(d)
I
Special Town Meeting held on July 22"d, 2013, @ 6:00 pm @the Livermore Falls Town Office.
Article #9: Amendment to the Ordinance titled" Floodplain Management Ordinance" amend
the map panel suffix from "D" to "E" under Article 1 of the ordinance and amend the wording
to read "Flood Insurance Rate Map, Androscoggin County, Maine the "Flood Insurance Study,
Androscoggin County, Maine." Article #9 Amendments were approved.
Town Clerk/Susan Sapiel
-c.. ·, ":: .-.. ''.·,=>'y "TTEST ~ ~ '
BY I ''k40'1{_ rjd ~tud
' CITYCLERK
TOWN OF LIVERMORE FALLS
.11 RTICLE I - PUF..POSE P...ND ESTA RL!SHMENT
Ce1iain areas of the Town ofLivennore Falls, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious
damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood ir1surance as authorized
by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine has chosen to become a participating comm1mity in the
National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Livermore Falls, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood
hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Livermore Falls has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce
foture flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38
MRSA, Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of Livermore Falls having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance
establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities
in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town ofLivennore Falls, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE for the Town of Livermore Falls, Androscoggin
County, Maine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood
Insurance Study- Androscoggin County, Maine" dated July 8, 2013 with accompanying "Flood Insurance
Rate Map" dated July 8, 2013 with panels: 027D, 031D, 032D, 033D, 034D, 041D, 042D, 044D, 055D,
065D, 107D, 126D, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled "Digital
Flood Insurance Rate Map, Androscoggin County," are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XJII), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This pennit shall be
in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town
of Livermore Falls, Maine.
ARTICLE III-APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Pennit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
2
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical
Datum (NA VD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
l. base flood at the proposed site of all uew or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study-Androscoggin County,
Maine" as described in Article I; or,
b. inZoneA:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265), including information obtained pursuant to
Article VI.K. and Vlil.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s ); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line
perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
3
1. a Floodproofirig Certificate (FE~A:A Form 81-65), to verif; t.1-iat the floodproofing methods for
any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Article ill.H.4.; Article
VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation walls
will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a ce1iified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of$50.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the
same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a
violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determioe that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood and flood way data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study- Androscoggin
County, Maine" as described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article ill.H. l.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIILD., in order to administer Alticle VI
of this Ordinance; and,
4
3. v1hen the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone}.._ by methods outlined h-<J.
Article III.H. l .b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from: which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit
copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with an Elevation
Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I pennit construction , "as built", for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of the Elevation
Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall
authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.l .a., b., and c. The application for th.is
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.I., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted tinder the provisions of Article IX of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles ill, VI, and VII of this Ordinance.
5
ARTICLE VI~ DEVELOP1'.1EI'IT STAfIDAPJ)S
.All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use constmction materials that aie resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
elinrinate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from
the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at ]east one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article ill.H.Lb.; Article V.B; or
Article Vill.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
6
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects ofbuoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article ll.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article ill.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article Vill.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofmg standards of
.Article Vl.CJ.l.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home,
pl-us two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each comer of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article Vl.H.1.c.(1) & (2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article Vl.H.1.b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article IlI.H. l .b.; Article
V.B; or Article VITI.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article Vl.H.l.c.
7
I. Recreational Vehicles - P'-ecreational Vehicles located ~mthin:
1. Zones A and AE, shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be pennitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article VI.H.l.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in ArticleXIIl, located within Zones A and
AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met Accessory Structures shall:
L be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the•
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be pen:nitted within a regulatory flood way which
is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments
will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
2. In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the flood way as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
8
a. will not increase the v-1ater su..rface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the connnunity; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses,"
Flood Insurance Study- Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37).
3. In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones A and AE that meets the development standards of Article VI, inclnding the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or Hand is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they pennit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A and AE shall be
designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
9
a. t.1-ie structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VIK.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones A and AE shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
· b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodyoamic loads and the
effects ofbuoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
0. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones A and AB, in and over water and seaward of mean high tide, if the
following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land
Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F,
G,orH.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions ofthis ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant's written notification; and,
10
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall
issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VHI - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPIVIENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Livermore Falls may, upon written application of an aggrieved
party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. ·
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
l. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a detennination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
11
create nuisa.."1.ces, cause fraud or 1.rictin1ization of the public or conflict vvith existh---ig local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that mioimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determioation that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
I. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
ofland subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
12
lELTld located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases tlie municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use ofland located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, includingjustification for the granting of the variance and an authorization forthe Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Penni!, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X- ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, npon determination that a violation
exists, may submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
l. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
13
4. evidence that t.h.e property O\:\rner has been provided notice of the violation and t._1-ie prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being snbmitted pursnant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision oflaw. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number. includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that .is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly c~led the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a mrmicipality to enforce all applicable
comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
14
Development - mea11s any man made cha..11ge to iinproved or unimproved real estate, ii-ii.eluding but not
limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A or AE, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building duriug a flood of up to
one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A or AE, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate fue unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L..
Elevation Certificate -An official form (FEMA Form 81-31) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with fue floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence ofland along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a. l.
of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
15
F!oodplaiin Management - means t.1-ie operation of an overall prograi"TI of corrective fu"ld preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain JVfanagement Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term desc1ibes such state or
local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property,
water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Free board tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed that could contribute
to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district prelinlinarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
16
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North .American Vertical Dafil'l1 (NAVD)
or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific
site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an mea
other than a basement mea is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) ofland divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NA VD) or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article Vl.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFlP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)".
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a commuuity and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NA VD)- means the national datum whose standard was established in
1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFlP) for all new
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NA VD is based upon vertical datum used by other Nmih American countries
such as Canada and Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the
emths crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
17
c. designed to be self-propelled or pennanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be tl1e
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the
width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary fonns; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions offue building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank fuat is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the d=age occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a ·
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before fue
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
dmnage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. . Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
18
-b_ P_113r alteration of a Historic StrJcture, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community's Board
of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a corrununity from fue terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means fue failure of a structure or development to comply wifu a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV -ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (d) Rev. 11/09
Prepared 2/15/13 by MFP/jpp
19