Code
of the
Town of Millinocket
COUNTY OF PENOBSCOT
STATE OF MAINE
Editor of this Code
R. D. SQUIRE3
Consulting Editors
V. M. BUTLER
T. B. CLANCY
E. M. FIKE
J. E. FLINT
H. H. HENRY
J. S. KITT
E. L. KLINE
D. J. KRESS
J. G. KRESS
G. C. LETTER
K. N. MacCALLUM
M. R. NETTNIN
F. J. SQUIRES
M. E. SZCZESNIAK
M. T. VERSPRILLE
C. C. WIGHT
GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
72 Hinchey Road
Rochester. New York 14624
1987
Code
of the
Town of Millinocket
COUNTY OF PENOBSCOT
STATE OF MAINE
SERIAL NO. . ..... 00·02
GENERAL CODE PUBLISHERS CORP.
72 Hinchey Road
Rochester. Xew York 14624
1987
(•~
PREFACE
In the land of Mt. Katahdin, the heart of the vital paper milling
areas of Maine, Millinocket sits proudly reflecting on its past
while constantly planning for the future.
The Town of Millinocket has, over the years, passed through a
process of legislative change common to many American communities.
While only a few simple laws were necessary at the
time of the establishment of the Town, subsequent growth of the
community, together with the complexity of modern life, has
created the need for new and more detailed legislation for the
proper function and government of the Town. The recording of
local law is an aspect of municipal history, and as the community
develops and changes, review and revision of old laws and
consideration of new laws, in the light of current trends, must
keep pace. The orderly collection of these records is an important
step in this ever-continuing process. Legislation must be
more than mere chronological enactments reposing in the pages
of old records. It must be available and logically arranged for
convenient use and must be kept up-to-date. It was with
thoughts such as these in mind that the Town Council ordered
the following codification of the Town's legislation.
Contents of Code
The various chapters of the Code contain all currently effective
legislation (ordinances) of a general and permanent nature enacted
by the Town Council of the Town of Millinocket, including
revisions or amendments to existing legislation deemed necessary
by the Town Council in the course of the codification.
Division of Code
The Code is divided into parts. Part I, · Administrative Legislation,
contains all Town legislation of an administrative nature,
l
MILLINOCKET CODE
namely, that dealing with the administration of government,
that establishing or regulating municipal departments and that
affecting officers and employees of the municipal government
and its departments. Part II, General Legislation, contains all
other Town legislation of a regulatory nature. Items of legislation
in this part generally impose penalties for violation of their
provisions, whereas those in Part I do not.
Grouping of Legislation and
Arrangement of Chapters
The various items of legislation are organized into chapters,
their order being an alphabetical progression from one subject to
another. Wherever there are two or more items of legislation
dealing with the same subject, they are combined into a single
chapter. Thus, for example, all legislation pertaining to the regulation
of streets and sidewalks may be found in Part II, in the
chapter entitled "Streets and Sidewalks." In such chapters, use
of Article or Part designations has preserved the identity of the
individual items of legislation.
Table of Contents
The Table of Contents details the alphabetical arrangement of
material by chapter as a means of identifying specific areas of
legislation. Wherever two or more items of legislation have been
combined by the editor into a single chapter, titles of the several
Articles or Parts are listed beneath the chapter title in order to
facilitate location of the individual item of legislation.
Reserved Chapters
Unassigned chapter numbers do not appear in the Table of Contents
but are available for assignment to new enactments. In
this manner, new subject matter can be included alphabetically.
ll 05- 01- 2011
•
PREFACE
Pagination
A unique page-numbering system has been used in which each
chapter forms an autonomous unit. The first page of each chapter
is the number of that chapter followed by a colon and the
numeral "l." Thus, Chapter 6 would begin on page 6:1. By the
use of this system, it is possible to add or to change pages in any
chapter, or add new chapters, without affecting the sequence of
subsequent pages.
Numbering of Sections
A chapter-related section-numbering system is employed, in
which each section of every item of legislation is assigned a
number which indicates both the number of the chapter in
which the legislation is located and the location of the section
within that chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 6 would
be§ 6-1, while the fourth section of Chapter 53 would be§ 53-4.
New sections can then be added between existing sections using
a decimal system. Thus, for example, if two sections were to be
added between§§ 53-4 and 53-5, they would be numbered as§§
53-4.1 and 53-4.2.
Scheme
The Scheme is the list of section titles which precedes the text of
each chapter. These titles are carefully written so that, taken
together, they may be considered as a summary of the content of
the chapter. Taken ·separately, each describes the content of a
particular section. For ease and precision of reference, the
Scheme titles are repeated as section headings in the text.
Histories
At the end of the Scheme in each chapter is located the legislative
history for that chapter. This History indicates the specific
legislative source from which the chapter was derived, including
the enactment number (e.g., ordinance number, local law number,
bylaw number, resolution number, etc.), if pertinent, and
Ill 05-01 - 2011
MILLINOCKET CODE
the date of adoption. In the case of chapters containing Parts or
Articles derived from more than one item of legislation, the
source of each Part or Article is indicated in the History.
Amendments to individual sections or subsections are indicated
by histories where appropriate in the text.
Codification Amendments and Revisions
New chapters adopted or sections amended or revised during
the process of codification are specifically enumerated in chapter
Histories with reference to "Ch. 1, General Provisions," where
the legislation adopting this Code and making such revisions
will appear after final enactment. Sections so amended or revised
are also indicated in the text by means of Editor's Notes
referring to the chapter cited above.
General References; Editor's Notes
In each chapter containing material related to other chapters in
the Code, a table of General References is included to direct the
reader's attention to such related chapters. Editor's Notes are
used in the text to provide supplementary information and
cross-references to related provisions in other chapters.
Appendix
Certain forms of local legislation are not of a nature suitable for
inclusion in the main body of the Code but are of such significance
that their application is community-wide or their provisions
are germane to the conduct of municipal government. The
Appendix of this Code is reserved for such legislation and for
any other material that the community may wish to include.
Index
The Index is a guide to information. Since it is likely that this
Code will be used by persons without formal legal training, the
Index has been formulated to enable such persons to locate a
particular section quickly. Each section of each chapter has been
. lV 05 - 01- 2011
PREFACE
indexed. The Index will be supplemented and revised from time
to time as new legislation is added to the Code.
Instructions for Amending the Code
All changes to the Code, whether they are amendments, deletions
or complete new additions, should be adopted as amending
the Code. In doing so, existing material that is not being substantively
altered should not be renumbered. Where new sections
are to be added to a chapter, they can be added at the end
of the existing material (continuing the numbering sequence) or
inserted between existing sections as decimal numbers (e.g., a
new section between§§ 45-5 and 45-6 should be designated§ 45-
5.1). New chapters should be added in the proper alphabetical
sequence in the appropriate division or part (e.g., Part I, Administrative
Legislation, or Part II, General Legislation), utilizing
the reserved chapter numbers. New chapter titles should begin
with the key word for the alphabetical listing (e.g., new legislation
on abandoned vehicles should be titled ''Vehicles, Abandoned"
under "V" in the table of contents, and a new enactment
on coin-operated amusement devices should be "Amusement
Devices" or "Amusement Devices, Coin-Operated" under "A" in
the table of contents). Where a reserved number is not available,
an "A" chapter should be used (e.g., a new chapter to be included
between Chapters 45 and 46 should be designated Chapter
45A). New Articles may be inserted between existing Articles in
a chapter (e.g., adding a new district to the Zoning Regulations)
by the use of "A" Articles (e.g., a new Article to be included between
Articles XVI and XVII should be designated Article
XVIA). The section numbers would be as indicated above (e.g., if
the new Article XVIA contains six sections and existing Article
XVI ends with § 45-30 and Article XVII begins with § 45-31. Article
XVIA should contain §§ 45-30.1 through 45-30.6).
Supplementation
Supplementation of the Code will follow the adoption of new legislation.
New legislation or amendments to existing legislation
will be included and repeals will be indicated as soon as possible
v 05-01-2011
MILLINOCKET CODE
after passage. Supplemental pages should be inserted as soon as
they are received and old pages removed, in accordance with the
Instruction Page which accompanies each supplement.
Acknowledgment
This Code is the result of much time and effort on the part of the
Town's officials. The editor wishes to particulary acknowledge
the efforts of the Millinocket Town Council and especially the
cooperation and hard work of Town Manager William Ayoob.
His desire for accuracy and attention to detail, as well as his
kindness and courtesy contributed greatly to the successful outcome
of this project.
The codification of the legislation of the Town of Millinocket reflects
an appreciation of the needs of a progressive and expanding
community. As in many other municipalities, officials are
faced with fundamental changes involving nearly every facet of
community life. Problems increase in nu·mber and complexity
and range in importance from everyday details to crucial areas
of civic planning. It is the profound conviction of General Code
that this Code will contribute significantly to the efficient administration
of local government. As Samuel Johnson observed,
"The law is the last result of human wisdom acting upon human
experience for the benefit of the public.0
VI 05 - 01 - 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE CHARTER
Charter .......................................................................................... C: 1
THE CODE
PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
1. General Pro'Visions ....................................................... 1:1
Article I Adoption of Code
3. Administration of Government ................................... 3: 1
4. Petitions ........................................................................ 4:1
Article I Petitions Filed Pursuant to Charter Sections
C901 and C903
5. Appeals. Board of ......................................................... 5: 1
7. Budget .................................................... ,. ......................... 7;1
Article I Presentation and Approval for Planned Capita]
Expenditures and/or Indebtedness
9. Cemetery Commission ................................................ 9: 1
17. Library Board of Trustees .......................................... 17:1
21. Nursing Commission ................................................. 21:1
Petitions -- See Ch. 4
23. Planning Board ............................ : ............................. 23:1
26. Recreation Commission ............................................. 26:1
vu 05 - 01-2011
MILLINOCKET CODE
27. Salaries and Compensation ............................ ,... ........ 27:1
Article I Town CounciJ
29. Transportation, Department of ........ ........................ 29: 1
29A. Warrant Review and Approval. .............................. 29A: 1
30. Welfare Hearing Board .............................................. 30: 1
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
33. Airport ....... ..... ..... .......... ........ .. ..................................... 33:1
35. Alarm Systems ........................................................... 35: 1
38. Alcoholic Beverages .................................................... 38:1
Article I Bott)e CJubs
42. Bandstand ................................................................... 42:1
48. Building Construction ................................................ 48: 1
49. Life Safety Code .................................................... .... 49:1
50. Property Maintenance ............................................... 50: 1
61. Dogs and Other Animals ................................... ,. ....... 61:1
Article I
Article II
Article III
Dogs
Keeping of Animals
Cats and Other Domestic Animals
65. Entertainment .Licenses ............................................. 65: 1
66. Fees ... .............. ..................... .......... ............ ................. 66:1
Article I Nonprofit Housing Facilities Service Fees
68. Floodplain Management ............................ _, ............... 68:1
70. Food Establishments .......................... ........................ 70: 1
73. Solid Waste ........... ... ................................................... 73:1
75. General Assistance ..................................................... 75:1
Vlll 05 - 01- 2011
(
-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
78. Junk Dealers ............................................................... 78:1
Life Safety Code -- See Ch. 49
83. Mobile Home Parks; Manufactured Housing ........... 83: 1
Article I
Article II
Mobile Home Parks
Manufactured Housing
86. Outdoor Wood Boilers ................................................ 86:1
90. Pawnbrokers ............................................................... 90: 1
94. Peace and Good Order ................................................ 94;1
Article I Throwing of Objects
97. Peddling and Soliciting .............................................. 97:1
Property Maintenance-· See Ch. 50
104. Sewers ....................................................................... 104: 1
Solid Waste·· See Ch. 73.
108. Streets and Sidewalks .............................................. 108:1
Article I Snow Removal
110. Street and Road Addressing .................................... 110: 1
Article I Administration and Design Guidelines
115. Vehicles and Traffic ... II ............................................... 115: 1
121. Weapons ................................................................ ~··· 121:1
123. Wind Turbines .......................................................... 123: 1
125. Zoning ........................................................................ 125:1
Part 1 (Reserved)
Part 2 Town Zoning
126. Zoning (continued) .................................................... 126: 1
IX 05 - 01- 2011
MILLINOCKET CODE
APPENDIX
A127. Affirmative Action ................................................. A127:1
A128. Personnel Policy ........................................ ............ A128;1
A129. Sexual Harassment ...................................... ......... A129:1
A130. Bloodborne Pathogens Control ............................. A130: 1
A131. Family Medical Leave Policy ................................ A131:1
DISPOSITION LIST
INDEX
x 05 - 01 - 2011
•
•
CHARTER
CHARTER
ARTICLE I
Grant of Powers to the Town
§ ClOl. Incorporation .
§ C102. Powers of the town.
ARTICLE II
Town Council
§ C201. Membership; election; terms.
§ C202. Qualifications.
§ C203. Powers and duties generally.
§ C204.
§ C205.
§ C206.
Enumeration of powers.
Compensation.
Induction into office.
§ C207. Council to judge qualifications of its members.
§ C208. Regular meetings; special meetings, posting of
Council actions.
§ C209. Chairman.
§ C210. Quorum; adjourned meeting.
§ C211. Vacancies.
§ C212. Rules of procedure,; ordinances, orders and
resolves.
§ C213.
§ C214.
§ C215.
Adoption of ordinances.
Town Clerk as Clerk of Council; records.
Independent annual audit.
§ C216. Appointment of Town Manager.
Cl 12-25-93
MILLINOCKET CODE
§ C217. Removal of Town Manager.
§ C218. Interference by Council with administrative
service.
§ C219. Recall of elected officials.
§ C301.
§ C302.
§ C303.
§ C304.
§ C305.
ARTICLE III
Town Manager
Qualifications.
Powers and duties.
Absence or disability.
Establishment of departments.
Appointment of Health Officer.
ARTICLE IV
Department of Education
§ C401. Board of Education.
§ C402. Qualifications of Board members.
§ C403. Vacancies on Board.
§ C404. Organization; swearing in; quorum.
§ C405. Powers and duties of Board; preparation of
budget.
ARTICLEV
Budget
§ C501. Fiscal year, budget year.
§ C502. Preparation and submission of budget.
§ C503. Budget establishes appropriations.
C2 12-25-93
()
•
CHARTER
§ C504. Budget establishes tax levy; certification to
Town Assessor.
§ C505.
§ C506.
§ C507 .
§ C508.
§ C509.
Budget summary.
Departmental expenditures; gross
appropriations.
(Reserved)
Transfer of unencumbered appropriations.
Interim expenditures; public statement of
overexpenditures.
ARTICLE VI
Tax Administration
§ C601. Division of Assessment; Town Assessor.
§ C602. Board of Assessment Review; compensation;
vacancies.
§ C603. Powers and duties of Board of Assessment
Review.
§ C701.
§ C702.
§ C703.
ARTICLE VII
Municipal Development
Planning Board.
Zoning Ordinance.
Board of Appeals
ARTICLE VIII
Nominations and Elections
§ C801. Municipal elections.
§. C802. Qualification for nomination.
C3 12-25-93
§ C803.
§ C804.
§ C805.
§ C806.
MILLINOCKET CODE
Conduct and management of elections.
Voting places.
Election officials.
Activity restricted at voting places.
ARTICLE IX
Initiative and Referendum
§ C901.
§ C902.
Petition for overrule of Coun~il action.
Submission by Council of proposition to
popular vote.
§ C903.
§ C904.
§ C905.
§ C906.
Enactment of ordinance by initiative.
Form of ballot.
(Reserved)
Referendum Reconsideration Limited.
ARTICLEX
General Provisions
§ ClOOl. Repealer.
§ C 1002. Severability.
§ C1003. Title.
§ C 1004. Existing rights and contracts not affected.
§ C 1006. Oath of office.
§ C1007. Continuation of ordinances not inconsistent.
§ C1008. Removal of officers and employees; appeals.
§ C1009. Personnel Appeals Board.
§ ClOlO. (Reserved)
§ ClOll. Bonds of officials.
C4 12 - 24 - 93
•.
§ ClOl CHARTER § Cl02
§ C1012. Charter amendment.
[IDSTORY: Adopted at the town election held 3 .. 14-1969;
amended 7 .. 11-1974, 3-9-1979, 7-8-1980 and 11-2-1993.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
General provisions - See Cb. 1, Art. I.
Administration of government - See Ch. 3.
ARTICLE I
Grant of Powers to the Town
§ ClOl. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the Town of Millinocket, within the limits
as now established or as hereafter established in the manner
provided by law, shall be a municipal corporation by the name
of the "Town of Millinocket, Maine."
§ Cl02. Powers of the town.
A. The town shall have, exercise and enjoy all the rights,
immunities, powers, privileges and franchises and shall
be subject to all the duties, liabilities and obligations
provided for herein or otherwise pertaining to or
incumbent upon said town as a municipal corporation, or
the inhabitants or municipal authorities thereof; it may
enact bylaws, regulations and ordinances not
inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the State
of Maine, and impose penalties for the breach thereof not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.) in any one case, to
be recovered to the use of said town by appropriate
action.
B. The town may acquire property within or without its
corporate limits for any town purpose, in fee simple or
any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise,
C5 12-25-93
§ C102 MILLINOCKET CODE § C203
lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage,
hold, manage and control such property as its interest
may require.
C. In this Charter no mention of a particular power shall be
construed to be exclusive or to restrict the scope of the
powers which the town would have if the particular
power were not mentioned. The Charter shall be
liberally construed to the end that the town may have all
the powers necessary or convenient for the conduct of its
municipal affairs, including all powers the town may
assume pursuant to state laws and of the provisions of
the State Constitution.
ARTICLE II
Town Council
§ C201. Membership; election; terms.
The Town Council shall be composed of seven (7) members,
each of whom shall be elected by the registered voters of the
entire town. Each member shall be elected for a term of three
(3) years and until his successor is elected and qualified.
"· \
§ C202. Qualifications.
Councilmen shall be qualified electors of the town and shall
reside in the town during the term of office. They shall hold no
office of emolument or profit under the Town Charter or
ordinances. If a Councilman shall cease to possess any of these
qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, his/her office shall immediately become vacant.
§ C203. Powers and duties generally.
The members of the Town Council shall be and constitute the
municipal officers of the Town of Millinocket for all purposes
required by statute, and except as otherwise herein specifically
C6 12-25-93
(·; ~··:, .
'· :
§ C203 CHARTER § C204
provided, shall have all powers and authority given to, and
perform all duties required of, municipal officers under the laws
of this state, and the municipal officers all have all the powers
heretofore vested in the Town Meeting, subject to provisions of
Article IX.
§ C204. Enumeration of powers.
Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council shall have
power to:
A. Appoint and remove the Town Manager and the Town
Clerk; appoint the Board of Assessment Review, the
Board of Appeals, the Planning Board; and determine
the manner of appointment of the following officers:
Assessor, Treasurer and Town Attorney.
B. By ordinance create, change and abolish offices, departments
or agencies other than the offices, departments
and agencies established by this Charter. The Council by
ordinance may assign additional functions or duties to
offices, departments or agencies established by this
Charter but may not discontinue or assign to any other
office, department or agency any function or duty
assigned by this Charter to a particular office, department
or agency. The Council may, however, vest in the
Manager all or part of the duties of any office except the
School Department.
C. Make, alter and repeal ordinances; included under this
power shall be the power to enact ordinances regulating
the following classes of persons, businesses and purposes
and to grant licenses and permits therefor for such
periods of time and in accordance with such rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with law, upon payment by
the licensee of such fees and filing of such bonds as said
Town Council may establish and make provisions for by
ordinance, to wit:· auctioneers; the maintenance and
operation of garages, filling stations, sidewalk tanks and
pumps for the sale or distribution of gasoline and other
C7 12-25-93
§ C204 MILLINOCKET CODE § C204
volatile flammable liquids for fuel or power; the
manufacture, storage, sale, transportation, disposition
and use of explosives and flammab~e liquids; billiard
halls; pool halls; bowling alleys; roller-skating rinks;
junk; dealers in secondhand parts and salvage of
automobiles; dealers in secondhand merchandise;
hawkers and peddlers; employment agencies; itinerant
vendors; public automobiles; taxicabs and motor buses;
public wagons and trucks; amusements; exhibitions and
performances; theaters; moving-picture houses; inns;
victualers; pawnbrokers; lodging houses of four ( 4)
lodging rooms or more; public shooting galleries; the
manufacture, storage, sale, distribution' and use of
fireworks; dance halls; circuses; and the erection of signs,
flags, banners, awnings, marquees and all other things
within the limits of the sidewalks, roads, ways and
streets of said town, and no such objects placed within
said limits in accordance with such ordinances shall be
deemed defects in such sidewalks, roads, ways and
streets.1
D. Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or
agency of the town and make investigations as to
municipal affairs.
E. Adopt land survey maps.
F. Adopt and modify the Official Map of the town.
G. Regulate and restrict the height and the number of
stories of buildings and other structures, the size of
yards and courts, the density of population and the
location and use of buildings for trade, industry,
business, residence or other purposes.
H. Create a housing authority.
1 Editor's Note: See Part 0. General Legislation, of the Code of the Town of Millinocket
ror ordinances regulating such persoR!!I and businesses.
CB 12-25-93
1Q
~
§ C204 CHARTER § C206
I. Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the
Planning Board for the clearance of slum districts and
rehabilitation of blighted areas.
J . Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the
Planning Board for the replanning, improvement and
redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning,
reconstruction and redevelopment of any area or district
which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by
disaster.
K. Provide for an annual audit.
§ C205. Compensation. [Amended 4-17-1986 by Ord. No.
4-86]
Councilors shall receive fifteen dollars ($15.) for each Council
meeting upon attendance, not to exceed, in the aggregate, eight
hundred dollars ($800.) per year in full for their services, except
that the Chairperson of the Town Council shall receive twenty
dollars ($20.) for each Cou~cil meeting upon attendance, not to
,.. exceed. in the aggregate, one thousand dollars ($1,000.) per
year in full for his or her services. Such compensation may be
changed by ordinance. The Town Council by order shall fix the
salaries of officials elected by the Town Council, including the
salary of the Town Manager for his/her services as such and for
all other services rendered by him. Maximum salaries of the
appointees of the Town Manager shall be fixed by the Town
Council.
§ C206. Induction into office. [Amended 1-0..1984 by Ord.
No 2-84]
Effective January l, 1985, the Town Council and the School
Board shall meet at the Town Council Chambers at 7:00 p.m. on
the second Monday in November, and at said meeting
Councilmen-elect and School Board members-elect shall be
sworn to the faithful discharge of their duties by a Notary
Public or by the Town Clerk.
C9 12-23-93
§ C207 MILLINOCKET CODE § C209
§ C207. Council to judge qualifications of its members.
The Council shall be the judge of the election and
qualifications of its members and for such purpose shall have
power to subpoena witnesses and require production of records,
but the decision of the Council in any such case shall be subject
to review by the courts.
§ C208. Regular meetings; special meetings, posting of
Council actions.
A. The Town Council shall, at its first meeting or as soon
thereafter as possible, establish by ordinance or
resolution a regular place and time for holding its
regular meetings, and shall meet regularly at last once a
month. It shall also provide a method for calling special
meetings. All meetings of the Town Council shall be open
to the public in accordance with the Revised Statutes of
1964, Title 1 §§ 401 to 406.
B. Actions of the Council shall be posted in the town office
within a reasonable time after such action has been
taken.
§ C209. Chairman.
At its first meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable, the
Council shall elect, by majority vote of the entire Council, one
( 1) of its members for the ensuing year as Chairman, and the
Council may fill, for an unexpired term, any vacancy in the
office of Chairman that may occur. The Chairman shall reside
at the meetings of the Council and shall be recognized as head
of the town government for all ceremonial purposes and by the
Governor for purposes of military law, but he shall have no
regular administrative duties. In the temporary absence or
disability of the Chairman, the Town Council may elect a
Chairman Pro tempore from among its members, and he/she
shall exercise all the powers of Chairman during such
ClO 12-215-93
•
§ C209 CHARTER § C212
temporary absence or disability of the Chairman and shall
receive such compensation as the Chairman normally receives.
§ C210. Quonun; adjourned meeting.
A majority of the Town Council shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn
from time to time or may compel attendance of absent
members. At least twenty-four (24) hours' notice of the time and
place of holding such adjourned meeting shall be given to all
members who were not present at the meeting from which
adjournment was taken.
§ C211. Vacancies.
If a seat in the Council becomes vacant more than six (6)
months prior to the next regular town election, the vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired term within sixty (60) days from
the date that the vacancy occurred by a special election, the
warrant for which shall, upon vote of the Town Council, be
issued by a member of the Town Council, by vote designated for
that duty.
§ C212. Rules of procedure,; ordinances, orders and
resolves.
The Town Council shall provide for keeping a record of its
proceedings and shall determine its own rules of procedure and
make lawful regulations for enforcing the same. The Council
shall act only by ordinance, order or resolve. All ordinances,
orders and resolves, except orders or resolves making
appropriations of money, shall be confined to one (1) subject,
which shall be clearly expressed in the title. All appropriation
orders or resolves shall be confined to the subject of
appropriations only.
Cll Ul-25-93
§ C213 MILLINOCKET CODE § C216
§ C213. Adoption of ordinances.
Before any ordinance shall be passed, at least one ( 1) public
hearing shall be held by the Council, notice of which shall be
given at least seven (7) days in advance by publication in a
newspaper having a circulation in said town and by posting a
notice in a public place. The yeas and nays shall be taken on the
passage of all ordinances and entered on the record of the
proceedings of the Council by the Clerk. Every ordinance shall
require on passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the Council. Such ordinance shall be effective thirty
(30) days after such passage, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
§ C214. Town Clerk as Clerk of Council; records.
The Town Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Council, and he/she
shall keep a public record of all proceedings of the Council,
including all roll-call votes.
§ C215. Independent annual audit.
Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Council shall
designate the State Department of Audit or private certified
public accountants who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall
make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of
financial transactions of the town government and shall submit
their report to the Council and the Town Manager. Such
accountants shall not maintain any accounts or records of the
town business, but shall postaudit the books and documents
kept by the Department of Finance and any separate or
subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or
agency of the town government.
§ C216. Appointment of Town Manager.
The Council shall appoint an officer of the town who shall
have the title of "Town Manager'' and shall have the powers and
C12 12-25-93
•
ra
~
(:2\
\J[J
§ C216 CHARTER § C218
perform the duties in this Charter provided. No Councilman
shall receive such appointment during the term for which he
shall have been elected nor within one (1) year after the
expiration of his term, nor shall any member of the Town
Council act in that capacity .
§ C217. Removal of Town Manager.
The Council shall appoint the Manager for an definite term
and may remove him/her for cause by a majority vote of its
members. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall
become effective, the Council shall, by a majority vote of its
members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for
his/her removal. The Manager may reply in writing and may
request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than
twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing
of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested,
and_ after full consideration, the Council by majority vote of its
members may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the
preliminary resolution, the Council may suspend the Manager
from duty, but the regular salary of'the Manager shall continue
to be paid to him/her during the period of suspension. If
removal is voted, the Council shall cause to be paid to the
Manager forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his
salary for at least' the next two (2) calendar months.
§ C218. Interference by Council with administrative
service.
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or
request the appointment of any person to or his/her removal
from office by the Manager or by any of his/her subordinates.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the
Manager, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall
give orders to any subordinates of the Manager, either publicly
or privately.
Cl3 12-25-93
§ C219 MILLINOCKET CODE § C219
§ C219. Recall of elected officials. [Added 9·26-1985 by
Ord. No. 4-85]
Any person elected to any office in the Town of Millinocket
may be recalled and removed therefrom by the electors of the
town as herein provided.
A. Procedure for initiating recall petition.
(1) Any thirty (30) qualified voters of the town may
make and file with the Town Clerk an affidavit
containing the name of the elected official whose
removal is sought. These thirty (30) qualified voters
shall be referred to as the "Recall Committee." The
affidavit shall also contain a statement detailing the
reason{s).. -why. recall .--is ·- sought. --This- statement
detailing the reason(s) for removal shall thereafter
be made a part of the recall petition.
(2) Upon- filing of the affidavit by the thirty (30)
qualified voters and acceptance of the affidavit by
the Town Clerk, the ToWn ·. Clerk shall prepare a
recall petition relating tg t~e elected official n.amed
in the affidavit. The Recall Committee shall have 30
calenclar days' from the date of acceptance of the
affidavit by the Town Clerk to :cause the.petition to
be 'sign.ed by, not "less than twentY percent (20%) of
the qualified. voters of the toWI1 ... The petition shall
be available for signing only at the Town Clerk's
office, during normal business hours. and shall be
signed by qualified voters in the p:resence of ·.the
Town Clerk or th~ Deputy Town Clerk. At the end of
the thirty calendar day period the Town Clerk shall
decfare the recall petition closed.
(3) Th~ recall petition, to be effective, shall have been
signed by voters of the town numbering not less
than. twenty percent (20%) of the number of
qualified voters as determined at the time of the last
preceding municipal election, and each voter's
signature shall be followed by the voter's place of
C14 12-25-93
(
•
§ C219 CHARTER § C219
residence with the street and number or other
description sufficient to identify the place.
B. Examination and certification of recall petition. Within
ten ( 10) business days after the closing of the petition,
the Town Clerk shall ascertain whether or not the
petition was signed by the requisite number of voters
and, upon such finding, shall attach a certification to the
petition stating that the petition has the required
number of signatures of qualified voters, that all
signatures were affixed in the presence of the Clerk or
Deputy Clerk, that each signer had an opportunity to
read the statement detailing the reason(s) for recall and
that the petition is sufficient. Should fewer qualified
voters than required hereunder sign the petition within
the required time, the petition shall have no further
force or effect and all proceedings shall be terminated.
C. Calling of recall election. If the petition shall be certified
by the Town Clerk to be sufficient, the Clerk shall submit
the petition with certification to the Town Council within
five (5) business days of certification as sufficient and
shall notify the elected official whose removal is sought
of such action. The Town Council shall thereupon, within
ten (10) days of the receipt of · the Town Clerk's
certification, order an election to be held not more than
forty-five ( 45) days after receipt to submit to vote the
question of recall. If recall is effective, the Town Council
shall, within forty-five (45) days after the vote for recall,
hold a special election to fill the vacancy; provided,
however, that if a regular municipal election is to occur
within six months after the vote for recall, the Town
Council may in its discretion hold the election to fill the
vacancy on the date of such other regular municipal
election. The recall election shall be called and held, and
nominations to fill any vacancy created by that recall
election shall be made as in other elections under this
Charter.
D. Form of ballot in recall election. The form of the ballot at
the recall election shall be as follows:
C15 11-26-93
§ C219 MILLINOCKET CODE § C302
"Shall (name of person proposed for recall), a member of
the Millinocket Town Council and/or the Millinocket
School Committee, be recalled?"
Immediately below such question shall appear in the
following order the words "Yes" and "No" and to the right
of each word a square within which the voter may cast
his vote.
E. Majority vote required. The elected official whose recall
is sought as provided above shall be recalled and
immediately removed from office when a majority of
those voting thereon shall have voted in the affirmative.
The successor elected after recall shall serve for the
balance of the unexpired term of the recalled official.
ARTICLE Ill
Town Manager
§ C301. Qualifications.
The Town Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on
the basis of his character and his executive and administrative
qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in
or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of
his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his
appointment, he need not be a resident of the town or state.
§ C302. Powers and duties.
The Town Manger shall be the chief administrative officer
and the head of the administrative branch of the town government
and shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration
of all affairs of the town. He shall have the power
and shall be required to:
A. Appoint, prescribe the duties of and, when necessary for
the good of the service, remove all officers and employees
of the town, except as otherwise provided herein and
except as he may authorize the head of a department or
C16 12-25-93
El
§ C302 CHARTER § C303
office to appoint and remove subordinates m such department
or office.
B. Prepare the budget annually, submit it to the Council
and be responsible for its administration after adoption.
C. Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the town for the preceding
year, and cause such annual town report to be published
and made available to the public as promptly as possible
after the close of the fiscal year.
D. Attend the meetings of the Council, except when his
removal is being considered, and keep the Council
advised of the financial condition and future needs of the
town and make such recommendations as may seem to
him desirable.
E. See that all laws and ordinances governing the town are
faithfully executed.
F. Act as Purchasing Agent for all departments of the town,
except the School Department.
G. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this
Charter or required of him by the Council, not
inconsistent with this Charter.
H. Prepare an Administrative Code, submit it to the
Council and be responsible for its administration after
adoption.2
§ C303. Absence or disability.
~ To perform his duties during his temporary absence or
~~ disability, the Manager may, with the consent of the Council,
designate by letter filed with the Town Clerk a qualified
administrative officer of the town. In the event of failure of the
Manager to make such designation, the Council may by
2 Editor's Note: See Cb. 3. Adminiatratlon of Government.
C17 12-24-98
§ C303 MILLINOCKET CODE §C402
resolution appoint any administrative officer of the town to
perform the duties of the Manager until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.
§ C304. Establishment of departments.
There shall be a Department of Education and such other departments
as may be established by ordinance upon the recommendation
of the Manager.
§ C305. Appointment of Health Officer.
The Manager shall appoint a Health Officer, who shall serve
for such term and exercise such powers and perform such duties
as may be prescribed, conferred or imposed by law. The Health
Officer shall meet such qualifications as may be specified
generally for such positions by the State Commissioner of
Human Services.
ARTICLE IV
Department of Education
§ C401. Board of Education.
The Department of Education shall be administered by a
Board of Education, hereinafter referred to as the "School
Board", which shall consist of five (5) duly qualified electors of
the Town of Millinocket, who shall be nominated and elected by
the registered voters of the entire town according to the
provisions of Article VIII of this Charter for a term of three (3)
years and who shall serve until their successors are elected and
qualified.
§ C402. Qualifications of Board members.
Members of the School Board shall be qualified electors of the
Town and shall reside in the town during their term of office.
C18 12 - 26-93
1.:~
fO
cl)
§ C402 CHARTER § C405
They shall hold no office of emolument or profit under the Town
Charter or ordinances. If a member of the School Board shall
cease to possess any of these qualifications or shall be convicted
of a crime involving moral turpitude, his office shall
immediately become vacant.
§ C403. Vacancies on Board.
If for any reason a vacancy shall exist in the membership of
the School Board, it shall be filled by a majority vote of the
Council until the next municipal election.
§ C404. Organization; swearing in; quorum.
The members of the School Board shall meet for organization
on the second Monday from the date of their election. The
members-elect shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of their
duties by a Notary Public or by the Town Clerk, and a record
made thereof. The majority of the whole number of the School
Board shall be a quorum, and they shall elect their own
Chairman.
§ C405. Powers and duties of Board; preparation of
budget.
A. The School Board shall have all the powers conferred
and shall perform all the duties imposed by law upon
superintending school committees in regard to the care
and management of the public schools of the town,
.except as ·otherwise provided in this Charter. The School
Board shall prepare budget estimates in detail of the
several sums required during the ensuing budget year of
the support of the public schools. Such budget shall be
approved by the Town Council prior to the beginning of
the next school year. The Town Council shall prescribe
the time and place of presentation of the school budget.
Cl9 12-211 - 93
§ C405 MILLINOCKET CODE § C405
B. [Amended 1-6-1984 by Ord. No. 1-84) The school
budget shall include an itemized statement of revenue
from sources other than municipal taxation, together
with a statement of the amount of money to be raised by
municipal taxation, together with comparative figures
from th~ current and next preceding school budget year.
The school budget shall include the School Committee's
recommended appropriation for each of the following line
item categories of proposed expenditures, the sum of
which shall constitute the total proposed appropriation
for school purposes, as well as year-to-date expenditures
for the previous year and preceding two years.
( 1) Administration.
(2) Instructional salaries.
(3) Instructional materials.
( 4) Attendance and health.
(5) Vocation education.
(6) Student activities and support service.
(7) Student transportation.
(8) Operation and maintenance of plant.
(9) Debt service and employee benefits.
(10) Adult education.
C. The Town Council, after reviewing the proposed budget,
may change the proposed appropriation in any of the
above line categories prior to approving the final budget.
Approval of the school budget shall fix the appropriation
for each of the line item categories and the School
Committee shall not authorize the transfer of approved
amounts from one line item category to another without
prior approval of the Town Council. The expenditures
included within each line item category shall be
consistent with the accounting and reporting
requirements of the Maine State Department of
Education and Cultural Services. The Council may not
C20 12-25-93
~'
I .~ -'.'.·, \ :t::-
§ C405 CHARTER § C502
by ordinance create additional line item categories
within the school budget.
D. The School Board shall review the budget at least
quarterly to compare year-to-date expenditures to those
amounts as approved by the Town Council. Any
documents prepared pursuant to this requirement shall
be immediately disseminated to the public and become
part of the pub lie record.
ARTICLEV
Budget
§ C501. Fiscal yeart budget year.3
The fiscal year of the town government shall begin the first
day of July and shall end on the 30th day of June of each
calendar year. Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget and
accounting year as used in this Charter. The term "budget year1'
shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is
adopted and in which it is administered.
§ C502. Preparation and submission of budget.
A. The Town Manager shall, not less than 60 days before
the beginning of any budget year, submit to the Council
a budget and an explanatory budget message. The
budget authority of the Council shall be limited to the
final determination of the total appropriation to be made
to each of the several offices, departments and agencies
of the town, including the Department of Education. This
budget shall be compiled from detailed information
furnished by the administrative officers and boards on
blanks, forms of which shall be designated by the
Manager and shall contain:
3 Editor's Note: See also f 3-8 of Ch. 3, AdmJnlstratton of Government.
C21 12-211-93
§ C502 MILLINOCKET CODE § C504
(1) Exact statement of the financial condition of the
town.
(2) An itemized statement of appropriations
recommended for current expenses and for
permanent improvements, with comparative
statements in parallel columns of estimated
expenditures for the current year and actual
expenditures for the next two preceding fiscal years.
An increase or decrease in any item shall be
indicated.
(3) An itemized statement of estimated revenue from
all sources, other than taxation, and a statement of
taxes required, with comparative figures from
current and next two preceding years.
( 4) Such other information as may be required by the
Town Council.
B. The proposed budget prepared by the Manager shall be
reviewed by the Town Council, which shall approve the
budget with or without amendments. The Town Council
shall give public notice as to the availability of the
budget and the time and place. of hearing. The Council
shall then review and act on the budget.
§ C503. Budget establishes appropriations.
From the date of adoption of the budget, the several amounts
stated therein as proposed appropriations shall be and become
appropriated to the several agencies and purposes therein
named.
§ C504. Budget establishes tax levy; certification to
Town Assessor.
From the date of adoption of the budget, the amounts stated
therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall
constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the
C22 12 - 25-93
•
i~w
§ C504 CHARTER § C508
purposes of the town in the corresponding tax year. A copy of
the budget as finally adopted shall be certified by the Manager
and filed by him with the Town Assessor, whose duty it shall be
to levy such taxes for the corresponding tax year.
§ C505. Budget summary •
At the head of the budget there shall appear a summary of
the budget, which need not be itemized further than by
principal sources of anticipated revenue, stating separately the
amount to be raised by property tax, and shall be itemized also
by departments, including the School Department, and kinds of
expenditures, in such a manner as to present to taxpayers a
simple and clear summary of the detailed estimates of the
budget.
§ C506. Departmental expenditures; gross
appropriations.
The budget for all departments, including the School Department,
shall include all proposed expenditures, and the Town
Council shall make a gross appropriation for each department,
including the School Department, for the ensuing municipal
year. The gross appropriation for each department shall not be
exceeded except by consent of the Council and subject to the
provisions of Article IX, but the school budget shall be expended
under the direction and control of the School Board.
§ C507. (Reserved)
§ C508. Transfer of unencumbered appropriations.
The Council may by resolution transfer any unencumbered
appropriation balance or portion thereof between general
classification of expenditures within an office.
C23 12-25-98
§ C509 MILLINOCKET CODE §C602
§ C509. Interim expenditures; public statement of
overexpenditures.
A. In the period between the beginning of the fiscal year
and the appropriation of funds, the Council may
authorize expenditures for current departmental
expenses chargeable to the appropriations for the year,
when made, in amounts sufficient to cover the necessary
expenses of the various departments.
B. If any act of the Council shall cause the annual town
budget to be exceeded by any amount, this fact shall be
stated publicly in the report of the Council as provided
for in Sub Section C208 of this Charter.
ARTICLE VI
Tax Administration
§ C601. Division of Assessment; Town Assessor.
There shall be established a Division of Assessment, the head
of which shall be the Town Assessor. The Assessor, appointed as
hereinbefore provided, shall exercise the same powers and be
subject to the same duties and liabilities as established by the
laws of the State of Maine.
§ C602. Board of Assessment Review; compensation;
vacancies.
There shall be a Board of Assessment Review, to consist of
three (3) members who shall be appointed by the Town Council
for a term of three (3) years. Compensation, if any, to such
members shall be determined by the Town Council. Vacancies in
the membership of such Board shall be filled by appointment by
the Council for the unexpired term.
C24 12 - 25 - 93
§ C603 CHARTER § C702
§ C603. Powers and duties of Board of Assessment
Review.
The powers and duties of the Board of Assessment Review
shall be to:·
A. Review, on complaint of property owners, and revise, if
necessary and proper, assessments for the purpose of
taxation of real and personal property within the town
limits made by the Town Assessor.
B. Administer oaths.
C. Take testimony.
D. Hold hearings.
E. Adopt regulations regarding the procedure of assessment
review.
ARTICLE VII
Municipal Development
:· § C701. Planning Board.
There shall be a Town Planning Board, which shall be
appointed, have such powers and perform such duties as are
provided by the laws of the State of Maine. 4
§ C702. Zoning Ordinance.
There shall be a Zoning Ordinance as provided by state law.5
4 Editor's Note: See Cb. 23. Planninl Board.
5 Editor's Note: See Cb. 125, Zoninl(.
C25 ii-28-93
§ C703 MILLINOCKET CODE § C803
§ C703. Board of Appeals
There shall be a Board of Appeals, which shall be appointed
by the Town Council, have such powers and perform such duties
as are provided by the laws of the State of Maine. 8
ARTICLE VIII
Nominations and Elections
§ C801. Municipal elections. [Amended 1-6-1984 by Ord.
No. 2-84]
Effective January 1, 1985, the regular election for the choice
of members of the Town Council and the School Board shall be
held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November.
The Council may, by resolution, order a special election at any
time to fill vacancies in the Council.
§ C802. Qualification for nomination.
Any qualified elector of the town may be nominated for the
Council or School Board in accordance with the laws of the
State of Maine.
§ C803. Conduct and management of elections.
Provisions of the laws of the State of Maine relating to the
qualifications of electors, registration, the manner of voting, the
duties of election officers and all other particulars respective to
preparation for, conducting and management of elections, so far
as they may be applicable, shall govern all municipal elections,
except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
8 Editor's Note: See Ch. 5. Appeals. Board of.
C26 12-25-93
•
•
§ C804 CHARTER § C901
§ C804. Voting places.
The voting places established for state elections shall be
established for municipal elections.
§ C805. Election officials •
The Town Council shall, at least ten (10} days before any
election, appoint a Warden, who shall exercise all duties as
prescribed by State law, and a Clerk, in addition to the regular
Ballot Clerks, for each voting place.
§ C806. Activity restricted at voting places.
No unofficial activities, including but not limited to, the
selling of any baked goods, crafts, or raffle chances; the
collection of petition signatures for any cause; or polling or
picketing; shall be allowed within 200 feet of any voting place.
The Warden shall be empowered to enforce this section.
All ordinances, orders or resolves, except those making
appointments or removals or regulating exclusively the internal
procedure of the Council, shall be subject to overrule by a
referendum as follow:
A. Any five (5) registered voters may begin referendum
proceedings by request, in writing, to the Town Clerk for
the appropriate petition blanks. All papers of the
petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be
assembled as one ( 1) instrument for filing. They shall
contain or have attached thereto throughout their
circulation the full text of the ordinance, order or resolve
sought to be reconsidered. The petition shall be signed
C27 12-25-93
§ C901 MILLINOCKET CODE § C902
only by registered voters of the town, and each voter's
signature shall be followed by his address.
B. Each paper of the petition shall have attached to it,
when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof
stating that he personally circulated the paper, the
number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures
were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be
the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they
purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity
before signing to read the full text of the ordinance, order
or resolve sought to be reconsidered.
C. If within ten (10) days after the enactment of any such
ordinance, order or resolve, or the next business day
should the 10th day fall on a non~business day, the
appropriate petition, signed by registered voters of the
town numbering at least twenty percent (20%) of the
number of votes cast in the town at the Last
gubernatorial election, is filed with the Town Clerk,
requesting its reference to a referendum, the Town
Council shall call a public hearing to be held within
fourteen (14) days from the date of the filing of such
petition with the Town Clerk and shall, within fourteen
(14) days after said public hearing, call a special
municipal election for the purpose of submitting to a
referendum . vote the question of adopting such
ordinance, order or resolye. Pending action by the voters
of the town, the referred ordinance, order or resolve shall
be suspended from going into operation until it has
received a vote of the majority of the voters voting on
said question [Amended 11-3·1992]
§ C902. Submission by Council of proposition to popular
vote.
The Town Council may submit on its own initiative a
proposition for the enactment, repeal or amendment of any
ordinance, - order or resolve, except as herein otherwise
provided, to be voted upon at any municipal election, and
C28 12-25-93
•
•
§ C902 CHARTER § C903
should such proposition review a majority of the votes cast
thereon at such election, such ordinance, order or resolve shall
be enacted, repealed or amended accordingly.
§ C903. Enactment of ordinance by initiative.
Ordinances may be enacted by the following initiative
procedure.
A. Any five (5} registered voters may begin initiative
proceedings by request, in writing, to the Town Clerk for
the appropriate petition blanks. The complete text of the
proposed ordinance shall be included with the request.
All papers of the petition shall be uniform in size and
style and shall be assembled as one ( 1) instrument for
filing. They shall contain or have attached thereto
throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed
ordinance. The petition shall be signed only by registered
voters of the town, and each voter's signature shall be
followed by his address.
B. Each paper of the petition shall have attached to it,
when filed, an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof
stating that he personally circulated the paper, the
number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures
were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be
the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they
purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity
before signing to read the full text of the proposed
ordinance.
C. Upon receipt by the Town Clerk of the appropriate
petition, signed by registered voters of the to~
numbering at least twenty percent (20%) of the number
of votes cast in the town at the last gubernatorial
election, the Town Council shall call a public hearing to
be held within fourteen (14) days from the date of the
filing of such petition with the Town Clerk and shall
within fourteen (14) days after said public hearing, call a
municipal election for the purpose of submitting to vote
C29 12-25-93
§ C903 l\HLLINOCKET CODE § C906
the question of adopting such ordinance, unless such
shall be enacted by the Council prior to the call for said
town election. Such ordinance shall be enacted and take
effect when a majority of those voting thereon shall have
voted in the affirmative. [Amended 11-3-1992]
D. Any such proposed ordinance shall be examined by the
Town Attorney before being submitted to the voters. The
Town Attorney is authorized to correct the form of such
proposed ordinance for the purpose of avoiding
repetitions, illegalities and unconstitutional provisions
and to assure accuracy in its text and reference and
clearness and preciseness in its phraseology, but he shall
not materially change its meaning and effect.
§ C904. Form of ballot.
A. The form of the ballot for the proposed ordinance or
repeal of such ordinance, order or resolve shall be
substantially as follows:
"Shall the ordinance, or order or resolve entitled,' ''be
approved?"
YES NO
B. The voters shall indicate their choice by a cross or check
mark placed in the appropriate box under the words
''YES" and "NO".
§ C905. (Reserved)
§ C906. Referendum Reconsideration Limited. [Amended
9-30-1993]
Any issue that has been decided by referendum vote shall not
be reconsidered by any means until at least one full year has
lapsed from the time of referendum vote. Provided, however,
any issue may be reconsidered if the Town Council determines
C30 12-211-93
tG
~
§ C906 CHARTER § C1004
that an emergency exists affecting the health, safety or welfare
of the inhabitants of the Town of Millinocket.
§ ClOOl. Repealer.
ARTICLEX
General Provisions
Chapter 131 of the private and special laws of 1965 is
repealed; and all acts and parts of acts of the private and
special laws of Maine relating to the Town of Millinocket,
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, are repealed.
§ C1002. Severability.
If any portion of this Act shall be held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
§ C1003. Title.
This Charter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Council·Manager Charter of the Town of Millinocket." The
Clerk shall cause it to be printed and made available to the
public promptly.
§ C1004. Existing rights and contracts not affected.
The Clerks of the Supreme Judicial and Superior Courts may
issue summons for witnesses to attend and produce books,
documents and papers at any meeting of the Town Council for
the Town of Millinocket at which a hearing is had in any mater
regarding any alleged dereliction, which summons shall be
served as required to be sufficient in matters before the
Supreme Judicial or Superior Courts. On complaint or failure to
obey summons to the District Court for Northern Penobscot,
which Court is expressly given jurisdiction to hear such
C31 11-25-93
§ C1004 MILLINOCKET CODE § C1008
complaints, said District Court, if it finds failure to obey said
summons to be without reasonable excuse, shall impose a fine of
not less than ten dollars ($10.) nor more than one hundred
dollars ($100.) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30)
days, or both. All rights of appeal are to be available as exist in
the general laws of the Town Clerk.
§ Cl006. Oath of offi.ce.7
Every officer of the town shall, before entering upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath or
affirmation, to be filed and kept in the office of the Town Clerk:
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the
Constitution and will obey the laws of the United States and
of the State of Maine; that I will, in all respect, observe the
provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the Town of
Millinocket, and will faithfully discharge the duties of the
office of ................... "
§ Cl007. Continuation of ordinances not inconsistent.
All ordinances of the Town of Millinocket in force at the time
when this Charter takes effect, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter, shall continue in force until amended
or repealed.
§ Cl008. Removal of officers and employees; appeals.
Any officer or employee to whom the Town Manager or a head
of any office, department or agency may appoint a successor
may be removed by the Manager or other appointing officer at
any time. The decision of the Manager or other appointing
officer shall be subject to appeal to the Personnel Appeals
Board. Notice of such appeal shall be made in writing to the
7 Editor's Note: See also Subsection S-6 of Cb. 3, Administration of Government.
C32 12-25-93
~ l,.
•
§ C1008 CHARTER § ClOll
Town Manager and the Town Council within thirty (30) days of
notice of dismissal.
§ C1009. Personnel Appeals Board.
There shall be Personnel Appeals Board consisting of three
(3) members appointed by the Town Council from among the
qualified voters of the town. All appointments shall be made for
terms of three (3) years.
§ ClOlO. (Reserved)
§ ClOll. Bonds of officials.8
The Town Council shall require a bond with sufficient surety
or sureties, satisfactory to the Town Council, from all persons
trusted with the collection, custody or disbursement of any of
the public moneys and may require such bond from such other
officials as it may deem advisable, the premium charges for said
bonds to be paid by the town .
8 Editor's Note: See also Subsection 3-7 of Ch. 3, Administration of Government.
C33 12-25-93
§ C1012 MILLINOCKET CODE § C1012
§ C1012. Charter amendment. [Amended 11-3-1992]
This Charter may be amended in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. Subsection 2101 et seq.9
9 Editor's Note: The following provisions appeared immediately following this section
"Emerpncy clause; referendum; effective date; certificate to Secretary of State and
resubmluion to the votel'L In view of the emergency cited ln the preamble. thl• Act
shall take effect when approved, only tor the purpose of permitting lts subm11111ion to
the le11al voters of the Town of Mllllnocket at the next annual town election to be held in
March 1989. Warrants shall be issued for such election ln the manner now provided by
law for the holdln1 of municipal elections. notttytn11 and warning the qualified voters of
said town to meet ln the reirular voting place of sald town, there to cast their ballots on
the approval or rejection of this Act. Failure of approval by the lelJal voters of the Town
of Millinocket at the annual town meettn1 of 1989 shall not prevent subsequent
elections held before 1974. The Town Clerk shall prepare the required ballots. on which
he shall reduce the subject matter of thl• Act to the followinlJ question: ,.Shall An Act
Provldlnlf for a Council-Manager Form of Government for the Town of MUU.nocket,
pa.aed by the 104th LelJislature. be accepted?" The voters shall indicate by a cl'0811 or
check mark placed against the words YES or NO their opinion of the same. "This Act
shall take effect for the purpoae of nominatlnr and electin1 officers hereunder
Immediately upon lta acceptance by a majority of the le11al votera voting at said
electio.i. and for all other purposes this Act shall take effect Immediately following the
first election held under the provtatons of this Charter following the approval of this
Act. "The resulta of the vote shall be declared by the municipal offtcen of the Town of
MilHnocket and due cerilflcate thereof shall be ftled by the Town Clerk with the
Secretary of State."
C34 12 - 23 - 93
~.
\J
THE CODE
I
I
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c c
(
(
(
c
c
c c
(
(
(
( .

(
PART I
ADMINISTRATIVE
~ LEGISLATION

,..
'-;r:fl
•
•.
•
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
§ 1-1. Designation of Code.
§ 1-2. Code adopt.eel.
§ 1..S. Repealer; when effective.
§ 14. Items saved from repeal.
§ 1..0. General penalty.
§ 1..&. Amendments t.o Code.
§ 1-7 . Copy of Code on file; book to be kepi up-to-date.
§ 1-8 . Alt.ering or tamperinl' with Code; penalties for violation.
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
§ 1-10. Repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-11. Severability.
§ 1-12. When effective.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket Art. I, 10-8-87 as Ord. No. 2-87; effective 11-7-87.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted lo.8-87 aa Ord. No. 2-87; effective 11-7-87)
Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Millinocket as
follows:
101 4-25-88
§ 1-1 MIWNOCKET CODE § 1-4
§ 1-1. Designation of Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapt.ers and sections
shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of
Millinocket, Maine," and may be so cit.ed.
§ 1-2. Code adopted.
The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 t.o 125, each
inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the Code of Ordinances,
Town of Millinocket, Maine, Parts I and II, and shall be treated and
considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which
shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by
the Town Council on or before September 1987, to the ext.ent provided
in § 1-3 hereof.
§ 1-3. Repealer; when effective.
All provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and
after the seventh day of November 1987, and all ordinances of a
general and permanent nature of the Town of Millinocket, Maine,
enacted on final passage on or before Sept.ember 1987 and not
included in such Code are repealed from and after Sept.ember 1987,
except as hereina&r provided.
§ 1-4. Items saved from repeal.
A. The repeal provided for in § 1-3 hereof shall not affect any of
the following:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or
accruing before the effective date of such Code.
(2) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any
bonds of the t.own or any evidence of the town's indebtedness.
(3) Any contract or obligation assumed by the town.
102 4·26·88
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
(4) Any right or franchise grant.eel by the t.own.
(5) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, pa\ing, widening, vacating, etc.~ any
park, playground or recreational facility.
(6) Any ordinance relating t.o specific public improvements
or MSeSSment.s therefor.
(7) Any ordinan~ establishing or prescribing grades for
street&
(8) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for
the levying of taxes or for an annual budget.
(9) Any ordinance in effect which regulates t.own elections
and voting district boundaries.
(10) Any ordinance relating t.o the investment of municipal
funds.
(11) Any ordinance establishing personnel rules for t.own
employees.
(12) Any traffic regulation not· inconsist.ent with this Code.
(13) Any ordinance enacted after September 1987.
(14) Any property right, including any easements, granred or
conferred t.o the town.
B. The repeal provided for in § 1-3 hereof shall not be construed
t.o revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed
by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this
ordinance.
§ 1-6. General penalty.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of
said Code or committing any act or omission t.o act declared to
be a misdemeanor or unlawful, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.).
103 .a-25-88
§ 1-5 MIWNOCKET CODE § 1-8
B. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for
which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as
provided in Subsection A above shall apply t.o the section as
amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for
which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general
penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the
penalty so provided in such other section shall be held t.o relate
t.o the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.
§ 1-6. Amendmenf.s to Code.
Any and all additions or amendments t.o such Code, when passed in
such form as t.o indicate the intention of the Town Council t.o make the
same a part thereof, shall be deemed t.o be incorporated in such Code
so that reference t.o the "Code of the Town of Millinocket1' shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendment.s.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on me; book to be kept up-t&date.
A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Town
Clerk. It shall be the express duty of the Town Clerk or someone
authorized by the Town Clerk to insert in their proper places all
amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Town
Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have
been printed or reprinted in page form and tD extract from such Code
all provisions which may be from time to time rei>ealed by the Town
Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons
desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code
of Ordinances of Millinocket, and any copy of such. Code certified by
the Town Clerk shall be the official Code of Ordinances of Millinocket
at the date of such certification. Copies of the Code may be purchased
at cost to be set by the Town Clerk.
§ 1 ·8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the town
to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
104
,,;a
\l1ll
tJ).. . '
-.: .,c
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
such Code or t.o insert or delet.e pages, or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Town of Millinocket to be misrepresent.ed thereby. Any
person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as
provided in § 1-5 of this ordinance or prosecuted under Title 17 A.
§ 456, of M.R.S.A.
§ 1-9. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as
the Code of the Town of Millinocket, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one (1) or more of said
pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Town Council that
all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions
are made herewith, t.o become effective upon the effective dat.e
of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are
to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in
the Code.)
(1) Chapter 90, Pawnbrokers,§ 90-1, is amended to include
the following definition of "pawnbroker":
"PAWNBROKER - Includes any person who loans
money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than securities or print.ed evidences of indebtedness, or
who purchases personal property on condition of reselling
the same back to a person at a stipulat.ed price or who,
doing business as a furniture warehouseman, loans and
advances money upon goods deposit.eel with or pledged to
him as collateral security therefor.•
(2) Chapt.er 97, Peddlers, § 97-2, is amended to read as
follows:
105
§ 1-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 1-12
"The Town Council may grant a license t.o expose for sale
or sell upon the public streets of the t.own, or t.o go from
place t.o place in the t.own exposing for sale and selling
goods, wares or merchandise at ret.ail."
§ 1-10. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the
extent of such conflict, hereby repealed, as of the operative date of this
ordinance, but shall remain in full force and effect until such dat.e.
§ 1-11. Severability.
If any phrase, clause, sent.ence, paragraph or section of this Code
shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code.
§ 1-12. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after
adoption.
106 4 - 25 - 88
•
~
§ 3-1.
§ 3-2.
§ 3-3.
§ 3-4.
§ 3-5.
§ 3-6.
§ 3-7.
§ 3-8.
§ 3-9.
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Title.
Scope.
Definitions.
Chief Administrator.
Departmental organization.
Oaths of office.
Bonds of officials.
Fiscal year; budget year.
Administrative policy and procedures.
ARTICLE II
Department of Law
§ 3-10. Town Attorney; duties.
ARTICLE IIA
Department of Community Development
§ 3-10.1. Establishment; Director.
§ 3-10.2. Duties of Director.
§ 3-10.3. Personnel
301 12 - 25 - 89
MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE III
Department of Finance
§ 3-11. Duties of Director of Finance.
§ 3-12. Divisions of Department.
ARTICLE IV
Department of Records
§ 3-13. Duties of Town Clerk.
ARTICLE V
Department of Police
§ 3-14. Duties of Chief of Police.
§ 3-15. Divisions of Department
ARTICLE VI
Department of Fire
§ 3-16. Duties of Fire Chief.
§ 3-17. Division of Department.
ARTICLE VII
Department of Health
§ 3-18. Duties of Town Health Officer.
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works
§ 3-19. Duties of Director of Public Works.
§ 3-20. Divisions of Department
302 12. 25 . 89
•
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE IX
Department of Purchasing
§ 3-21. Duties of Purchasing Agent.
§ 3-22. Delegation of authority .
(Cont'd on page 303)
302.1 12. 25. 89
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 3-23. Responsibilities of Purchasing Agenl
ARTICLE X
Department of Personnel
§ 3-24. Duties of Director.
ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Welfare
§ 3-25. Establishment; Director of Public Welfare.
§ 3-26. Duties of Director.
ARTICLE XII
· Commissions
§ 3-27. Creation of advisory commissions.
§ 3-28. Membership.
§ 3-29. Duties.
ARTICLE XIII
Penalties
§ 3-30. Violations and penalties.
• [HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Ch. 2 of the Millinocket Code. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL RF.PERENCES
Other admlnlstrath·e prcnitdons - See Charter.
.1. ) { ·}'. \ ,· ·. .. .
30:-1
§ 3-1
§ 3el. Title.
MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 3-2
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative
Code of the Town of Millinocket."
§ 3-2. Scope.
This chapter shall include only those administrative functions and
responsibilities not specifically provided for by Charter or by state law
and listed in § 3-5 herein and functions related closely thereto.
Specific exclusions are:
A. Department of Education. Administration of this Department
is charged to the Board of Education by the Town Charter,
Article IV.
B. Agencies created under state law. General administration of
the following agencies is provided for under state law:
(1) Board of Appeals.1
(2) Civil Defense Director.
C. Agencies created by Town Charter. General administration of
the following agencies is provided for under the Town Charter:
(1) Personnel Appeals Board. See Article X, § C1009, of the
Charter.
(2) Board of Assessment Review. See Article VI, §§ C602
and C603, of the Chart.er.
D. Agencies created by t.own ordinance. General administration
of the following agencies is provided for under other Code
chapters:
( 1) Recreation Commission. 2
(2) Department of Transportation.3
~----
1 Editor'll Note: See also Ch. 5, Appeal1, Board of.
2 Editor's Note: See Ch. 26, Recreation CommL'ISion.
3 Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Transportatinn, Department of.
304
Ir:\
\?JI
(~
~
§ 3-2 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
(3) Library Board of Trustees.t
(4) Cemetery Commission.6
(5) Nursing Commission.8
(6) Planning Board.1
§ 3-4
§ 3-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR or ADMINISTRATOR - The
Town Manager of the Town of Millinocket
TOWN - The Town of Millinocket
TOWN COUNCIL or COUNCIL - The Council of the Town
of Millinocket as provided for by the Town Charter.
§ 3-4. Chief Administrator.
The Chief Administrator shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the town government. He shall see that all
laws governing the town are faithfully executed, require the faithful
performance of all administrative duties for which he is herein made
responsible and:
A. Shall have the following duties:
(1) Appoint and remove. Appoint. prescribe the duties of
and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove
all officers and employees of the town, except as otherwise
provided herein and except as he may authorize the head
of a department or office to appoint and remove
subordinates in such department or office. ----- .. Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Library.
6 Editor's Note: See Ch. 9. Cemetery Contmiic.,.fon.
8 Editor's Note: Ser Ch. 21. Nunlnll' Commi!18lon.
1 Editor's Note: See <.'h. 23, Planning Board.
305
§ 3-4 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-4
(2) Appoint to acting capacity. Designate himself or some
other officer or employee to perform the duties of any
office or position in the administrative service under his
control which is vacant or which lacks administration
due to the absence or disability of the incumbent
(3) Annual report. Prepare and submit to the Council as of
the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the t.own for the
preceding year, and cause such annual t.own report t.o be
published and made available to the public as promptly
as possible aft.er the close of the fiscal year.
(4) Budget report Prepare the budget annually, submit it to
the Council and be responsible for its administration after
adoption.
(5) Administrative Code. Prepare an Administrative Code,
submit it to. the Council and be responsible for its
administration after adoption.
(6) Departmental responsibilities. Prepare, with respect to
each commission, committee or board, a list of all
procedural duties and responsibilities of such agencies
upon approval by the Council, file the same with the
Town Clerk and be responsible for the administration
thereof.
B. Shall have the following powers:
(1) Assign according to classification. Assign any employee of
the town to any department or branch thereof requiring
services appropriate t.o the classification or qualifications
of the employee so assigned.
(2) Prescribe rules. Prescribe such rules and regulations as
he shall deem necessary or expedient for the conduct of
administrative agencies subject t.o his authority, and
revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the
administrative service by whomever under his authority
prescribed.
306
§ 34 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 34
(3) Investigate. Either by himself or by an officer or person
designated for the purpose by him, investigate and
examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any
department, division, bureau or office, and, when so
authorized by the Council, employ consultants and
professional counsel to aid in such investigations,
examinations or inquiries.
( 4) Town departments. Recommend est.ablishment of town
departments considered essential to proper administration
of the town.
(5) Overrule officials. Set aside any action taken by a
department head under his authority and supersede him
in the functions of his office.
(6) Delegate duties. Direct any department, division or
bureau in time of emergency.
(7) Appoint administrative committees. Designate from the
administrative service such committees and the officers
thereof as he shall find necessary for the proper
consideration of administrative problems. Such committees
shall meet at the request of the Chief Administrator
and shall make such recommendations on matters
referred to them as they shall find necessary for the best
interest of the town.
(8) Work with Council. Attend the meetings of the Council,
except when his removal is being considered, and keep
the Council advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the town and make such recommendations as
may seem to him desirable.
(9) Bonded debts. Submit to the Town Attorney or bond
counsel for legal review, all bonded debts required to be
furnished to the town.
307 12 - 25 - 89
§ 3-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3~
§ 3-5. Departmental organization.
The departmental organization of the town shall be as follows:
Department of Law
Department of Finance
Department of Records
Department of Police
Department of Fire
Department of Public Health
Department of Public Works
Department of Public Welfare
Department of Purchasing
Department of Community Development
[Added 5-11·89 by
Ord. No. 1-89)
§ 3-6. Oaths of office.8
Town Attorney
Town Treasurer
Town Clerk
Chief of Police
Fire Chief
Town Health Officer
Director of Public Works
Director of Public Welfare
Purchasing Agent
Director of Community
Development
A. Persons required to take oath of office. Each of the following
officers and employees in the administrative service shall be
required to take an oath of office before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, which oath shall be subscribed by the
person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office
of the Town Clerk:
(1) Officers. The Chief Administrator, each officer and
department head.
(2) Policeman. Every member of the Department of Police,
including any private, special, temporary or substitute
policeman which the town might find it necessary to
appoint.
(3) Fireman. Every member of the Department of Fire who
serves on a full-time basis.
(4) Any other officer or employee of the town, if required to
do so by state law.
B. Form of oath. The form of the oath shall be as follows:
8 Editor's Note: See also§ C1006 of the Charter, which is included at the beginning of this
volume.
308 12 - 25 - 89
~
\JI
I~
'i3
§ 3-6 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-9
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I wiJI support the
Constitution and will obey the laws of the United
States and of the State of Maine; that I will, in all
respects, observe the provisions of the Charter and
ordinances of the Town of Millinocket, and will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
n
§ 3-7. Bonds of officials.1
The Town Council shall require a bond with sufficient surety
or sureties, satisfactory to the Town Council, from all persons
trusted with the collection, custody or disbursement of any of
the public moneys, and may require such bond from such other
officials as it may deem advisable, the premium charges for said
bonds to be paid by the town.
§ 3·8. Fiscal year; budget year. [Amended 11·2·19932]
The fiscal year of the town government shall begin on the
first day of July and shall end the 30th day of June of each
calendar year, except as applicable law may otherwise require.
Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget and accounting year
as used in the Charter. The term "budget year" shall mean the
fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in
which it is administered.
§ 3.9. Administrative policy and procedures.
A. Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of
his office by state law, the Town Charter, this chapter,
other provisions of the Code and any other ordinances,
1 Editor's Note: See also t C1011 of the Charter. which ls included at the beginninl of
this volume.
2 Editor's Note: See also § CISOl of the Charter, which ls included at the beglnnlnr of
this volume.
309 12-10-94
§ 3-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-9
and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be
prescribed by the Administrator.
B. Department heads. The heads of departments shall:
(1) Responsibility to appointing authority. Be
immediately responsible to the appointing authority
for the effective administration of their respective
departments and all activities assigned thereto.
(2) Inaugurate sound practices. Keep informed as to the
latest practices in their particular field and
inaugurate, with the approval of the Administrator,
such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the
town.
(3) Report to Administrator. Submit monthly and
annual reports of the activities of their respective
departments to the Administrator.
( 4) Maintain records. Establish and maintain a system
of filing and indexing records and reports in
sufficient detail to furnish and to form a basis for
periodic reports to the Administrator.
(5) Authority over employees. Have power, when
authorized by the Administrator in writing, to
appoint and remove, subject to regulations for
personnel, all subordinates in their respective departments.
(6) Maintain equipment. Be responsible for, account for
and maintain all town property and equipment used
in their respective departments.
C. Departments. Each department shall, upon the direction
of the Administrator, furnish any other department such
service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned in
writing by the head of such department, through the
same procedure and subject to the same audit and
control as other expenditures are incurred.
D. Operation of administrative service. All units in the
administrative service shall:
310 12-10-94
t~
'<ti/
§ 3-9 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-9
(1) Make weekly deposit. Make a weekly deposit with
the Town Treasurer of any moneys received directly
from the public.
(2) Payment of moneys. Pay out moneys belonging to
the town only in the manner prescribed herein.
(Cont'd on page 311)
310.1 12-10-94

§ 3-10 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE II
Department of Law
§ 3-10. Town Attorney; duties.·
§ 3-10
The Department of Law shall consist of the Town Attorney, who
shall act to protect the interests of the town when requested by the
Town Council or the Chief Administrator and who shall:
A. Advise Council. Advise the Council or its committees or any
town officer, when thereto requested by the Council or the
Chief Administrator, upon all legal questions arising in the
conduct of town business.
B. Prepare ordinances. Prepare or revise ordinances when so
requested by the Council or any committee thereof duly
authorized.
C. Attend Council meetings. ·Attend meetings where legality of
procedure or presentation of evidence may be pertinent, when
requested by the Council or Chief Administrator.
D. Prepare legal instruments. Prepare for execution or otherwise
recommend preparation of all contract.a and instruments to
which the town is a party, and he shall approve, as to -form, all
bonds required t.o be submitted t.o the town.
E. Prosecute offenders and defend officials. Prepare, when
authorized by the Council, all charges and complaints against
and appear in the appropriate court in the prosecution of
every person charged with the violation of a t.own ordinance or
of any regulations adopted under authority of the Charter. In
any prosecution for violation of any regulation adopted by any
board or commission created under authority of the Charter,
the Town Attorney shall act under the directions of such board
or commission, subject to such paramount control as is given to
the Council by the Charter.
F. Negotiate claims. When requested by the Chief Administrator,
negotiate any action, cause of action, account, debt, claim,
demand, dispute and matter in favor of or against the t.own or
in which the t.own is concerned as debtor or credit.or, now
existing or which may hereafter arise, and submit results to
the Chief Administrator and Council for approval.
311
MILLINOCKET CODE
G. Make reports.
(1) Immediate report of decision. Immediately report the
outcome of any litigation in which the town has an
interest to the AdministratDr and Council.
(2) Annual report of pending litigation. Make an annual
report to the AdministratDr and Council, as of the last
day of the fiscal year, of all pending litigation in which
the town has an interest and the condition thereof.
H. Employment negotiations. Serve as a member of the Public
Employment Negotiating Committee charged with negotiating
with employees in the area of wages, hours of work and
conditions of employment, subject to the authority granted by
the Town Council.
I. Keep records.
(1) Suits. Keep a complete record of all suits in which the
tDwn had or has an interest, giving the names of the
parties, the court where brought, the nature of the action,
the disposition of the case or its status pending and the
briefs of counsel.
(2) Opinions and titles. Keep a complete record of all written
opinions furnished by him and of all certificates or
abstracts of title furnished by him to the town or any
department or official thereof.
J. Deliver records to successor. Deliver all records, documents
and property of every description in his possession, belonging
to his office or to the town, to his successor in office, who shall
give him duplicate receipts therefor, one of which he shall file
with the Town Auditor.
312
(: ...~· . : ·~···
""'"' .
§ 3-10.1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-10.3
ARTICLE IIA
Department of Community Development
[Added 5-11-89 by Ord. No. 1-89]
§ 3-10.1. Establishment; Director.
There shall be a Department of Community Development, the head
of which shall be the Direct.or of Community Development, who shall
be or be appointed by the Town Manager.
§ 3-10.2. Duties of Director.
The duties of the Direct.or of Community Development shall be as
follows:
A. Implement and administ.er the town's Community Development
Program in accordance with it.s community development
block grant
B. Prepare and submit grant applications in furtherance of
community development goals.
C. Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred
or imposed by state law in furtherance of community
development.
D. Such other duties as may be prescribed by the Town Manager.
§ 3-10.3. Personnel.
The Department shall have such personnel as may be authorized by
the Town Council and appointed by the Town Manager from time tD
time.
(Cont'd on page 313)
312.1 12 - 25 - 89
•
•
•
§ 3-11 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE III
Department of Finance
§ 3-12
§ 3-11. Duties of Director of Finance.
In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged t.o any other
department or office, it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to
act to promote. secure and preserve the financial and property
interests of the town. The Direct.or of Finance shall:
A. Fiscal supervision over officers. Exercise general supervision
mer all officers of the tOwn regarding the proper management
of the fiscal concerns of their respective offices.
(1) Examine books. Examine the books of each department
from time t.o time and see that they are kept in proper
form.
(2) Report delinquent payments and financial reports. See
that officers receiving money pay the same int.o the t.own
treasury when required and that all delinquent payments
are reported to the Administrat.or or Council
B. Duty upon default of officer. Report the default of any officer
of the t.own t.o the Chief Administrator, who shall direct the
Town Attorney t.o take immediate legal measures for the
recovery of the amount for which such officer may be in
default.
C. Responsibility for proceeds of bonds. Deposit the proceeds of
all sales of bonds with the Town Treasurer immediately aft.er
he shall have received the same, and until such deposit, he
shall be responsible for the amount thereof.
§ 3-12. Divisions of Department.
The Department of Finance shall be divided into the following
divisions:
A. Division of the Treasury, headed by the Town Treasurer. who
shall:
(1) Account for expenditures. Keep in proper books a full
and accurate account of all the moneys received and
313
§ 3-12 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-12
disbursed. from whom received and to whom disbursed,
on what account received and disbursed and how paid.
(2) Cancellation of evidences of debt Cancel all warrants and
other evidences of debt against the town whenever paid
by him, by writing or stamping across the face thereof
the words "Paid by the Town Treasurer," with the dat.e of
payment written or st.amped thereon.
(3) Disburse money on warrant. Disburse money only on the
authority of a warrant drawn for the purpose by the
municipal officers.
(4) Pay town employees. Pay town employees upon presentation
of the properly certified payrolls.
(5) Collect moneys and fees due the town. Demand and
receive all moneys and fees owing to the town whenever
any person is indebted to the town in any manner and the
means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided
for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by
other methods, he shall report the same to the Chief
Administrator for action by the Town Attorney.
(6) Bank accounts. Maintain appropriat.e bank accounts,
subject to the approval of the Chief Administrator, in the
name of the municipality, for the deposit of cash receipts.
When the cash balance in his possession exceeds one
hundred dollars ($100.), he shall deposit it in the bank
within ten (10) days.
(7) Weekly settlement with Town Audit-0r. Make a weekly
settlement with the Town Auditor of the amounts
received and paid out during the week in which
settlement is being made, and at such settlements deliver
to the Town Auditor, properly canceled, all warrants and
other obligations of the town paid by him since his last
settlement and take a receipt thereof in duplicate, one to
be turned over to the Director of Finance and one to be
retained by him, and once a month he shall balance
accounts with the Town Auditor, which monthly settlement
shall show the balance to the credit of the several
funds for which the Treasurer is responsible.
314
,.~•
"U
•
§ 3-12 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-12
(8) Permits and licenses. Issue all permits and licenses for
which money is required to be paid, except those which
are required by ordinance or statut.e to be issued by
another department or office.
(9) Monthly report to Director of Finance. Make a detailed
report to the Director of Finance on the fifth day of each
month or at such times as the Director of Finance may
request, as to the business of his office during the period
prescribed, showing the balance on hand to the credit of
the different funds at the time of his last report, the
amounts received during the period and on what account,
together with such other items and fact.s as the DirectA>r
of Finance may require.
(10) Deductions from employee's salary. Make deductions
from the salary of a municipal employee and pay the
money deducted to the proper payee when the employee
gives him the written authority to do so. The authority of
the Treasurer to make a deduction continues until it is
revoked in writing by the employee or until the reason for
the deduction is known by the Treasurer to no longer
exist.
B. Division of Accounts, headed by the Town Auditor, who shall:
(1) Audit accounts. Examine and audit the accounts of all
officers and departments, subject to the approval of the
Administrator and Council.
(2) Prescribe form. Prescribe the form of accounts and
reports to be rendered to him.
(3) Budget duties. Prepare estimates of revenue and give
such other assistance in the preparation of the budget as
may be required of him by the Administrator.
(4) Financial statements. Transmit to the Administrator at
least semimonthly stat.ements of cash on hand and of
classified unencumbered appropriation balances for the
town as a whole and such other financial statements as
the Administrator may from time to time require. He
shall keep all departments, boards, commissions or
315
§ 3-12 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-13
institutions currently informed of their respective
classified unencumbered appropriation balances.
(5) Keep accounts. Keep all general accounts of the town
government and of the respective departments, offices,
boards, commissions and institutions thereof.
(6) Custodian of bonds. contracts, etc. Be charged with the
custody of the official bonds of town employees and with
the custody of all deeds, mortgages, contracts, judgments,
notes, debts and choses in action. He shall keep and
administer all securities, bonds or other forms of
negotiable instruments owned by or belonging to the
town.
C. Division of Assessments, supervised by the Town Assessor,
who shall:
(1) Prepare assessment rolls. Prepare all work in connection
with the assessment of property and the preparation of
all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices.
(2) Serve as real estate agent. Act as real estate agent and
supervise the lease, rental or other use and maintenance
of all town property not used by other units of the town.
D. Division of Tax Collection, supervised by the Tax Collector,
who shall collect all taxes in the manner authorized and
required by law.
E. Division of Licenses, supervised by the Town License Officer,
who is also the Town Clerk.
ARTICLE IV
Department of Records
§ 3-13. Duties of Town Clerk.
The Department of Records shall consist of a Town Clerk, who
shall:
A. Clerk of Council. Serve as Clerk of the Council and perform
such other duties of a like nature as shall be required by that
body.
316
(~
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-14
B. Keep records of Council. Be responsible for the recording,
filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the
Council.
C. Record ordinances. Record in full, uniformly and permanently,
all ordinances and authenticate the same.
D. Publish Council action. Publish in timely fashion all adopted
ordinances and resolutions of the Council and all legal notices
required by law or ordinance.
E. Keep election records. Keep and maintain all election records
and have custody of all property used in connection with
elections.
F. Keep vital statistics. Prepare, attest and report on the vital
statistics of the town.
G. Notice of expiration of term. Notify the appointing authority
of the impending expiration of the term of office of a member
of any board or commission, said notice to be given at least
thirty (30) days before such expiration.
H. Oath. Be responsible for determining that all persons required
to take an oath of office before entering upon their duties have
done so.
I. Ward Clerk. Act as Ward Clerk at all municipal elections.
J. Legal documents. Record legal instruments and carry out
other duties prescribed .by the Chief Administrator or by state
law.
K. Keep Official Seal. Be the custodian of the Official Seal of the
town.
ARTICLE V
Department of Police
§ 3-14. Duties of Chief of Poliel•.
A. The Chief of Police shall be directly responsible to his
appointing authority for the police work of the town and for
:u1 2·25-89
§ 3-14 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-15
the enforcement and maint.enance of law and order and shall
assign officers t.o the various divisions of the Department.
B. Chiefs powe~. The Chief of Police is authorized t.o represent
the t.own in District Court in the p~ution of alleged
violations of those ordinances which the Police Department is
empowered t.o enforce, if duly certified in accordance with 25
M.R.S.A. § 2803(3}-A, or successor statut.e. The Chief of Police
may designate any officer under his command, if so certified,
t.o perform this prosecutorial function. [Added 3-24..SS by
Ord. No. 2-88]
§ 3-15. Divisions of Department.
The Department of Police shall be divided into the following
divisions:
A. Records Division, supervised by an officer who shall have
charge of:
(1) The central complaint desk and of dispatching police
records.
(2) Criminal and noncriminal identification.
(3) Identification of property.
(4) Cust.ody of property.
(5) Operation of detention quarters.
B. Patrol Division, supervised by an officer who shall have charge
of:
(1) Motor and foot patrol units.
(2) Routine investigations not assigned to the Investigation
Division.
C. Investigation Division, supervised by an officer who shall· have
charge of:
(1) Investigation of crime.
(2) Elimination of illegal liquor traffic and vice.
2-25-89
§ 3-15 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-15
(3) Preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal
cases.
(4) Crime laboratory.
D. Crime Prevention Division, directed by a supervisor who shall
have charge of:
(1) Prevention and control of juvenile delinquency.
(2) Removal of crime hazards.
(Cont'd on page 319)
318.1 2·26·89
§ 3-15 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-17
(3) CoonJination of community agencies interested in crime
prevention.
E. Traffic Division, supervised by an officer who shall have
charge of:
(1) Control of traffic.
(2) Traffic educational program.
(3) School patrol.
(4) Coordination of traffic accident prosecution.
(5) Painting of street and crosswalk lanes.
F. Radio Division, supervised by the Chief Radio Engineer. who
shall have charge of the maintenance and operation of the
radio plant and equipment.
ARTICLE VI
Department of Flre
§ 3·16. Duties of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief shall be charged with the prevention of fires and the
protection of life and property against fire and shall:
A. Report losses. Report all fire losses over fifty dollars ($50.) to
the Assessor.
B. Maintain equipment. Be responsible for the maintenance and
care of all property and equipment used in his Department.
C. Investigate fire losses t.o determine cause.
§ 3-17. Division of Departmenl
The Department of Fire shall be divided into the following divisions
and supervisors thereof:
A. Fire-Fighting Division.
(1) The Fire·Fighting Division shall be supervised by an
officer who shall be responsible for:
319
§ 3-17 MILLINOCKET CODE § 3-19
(a) Extinguishment of fires.
(b) Saving of life and projJerty from fire.
(c) Performance of various miscellaneous public services
of an emergency nature.
(2) The Division shall include a volunteer department
created by ordinance.
B. Fire Prevention Division, supervised by a Fire Hazard
Inspector, who shall be responsible for:
(1) Inspecting of potential fire hazards.
(2) Abatement of existing fire hazards.
(3) Conducting an educational fire prevention program.
ARTICLE VII
Department of Health
§ 3·18. Duties of Town Health Officer.
The Town Health Officer shall have charge and control of all
functions involved in protecting and preserving the public health as
provided by Maine state law.
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works
§ 3·19. Duties of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for all matters
relating to construction and maintenance of the physical properties of
the town, excluding property under the jurisdiction of the School
Board.
320
f:?\\ \!Yi
§ 3-20 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-20
I 3-20. Divisions of Department.
The Department of Public Works shall be divided, under the
Director of Public Works, into the following divisions and bureaus:
A. Division of Engineering, supervised by a civil engineer or
Director, who shall perform all engineering services for the
Department of Public Works and for such other departments
of the town as may from time to time require such services.
(1) Bureau of Permits and Inspections, under the Division of
Engineering and supervised by a town inspector who
shall:
(a) Issue all permits for. and inspect the work involved
in, street cuts, curb cub. tree belt cuts and sidewalk
cuts for utility services.
(b) Inspect all town premises. including structures and
appurtenances thereon, for safety features.
B. Division of Sewer Maintenance, which shall, under the
supervision of the Sewer Maintenance Foreman, be responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the town sewerage
system.
C. Division of Parks, which shall, tinder the supervision of the
Park Foreman, maintain all town parks, except that the
recreational areas and facilities shall be under the supervision
of the Recreation Commission.11
D. Division of Property Control, which shall, under the supervision
of the Property Control Foreman, provide for maintenance,
custody, security and control of all structures,
mat.erials, supplies and equipment assigned to the Public
Works Department and not otherwise provided herein.
E. Division of Highways, which, under . the supervision of the
Highway Foreman, shall be responsible for the maintenance,
and uses for sanitation purposes, of all town streets, and more
specifically shall be responsible for:
(1) Street cleaning . .,,..._.--- 11 Editor'• Note: See Ch. 28, Recreation Commt.ion.
321
MILLINOCKET CODE
(a) Collection of rubbish and leaves authorized to be
deposited in street rights9<>f-way.
(b) Clearing of snow.
(c) Cleaning of improved streets.
(d) Transportation of junked vehicles t.o the t.own dump.
(2) Street maintenance. Maintenance of and provision of
adequate drainage for all streets, sidewalks and bridges.
(3) Off-street parking. Operation and maintenance of
municipal off-street parking lots and areas.
F. Division of Construction Projects, under the supervision of the
Project Engineer. which shall be responsible for all activities
in connection with:
(1) Minor construction of special projects performed by the
Public Works Department.
(2) Major construction projects, subject to authority granted
by the Chief Administrat.or.
ARTICLE IX
Department of Purchasing
§ 3·21. Duties of Purchasing Apnt.
In all cases where the purchasing duty is not expressly charged t.o
any other t.own department, agency or individual, it shall be the duty
of the Purchasing Agent t.o procure such materials, equipment or
services as may be required and authorized by the Chief Administrator
in carrying out his administrative function.
§ 3-22. Delegation of authority.
The Purchasing Agent may delegate in writing to department or
agency heads such of his authority t.o purchase as he deems
appropriate. but he shall not delegate his responsibility with respect
thereto.
322
{;;v;a
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT I 3-24
I 3-23. RespomlbDltle· of Purehaslns Agent.
The Purchasinr Agent shall be responsible for the prudent
expenditure of town funds. consistent with customary municipal
purchasing practices; and with respect thereto shalt
A. Submit to bid any purchase in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.) if requested to do so by his appointing authority or by
the Chief Administra~.
8. Solicit bids only on specifications when request.ed to do so by
his ap~inting ·,uthority or by the .Chief Administrator.
C. Maintain a library containing sources and prices of materials.
equipment and services required for operatjon of sm~ll
municipal~tieS. . ' ' '
ARTICLE·X
Department of Personnel
I 3·24. Duties of Dlreetor.
The duties of J;>irecw~ of Personn'1 shall be as. follows
A. Cen~~.~ ~~ handl~ng . of ~~el ma~ters ~d . records.
.B •. }n~~rate ~~c J?8"-0nne~ poli~ .iw:i ~ o~in~ce o~ code.
C. Identify and classify jobs in terms of difficulty and , · · resiloiisn>illt1. · · .. · · · · · ·
D. Ma~h jobs classified with equitable rates of pay.
! • • · ' \ I . ' • ' ~ ' - ' : • ' ' , : • ' '":
E. Develop procedures and policies to effect good employee
morale.
F. Review with department, or agency heads present status of
training in departmen~, determine" need: frlil further traininr,
establish and recommend a training objective and locate
services ~d ·.lll•terial: 11ecess.ry t.o.earry out objective.
G. er.ribe policy. for promotions; establishing ·relative impdrtance
of.seniority, ,testing and"rating. ·
H. Prescribe disciplinary methods and procedlires.
323 ·
§ 3-24 · ·. MILLINOCKET· CODE. ,
I. Review. and Crom time to time recommend' changes in. the·
town's perso1'nel retirement program and other fringe
benefits.-. .. · ·. · · · ·. · '. · · · ·
J. Prepare and have for distribution copies of the town's
personnel policy.
K. Maintain files coiltainhtg· copies of past· eontracts between the
t.own and employees' representatives. ·
L lssiie t.o. the Town Treasurer . oopies ·or any personnel actions
inwlvint change' in employees' ~ hours. frinp benefits or
... ~~& condi~ns. . , _
M. Maintain a · pers0nnel file· for each employee, including any
personnel actions reported by employee's superior~ ·
N. Deftlop and keep current infOrmation on each class of town
employee. showing comparable wages for:
(1) Similar jobs in. the ~inniunity. ·
(2) Similar jobs in other communities.
(3) Jobs requirins like skills in this community.
(4) Jobs requiring like skills in other commUnities.
0. Secure arid maintain a current, reliable cost-Gt-living index.
P. Serve on the t.own's negotiating team in developing. contracts
with employees' representatives. ·
Q. Such other duties as the Manager may delegate.
ARTICLE XI.
Department of Public Welfare
§ 3-25. Establishment; Director of Public Welfare.
There shall be a Department of Public Welfare, the head of which
shall be the Director of Public Welfare, who shall be or be appointed
by the Town Manager.
324
I 3-26 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-29
I 3·28. Duties of Director.
The duties of the Director of Public Welfare shall be as follows:
A. Be responsible for the planning, budgeting, reporting and
control of the t.own welfare program.
B. Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred
or imposed by state law upon overseers of the poor.
ARTICLE XII
Commfsllons
§ 3-27. Creation of advisory commissions.
The administrative service of the town shall include, under the
Chief Administrat.or, the advisory commissions hereby created:
A. Civil Defense Commission.
B. Department of Transportation.
C. Cemetery Commission.
D. Recreation Commission.
E. Nursing Commission.
§ 3·28. Membership.
Each Commission shall be created and shall serve as provided in
Chapter 29, Transportation, Department of; Ch. 9. Cemetery
Commission; Ch. 26, Recreation Commission; and Ch. 21, Nursing
Commission, of the Code of the Town of Millinocket.
§ 3·29. Duties.
Each Commission created herein shall act as an advisory group to
the Chief Administrator regarding the betterment of administrative
operations within its field and as to any specific problems referred to
it by ordinance. resolution orb)· the Chief Administrator.
325
§ a-ao MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE XIII
Penalties
§ 3...10. Violations and penalties.
§ 3-30
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.) plus
costs, such fine and costs to be recovered on complaint t.o the use of the
Town of Millinocket
326
C)
§ 65-3 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 65-5
or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction, or any
other articles, equipment or machines.
OBSCENE - To the average person applying contemporary
community standards, the predominant appeal of the matter
or act taken as a whole is to prurient interest. and the matter
or act depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct or lewd exhibition of the genitals or other body
parts mentioned hereinafter in this chapter. and the matter or
act or performance considered as a whole lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value; or any matter or
act or performance which is prohibited by the statutes of the
State of Maine.
PERFORMANCE - Any preview, play, show, skit, film,
dance or other exhibition or entertainment performed before
an audience.
PROMOTE - To cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
SERVICE TO PATRONS - The provision of services to
customers, patrons or any other persons present in establishments
providing food and beverages, including but not limited
to hostessing, hat.checking, cooking, hart.ending, serving, t.able
setting and clearing, waitering and waitressing and
entertaining.
§ 65-4. Permit required.
No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed
premises shall permit on his licensed premises any music, except
radio or other mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any
sort unless the licensee shall have first obtained from the municipality
in which the licensed premises are situated a special amusement
() permit signed by at least a majority of the municipal officers.
()
§ 65-5. Application for permit.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in
writing to the municipal officers and shall state:
A. The name of the applicant.
6503
§ 65-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 65-6
B. The applicant's residence address.
C. The name of the business to be conducted.
D. The applicant's business address.
E. The nature of the app.licant's business.
F. The location to be used.
G. All places of residence of the applicant during the past five (5)
years.
H. Whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the
business therein described either denied or revoked, and if so,
the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically.
I. Whether the applicant, including all partners or corporate
officers, has ever been convicted of a felony. and if so, the
applicant shall describe specifically those circumstances.
J. Any additional information as may be needed by the
municipal officers in the issuing of the permit, including but
not limited t.o a copy of the applicant's current liquor license.
§ 65-6. Issuance of permit.
A. No permit shall be issued for any thing or act or premises if
the premises and building to be used for the purposes do not
fully comply with all ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules and
regulations of the municipality.
B. rhe fee for a special amusement permit shall be set. by the
Town Council by resolution.1
C. The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and
aft.er reasonable notice to the municipality and the applicant,
hold a public hearing at which the testimony of the applicant
and that of any interest.ed members of the public shall be
t.aken.
1 Edltor'a Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code: aee Ch. l, General Provblons, ArL I.
6504
r-''· \ '_)
(,tJ. ~
cJ
§ 65-6 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 65-7
D. The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find
that issuance of the permit will be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare or would violate municipal ordinances
or rules and regulations, articles or bylaws.
E. A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the
applicant's existing liquor license.
§ 65-7. Conduct constituting offenses by licensees.
A. Tumultuous conduct. The licensee shall not knowingly allow on
any licensed premises any person or persons to disturb, tend to
disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others of ordinary
sensibilities or to be disorderly by violent, tumultuous,
offensive or obstreperous conduct; or permit to gather a crowd
or audience or patrons to witness any entertainment.
amusement or show so as to create a dangerous condition
because of fire or other risks in derogation of the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety or welfare.
B. Riots. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises
any public entertain.ment or amusement or· show of any kind
which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.
C. Unnecessary noise. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed
premises the making, creation or maintenance of excessive,
unnecessary or unreasonably loud noise which disturbs.
annoys. injures, prejudices or endangers the comfort, repose.
health, peace or safety of individuals of ordinary sensibilities
or the public in general or the property rights of others, and
which noise affects and is a detriment to the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety. welfare or prosperity of the
residents of the municipality.
D. Nuisances. The licensee shall not allow any licensed -premises
to be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in
fact under any ordinances or any sections of any ordinances.
articles, bylaws or rules and regulations of the municipality or
under any statutes of the State of Maine.
6505
§ 4-1 PETITIONS
Chapter 4
PETITIONS
ARTICLE I
Petitions Flied Pursuant to Charter
Sections C901 and C903
§ 4-1. Section C901 petitions.
§ 4-2. Section C903 petitions.
§ 4-3. Council review.
§ 4-1
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated In article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Jnltfadve and referendum - See Charter, Art. IX.
Administration of 1ovemment - See Ch. 3.
ARTICLE I
Petitions Filed Pursuant to Charter
Sections C901 and C903
[Adopted 9-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005)
§ 4-1. Section C901 petitions.
Petitions pursuant to § C901 of the Charter shall be
administered as follows:
A. Request for petition blanks.
(1) Any five registered voters may begin referendum
proceedings pursuant to § C901 of the Charter by
submitting a written request for petition blanks to
the Town Clerk. or the Clerk's designee.
401 07 - 01-2006
§ 4-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-1
(2) The written request for petition blanks must
include, or have attached thereto, the full text of the
ordinance, order or resolve sought to be
reconsidered. The written request must also include
the printed name and address of each individual
signing the request so that the Town Clerk may
contact them about the proceedings.
(3) Upon filing of the request for petition blanks, the
request becomes the property of the Town, and the
Town Clerk shall mark the request with the time
and date of filing. No changes, additions or deletions
to the request shall be allowed after filing, and the
request, and all documents related to the request,
shall be maintained by the Town Clerk in a secure
location accessible only by the Town Clerk or the
Clerk's designee. The request and related
documents may only be examined in the presence of
the Town Clerk or the Clerk's designee.
(4) Action by Town Clerk upon filing: review.
(a) The Clerk shall within ~ reasonable time,
determine whether the request has been signed
by five registered voters of the Town, whether
the full text of the ordinance, order or resolve
sought to be reconsidered is included in the
request or attached to it, and whether
consideration of the subject matter is prohibited
by§ C906 of the Charter. Copies of the request
shall be provided to members of the Council
upon request. Copies of the request shall be
provided to the public upon payment of
. photocopy charges. The Town Clerk may seek
legal advice concerning the sufficiency of the
request and the validity of the signatures with
the permission of the Town Manager.
[ 1] If the Town Clerk determines that the
request is not in proper form, has not been
signed by five registered voters of the
402 07 -01-2006
"~
§ 4-1 PETITIONS § 4-1
Town, or consideration of the subject
matter is prohibited by § C906 of the
Charter, the Town Clerk shall inform, in
writing, the individuals who signed the
request, the Town Manager and members
of the Town Council of the decision and
that petition blanks will not be issued
pending further action of the Town Council.
(2) If the Town Clerk determines that the
request is in proper form, has been signed
by five registered voters of the Town, and
consideration of the subject matter is not
prohibited by § C906 of the Charter, the
Clerk shall inform, in writing, the
individuals who signed the request, the
Town Manager and members of the Town
Council of the decision and prepare petition
blanks.
(b) The decision of the Town Clerk shall be
reviewed by the Town Council at its next
meeting. Review by the Town Council shall be
pursuant to § 4-3 of this chapter.
B. Size and style of petition blanks; circulation; filing.
( 1} Each petition blank shall be uniform in size and
style and shall:
(a) Contain or have attached thereto throughout its
circulation, the full text of the ordinance, order
or resolve sought to be reconsidered;
(b) Be signed only by registered voters of the Town,
and the signature shall be followed by the
voter's name printed in a legible manner along
with his address;
(c) Contain a statement by the circulator thereof
that he personally circulated the paper, the
number of signatures thereon, that all
signatures were affixed in his presence, that he
403 07 - 01 -2006
§ 4-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-1
believes them to be the genuine signatures of
the persons whose names they purport to be
and that each signer had an opportunity before
signing to read the full text of the ordinance,
order or resolve sought to be reconsidered. The
statement of the circulator shall be made under
oath by affidavit.
(2) The completed petition blanks shall be assembled by
the circulators as one instrument for filing and must
be filed with the Town Clerk or the Clerk's designee,
at the Town Office within 10 days after the
enactment of any such ordinance, order or resolve,
or the next business day should the 10th day fall on
a nonbusiness day. "Assembled by the circulators as
one instrument for filing" means that all of the
petition sheets are filed with the Town Clerk at the
same time. Town office personnel may take the oath
of circulators. All such inquiries shall be directed to
the Town Manager concerning procedures.
(3) Upon filing of the petition with the Town Clerk, the
petition becomes the property of the Town, and the
Town Clerk shall mark each sheet of the petition
with tlie time and date of filing. No changes,
additions or deletions to the petition shall be
allowed after filing, and the petition, and all
documents related to the petition, shall be
maintained by the Town Clerk in a secure location
accessible only by the Town Clerk or the Clerk's
designee. The petition and related documents may
only be examined in the presence of the Town Clerk
or the Clerk's designee. Copies of the petition shall
be provided to members of the Council upon request.
Copies of the petition shall be provided to the public
upon payment of photocopy charges. The Town
Clerk may seek legal advice concerning the
sufficiency of the petition and the validity of the
signatures with the permission of the Town
Manager.
404 07-01 - 2006
§ 4-1 PETITIONS § 4-1
(4) Action by Town Clerk upon filing; review.
(a) The Clerk shall within a reasonable time,
determine whether each sheet of the petition
conforms to Subsection B(l) and whether the
petition has been signed by registered voters of
the Town numbering at least 20% of the
number of votes cast in the Town at the last
gubernatorial election.
lIJ If the Town Clerk determines that the
petition was not filed in a timely manner,
is not in proper form, or has not been
signed by the required number of voters of
the Town, the Town Clerk shall inform, in
writing, the individuals who signed the
request, the Town Manager and members
of the Town Council of the decision, and no
further action concerning the petition shall
be taken pending further action by the
Town Council.
[2] If the Town Clerk determines that the
petition was filed in a timely manner, is in
proper form and has been signed by the
required number of voters of the Town, the
Clerk shall inform, in writing, the
individuals who signed the request for
petition blanks, the Town Manager and
members of the Town Council of the
decision and request the Town Council to
call a public hearing concerning the
petition pursuant to Subsection C(l).
(b) The decision of the Town Clerk shall be
reviewed by the Town Council at its next
meeting. Review by the Town Council shall be
pursuant to § 4-3 of this chapter.
405 07-01-2006
§ 4-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-2
C. Action by Town Council; public hearing.
(1) Upon receipt of the determination by the Town
Clerk that the petition meets the requirements of
the Charter and this chapter, the Town Council
shall call a public hearing concerning the petition to
be held within 14 days from the date of the filing of
such petition with the Town Clerk. The first order of
business by the Council at the public hearing shall
be consideration of the report of the Town Clerk
concerning the petition which shall either be
accepted. accepted with modification or rejected.
Further proceedings concerning the petition shall be
consistent with the order of the Council accepting or
rejecting the report of the Town Clerk.
(2) Within 14 days of the public hearing conducted
pursuant to Subsection C(l) and determination by
the Council that the petition is in accordance with
the requirements of the Charter and this chapter,
the Town Council shall call a special municipal
election for the purpose of submitting to a
referendum vote the question of adopting such
ordinance, order or resolve. The form of the ballot
shall be as set out in C904 of the Charter.
D. Upon determination by the Town Council that the
petition meets the requirements of the Charter and this
chapter and that a referendum election will be held, the
referred ordinance, order or resolve shall be suspended
from going into operation until it has received a vote of
the majority of voters voting on said question.
§ 4-2. Section C903 petitions.
Petitions pursuant to § C903 of the Charter shall be
administered as follows:
A. Request for petition blanks.
406 07 - 01 - 2006
•
§ 4-2 PETITIONS § 4-2
( 1) Any five registered voters may begin initiative
proceedings pursuant to Section C903 of the Charter
by submitting a written request for petition blanks
to the Town Clerk, or the Clerk's designee.
(2) The written request for petition blanks must
include, or have attached thereto, the complete title
and text of the proposed ordinance. The written
request must also include the printed name and
address of each individual signing the request so
that the Town Clerk may contact them about the
proceedings.
(3) Upon filing of the request for petition blanks, the
request becomes the property of the Town, and the
Town Clerk shall mark the request with the time
and date of filing. No changes, additions or deletions
to the request shall be allowed after filing, and. the
request, and all documents related to the request,
shall be maintained by the Town Clerk in a secure
location accessible only by the Town Clerk or the
Clerk's designee. The request and related
documents may only be examined in the presence of
the Town Clerk or the Clerk's designee.
(4) Action by Town Clerk upon filing; review.
(a) The Clerk shall within a reasonable time,
determine whether the request has been signed
by five registered voters of the Town, whether
the complete text of the proposed ordinance is
included in the request or attached to it, and
whether consideration of the subject matter is
prohibited by § C906 of the Charter. Copies of
the request shall be provided to members of the
Council upon request. Copies of the request
shall be provided to the public upon payment of
photocopy charges. The Town Clerk may seek
legal advice concerning the sufficiency of the
request and the validity of the signatures with
the permission of the Town Manager.
407 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 4-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-2
[1] If the Town Clerk determines that the
request is not in proper form, has not been
signed by five registered voters of the
Town, or consideration of the subject
matter is prohibited by § C906 of the
Charter, the Town Clerk shall inform, in
writing. the individuals who signed the
request, the Town Manager and members
of the Town Council of the decision and
that petition blanks will not be issued
pending further action of the Town Council.
[2] If the Town Clerk determines that the
request is in proper form, has been signed
by five registered voters of the Town, and
consideration of the subject matter is not
prohibited by § C906 of the Charter, the
Clerk shall inform, in writing. the
individuals who signed the request, the
Town Manager and members of the Town
Council of the decision and prepare petition
blanks.
(b) The decision of the Town Clerk shall be
reviewed by the Town Council at its next
meeting. Review by the Town Council shall be
pursuant to § 4-3 of this. chapter.
B. Size and style of petition blanks; circulation; filing.
(1) Each petition blank shall be uniform in size and
style and shall:
(a) Contain or have attached thereto throughout its
circulation the complete text of the proposed
ordinance; •
(b) Be signed only by registered voters of the Town.
and the signature shall be followed by the
voter's name printed in a legible manner along
with his address;
408 07- 01 - 2006
§ 4-2 PETITIONS § 4-2
(c) Contain a statement by the circulator thereof
that he personally circulated the paper. the
number of signatures thereon, that all
signatures were affixed in his presence. that he
believes them to be the genuine signatures of
the persons whose names they purport to be
and that each signer had an opportunity before
signing to read the full text of the proposed
ordinance. The statement of the circulator shall
be made under oath by affidavit.
(2) The completed petition blanks shall be assembled by
the circulators as one instrument for filing.
"Assembled by the circulators as one instrument for
filing" means that all of the petition sheets are filed
with the Town Clerk at the same time. Town office
personnel may take the oath of circulators. All such
inquiries shall be directed to the Town Manager
concerning procedure.
(3) Upon filing of the petition with the Town Clerk. the
petition becomes the property of the Town, and the
Town Clerk shall mark each sheet of the petition
with the time and date of filing. No changes,
additions or deletions to the petition shall be
allowed after filing, and the petition, and all
documents related to the petition, shall be
maintained by the Town Clerk in a secure location
accessible only by the Town Clerk or the Clerk's
designee. The petition and related documents may
only be examined in the presence of the Town Clerk
or the Clerk's designee. Copies of the petition shall
be provided to members of the Counci1 upon request.
Copies of the petition shall be provided to the public
upon payment of photocopy charges. The Town
Clerk may seek legal advice concerning the
sufficiency of the petition and the validity of the
signatures with the permission of the Town
Manager.
409 07 - 01 - 2006

§ 4-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-2
(4) Action by Town Clerk upon filing; review.
(a) The Clerk shall within a reasonable time,
determine whether each sheet of the petition
conforms to Subsection B(l) and whether the
petition has been signed by registered voters of
the Town numbering at least 20% of the
number of votes cast in the Town at the last
gubernatorial election.
[1) If the Town Clerk determines that the
petition is not in proper form, or has not
been signed by the required number of
voters of the Town, the Town Clerk shall
inform, in writing, the individuals who
signed the request, the Town Manager and
members of the Town Council of the
decision, and no further action concerning
the petition shall be taken pending further
action by the Town Council.
(21 If the Town Clerk determines that the
petition was filed in a timely manner, is in
proper form and has been signed by the
required number of voters of the Town, the
Clerk shall inform, in writing, the
individuals who signed the request for
petition blanks, the Town Manager and
members of the Town Council of the
decision and request the Town Council to
call a public hearing concerning the
petition pursuant to Subsection C(l).
(b) The decision of the Town Clerk shall be
reviewed by the Town Council at its next
meeting. Review by the Town Councll shall be
pursuant to § 4-3 of this chapter.
C. Action by Town Council, public hearing.
(1) Upon receipt of the determination by the Town
Clerk that the petition meets the requirements of
410 07 - 01 - 2006
a
\BJ
•
•
•
§ 4-2 PETITIONS § 4-3
the Charter and this chapter, the Town Council
shall call a public hearing concerning the petition to
be held within 14 days from the date of the filing of
such petition with the Town Clerk. The first order of
business by the Council at the public hearing shall
be consideration of the report of the Town Clerk
concerning the petition which shall either be
accepted, accepted with modification or rejected.
Further proceedings ·concerning the petition shall be
consistent with the order of the Council accepting or
rejecting the report of the Town Clerk.
(2) Within 14 days of the public hearing conducted
pursuant to Subsection C(l) and determination by
the Council that the petition is in accordance with
the requirements of the Charter and this chapter,
the Town Council shall call a special municipal
election for the purpose of submitting to a
referendum vote the question of adopting such
proposed ordinance.
D. Any such proposed ordinance shall be examined by the
Town Attorney before being submitted to the voters in
accordance with § C903D of the Charter. The form of the
ballot shall oe as set out in § C904 of the Charter.
§ 4-3. Council review.
A. Review of the sufficiency or validity of petitions shall be
conducted by the Town Council in workshop session
should the Town Council determine that review is
necessary. State election law and procedure shall be a
nonbinding guide for the Town Clerk and Town Council
in reviewing petitions, but the decision of the Town
Council shall be final concerning all such questions.
B. The Town Manager, Town Clerk, and Town personnel
involved with handling the petition under review shall
all be present at the workshop. The Town Clerk shall
ensure that all documents under review as well as the
411 07 - 01- 2006
§ 4-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 4-3
current Town voting list are available at the workshop as
well as all documents necessary to determine the
number of votes cast in the Town at the last
gubernatorial election.
C. All questions shall be determined by majority vote of the
Town Council.
D. No determination of the Town Clerk, Town Manager or •
other Town personnel shall be binding on the Town
Council in interpreting this chapter or the Town Charter.
E. Workshops concerning petitions shall be conducted under
the authority of the Town Council pursuant to§§ C204D
and C212 of the Charter.
412 07- 01- 2006 a •
§ 5-1 APPEALS, BOARD OF
Chapter5
APPEALS, BOARD OF
§ 5-1. Establishment.
§ 5-2. Terms of members; vacancies.
§ 5-3. Qualifications.
§ 5-4. Conflict of interest.
§ 5-5. Rules; meetings.
§ 5-6. Budget and explanatory message.
§ 5-7. Appeals.
§ 5 .. s. Powers and duties.
§ 5-9. Compliance with Charter.
§ 5-1
[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-1981 as Art. I of Ch. 5 of the Millinocket
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL BEFERENCES
Authority for establishment of Board of Appeal• - See Charter, I C703.
Zonillg - See Ch. 125.
§ 5-1. Establishment.
A. The Board of Appeals is hereby established. The Board of
Appeals, also referred to in this chapter as the "Board,"
shall consist of five members appointed by the Council.
Each member shall serve for a term of three years.
[Amended 2-6-1986 ~y Ord. No. 2-86; 12-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 7-98)
501 4-1-2000
§ 5-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 5-5
B. The present Board of Appeals for the Town of Millinocket
now constituted shall constitute the Board of Appeals
under this chapter, and each member thereof shall serve
the remainder of his or her present term.
§ 5-2. Terms of members; vacancies. •
The Town Council by a majority vote shall, upon the
expiration of each member's term, appoint a member of the
Board for a three-year term. When a vacancy occurs on the
Board of Appeals, it shall be filled by appointment by the Town
Council to finish the unexpired term.
§ !).3. Qualifications.
Board of Appeals' members shall be qualified electors of the
town and shall reside in the town during their term of office.
Neither a municipal officer nor his or her spouse shall be a
member of the Board.
§ 5-4. Conflict of interest.
The Board of Appeals shall determine by a majority vote
whether or not a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a
member from voting thereon exists after a challenge based on
confilct of interest is made by a party to the hearing or a
member of the Board.
§ 5-5. Rules; meetings. [Amended 12-3-1998 by Ord. No •
7-98]
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the
conduct of its affairs. The Chairman, or in his absence the
Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and
other official actions, all of which shall be a public record.
502
•
§ 5-5 APPEALS, BOARD OF § 5-8
Meetings of the Board shall be conducted as provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 2691. A majority of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 5-6. Budget and explanatory message.
The Board of Appeals shall submit a budget and explanatory
budget message to the Town Manager at least 45 days prior to
the new fiscal year, in accordance with the procedure set forth
in § C502 of the Town Charter.
§ 5-7. Appeals. [Amended 12-3-1998 by Ord. No. 7-98)
An appeal may be taken from any decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer to the Board of Appeals and from the Board of
Appeals to the Superior Court pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691.
§ 5-8. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers.
A. Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the
Building Inspector in the enforcement of any provision
authorizing such appeals.
B. Exceptions. To hear and decide only such exceptions
upon which the Board is required to pass under the
terms of any provision.
C. Variances. To hear and decide, upon appeal, such
variances as may be authorized by any provision. A
variance may be granted by the Board only where strict
application of the ordinance or a provision thereof to the
petitioner and his or her property would cause undue
hardship. The words "undue hardship" as used in this
subsection mean:
503 4-1-2000
§ 5-8 MILLINOCKET CODE
( 1) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable
return unless a variance is granted.
(2) That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood.
(3) That the granting of a variance will not alter the ....
essential character of the locality.
( 4) That the hardship is not the result of action taken
by the applicant or a prior owner.
§ 5-9. Compliance with Charter.
The Board of Appeals shall operate subject to all provisions of
the Town Charter with respect to operation of the town offices,
departments or agencies.
504 4-1-2000
a
'11
•
§ 7-1 BUDGET
Chapter7
BUDGET
ARTICLE I
Presentation and Approval for Planned Capital
Expenditures and/or Indebtedness
§ 7·1. Process established.
School Department.
§ 7-2
§ 7-2.
§ 7-3. Other departments, agencies, offices, and
wastewater treatment.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Presentation and Approval for Planned Capital
Expenditures and/or Indebtedness
[Adopted 1·9·2003 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
§ 7·1. Process established.
The following process shall be used by the various departments,
offices, and agencies of the Town in the presentation of
any proposed capital budget items and/or proposed
indebtedness to finance them.
§ 7-2. School Department.
The School Department shall present its overall budget as
defined in Article IV, Section C405 of the Town Charter. As part
of this presentation, the School Department shall make special
presentation by each affected line item category of any proposed
701 03 - 30 - 2003
§ 7-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 7-3
capital expenditure or proposed indebtedness, either of which is
$5,000 or more. The Town Council shall consider these
proposals within the scope of the entire line item category, per
the requirements of C405, Subsection C. Once the budget for
each line item category is approved, the School Committee shall
be authorized to expend all such funds so voted and shall be
empowered to make capital expenditures and to enter into
appropriate forms of indebtedness (loans, lease/purchase
agreements containing nonappropriation clauses, capital leases,
etc.) as are prudent and necessary to complete such
acquisitions. The Town Council shall approve all expenditures
that require specific approval of the Town Council, bonding,
and/or the pledging of the full faith and credit of the Town. The
requirements of this section shall not apply to major or
significant repair or maintenance items, even if such items
exceed $5,000 in cost.
§ 7.3. Other departments, agencies, offices, and
wastewater treatment.
All other municipal departments, agencies, offices, and
wastewater treatment shall present their overall budgets to the
Town Council per the requirements of Article V of the Town
Charter. The Town Manager shall make special presentation of
each proposed capital expenditure or proposed indebtedness to
finance such expenditures. The total ca• pital expenditure budget
and/or indebtedness method, if any, to finance it shall require
the approval of the Town Council as part of the budget adoption
process. The 'lbwn Council shall then approve each specific
capital expenditure and/or appropriate indebtedness method to
finance it during the fiscal year as each item is proposed for
purchase.
702 03-30-2005
•
-•
§ 9-1 CEMETERY COMMISSION
Chapter9
CEMETERY COMMISSION
I 9-1. Establishment; appointment; vacancies.
I 9-2. Qualifications.
I 9-3. Powen and duties.
I 9-4. Meetings.
§ 9-6. Chairman; Vice Chairman; vacancies.
I 9-6. Budget and explanatory message.
§ 9-7. Cemetery Superintendent; powers and duties.
§ 9-8. Compliance with Charter.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Art. II of Ch. 5 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Creation of ad\'110ry commlllllona- See Ch. 8. 1 3-27.
I 9-1. Establishment; appointment; vaeancles.
There shall be a Cemetery Commission, which shall consist of five
(6) members appointed by the Town Council for five (5) years. Should
a vacancy occur in said Commission, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by the Town Council t.o finish the unexpired term. The
present Commission shall constitute the Cemetery Commission under
this chapter. and each member thereof shall serve the remainder of
his or her present term.
901
MILLINOCKET CODE § 94
I 9-2. Qualifications.
Commission members shall be qualified electors of the town and
shall reside in the town during their term of office.
§ 9-3. Powen and duties.
The Cemetery Com mission shall have the following powers and
duties:
A. Operation of cemetery. Be responsible for the operation of the
Millinocket Cemetery, within the limitations of statutory
authority, the Millinocket Town Charter and the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Appointment/removal of Superintendent. Make recommendations
in the appointment and removal of the Cemetery
Superintendent and other cemetery employees.
C. Employee regulations. In conjunction with the Town Manager
or his designee. adopt and prescribe rules and regulations
governing the duties of the Superintendent and other cemetery
employees, subject to the approval of the Council.
D. Rules governing use. Make. alter and repeal rules and
regulations, subject t.o the approval of the Town Council, as to
the use of the cemetery by the public and for such other
purpose as may be required to carry out the responsibility of
the Commission.
E. Fee schedule. Recommend from time to time for Council
approval prices to be charged for plots and opening and
closing of graves. '
§ 9-4. Meetings.
The Cemetery Commission shall, at its first meeting or as soon
thereafter as ~ible. establish by rules and regulations a regular
place and time for holding its regular meetings and shall meet
regularly at least once a month. It shall also provide a method for
calling special meetings. Actions of the Commission shall be recorded
902
•
~ 'Ci
I 9-4 CEMETERY COMMISSION
by the Chairman and a copy thereof fi)ed with the Town Council
within a reasonable time after such action is taken.
I 9-0. Chairman; Vice Chairman; vacancies.
At its first meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable, the
Cemetery Commission shalJ elect, by majority vote of the entire
Commission. one of its members to serve for the ensuing year as
Chairman and one of its members to serve as Vice Chairman. The
Commission may fill, for an unexpired term, any vacancy in the office
of Chairman or Vice Chairman that may occur.
I 9-6. Budset and explanatory message.
The Cemetery Commission shall submit to the Town Manager a
budget and explanatriry budget · message in accordance with the
procedure set forth in § C502 of the Town Charter and at least fortyfive
(45) days prior to the new fiscal year.
I 9-7. Cemetery Superintendent; powers and duties.
The Cemetery Superintendent shall be the chief administrative
officer for the Cemetery Commission and shall be responsible to the
Manager for the proper administration of all cemetery affairs. He
shall have the power and be required to:
A. Control over employees. Exercise such authority as the Town
Manager may grant to appoint, prescribe the duties and
removal of employees.
B. Budget. Prepare a budget annually, submit it to the Cemetery
Commission and be responsible for its administration after
adoption by the Council.
C. Relation to Commission. Attend the meetings of the Commis~
sion, keep the Commission advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the cemetery and make such recommenda~
tions as may seem to him desirable.
903
§ 9-7 MILLINOCKET CODE § 9-8
D. Purchasing Agent. Act as Purchasing Agent for the Commission
tD the extent that the Town Manager may grant such
authority in writing.
E. Other duties. Perform such duties as may be prescribed by
law, ordinance or required of him by the Commission, not
inconsistent with this chapter, including but not limited to:
~
~,
(1) Providing for attendapce at all funerals .and execution of •
proper forms for filing with the Town Clerk.
(2) Operation of the vault and providing for ·burials
therefrom.
(3) Maintaining the cemetery to standards set by the Town
Council from time to time.
(4) Authorizing assignment of lots, the money tD be paid by
the purchaser tD the Town Treasurer.
(5) Maintaining suitable plans and maps to locate specific
burial plots and providing adequate ground reference
points with respect tD said plots.
I 9-8. Compliance with Charter.
The Commission shall operate subject tD all provisions of the Town
Charter with respect to operation of the town offices, departments or
agencies.
904
AZ\ ""
~
~
p
LIBRARY BOARD OJt, TRUSTEES
Chapter 17
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
f 17-1. Establishment of Miiiinocket Memorial Library.
I 17-2. Membenhip; appointment; term.
§ 17 ~. Qualifications.
I 17-4. Powers and duties.
§ 17-5. Compensation of members.
I 17..f>. Meetings.
§ 17-7. Vacancies.
§ 17-8. Rules. and procedure.
§ 17-9. Secretary of Board.
I 17-10. Appointment of Ubrarian.
I 17-11. Removal of Ubrarlan.
§ 17-12. Budget and explanatory message.
f 17-13. Compliance with Charter.
§ 17-14. Qualifications and powers of Librarian; absence.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Art. III of Ch. 5 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Apnclet ereaCed by town ordlnanee - See Ch. 3, I 3-20.
1701
§ 17-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 17-4
§ 17-1. Establishment of Millinocket Memorial Ubrary.
There shaJI be a Mi11inocket Memorial Library, the head of which
shall be the Library Board of Trustees, which shall consist of
members appointed by the Town Council and responsible to the Town
Manager. The present Board shall constitute the Board of Trus~
under this chapter, and each member thereof shall serve the
remainder of his or her present term.
§ 17-2. Membership; appointment; term.
The Library Board of Trust.ees shall be composed of seven (7)
members, each of whom shall be appointed for a term of seven (7)
years or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Trustees
shall not be eligible to serve two (2) full t.erms in succession. The
Board and Town Clerk shall maintain an up-to-date list of Trust.ees
and their terms.
§ 17-3. Qualifications.
Trustee members shall be qualified electors of the town and .shall
reside in the. town during their term of office. They shall .comply with
the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 2251. If any member shall cease to
possess any of the above qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitu4e, his office shall immediat.ely become vacant.
I 17-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Library Board of Trust.ees shall be responsible to the
Town Manager for the operation of the Millinocket Memorial
~
~
Library for tlte inhabitants of the Town of Millinocket, within ~
the ·limitations of. statutory authority, the Millinocket Town \Qi.I
Chart.er and the provisions of this chapt.er.
B. The Library Board of Trust.ees shall have power to:
(1) Advise the Manager in the appointment and fixing of the
compensation of and removal of the Librarian and the
employees serving under the Librarian.
1702
§ 17-4 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES § 17-6
(2) Make, alter and repeal rules and regulations for the
purpose of carrying out the responsibilities of the
Trustees, with the approval of the Town Council.
(3) Inquire into the conduct of any activities of the library.
§ 17..f>. Compensation of members.
Compensation of the Library Board of Trustees is forbidden except
for travel expense.
§ 17-6. Meetings.
A. Induction of Library Board of Trustees into office. The
Library Board of Trustees shall meet at the usual place for
holding meetings at 7:00 p.m. on the first Wednesday of the
month following the enactment of this chapter, and at such
meeting Trustees-elect shall be sworn t.o the faithful discharge
of their duties by the Town Clerk or Justice of the Peace.
B. Regular meetings. The Library Board of Trustees shall, at its
first meeting or as soon thereafter as possible, establish by
rules and regulations a regular place and time for holding its
regular meetings and shall meet regularly at least once a
month. It shall also provide a method for calling special
meetings.
C. Attendance at meetings. Whenever a Library Board of
Trustee member shall be absent from more than three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the Board without suitable
reason therefor satisfact.ory to the Board, the Chairman of the
Board of Trustees shall notify the absent member and the
Town Council that a vacancy exists, and the Council shall fill
such vacancy in the manner herein provided.
D. Chairman. At its first meeting or as soon thereafter as
practicable. the Board of Trustees shall elect, by majority vote
of the entire Board of Trustees, one of its members t.o serve for
the ensuing year as Chairman, and the Trustees may fill for an
unexpired term any vacancy in the office of the Chairman that
may occur. The Chairman shall not succeed himself, i.e., he
1703
17-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 17-9
cannot serve two (2) fulJ terms in succession. The Chairman
shall preside at the meeting of the Board of Trustees and shall
be recognized as head of the Board of Trustees for all
ceremonial purposes. In the temporary absence or disability of
the Chairman, the Board of Trustees may elect a Chairman
Pro Tempore from among its members, and he shall have all
the powers of the Chairman during such temporary absence or
disability of the Chairman.
E. Quorum. A majority of the Library Board of Trustees shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If a
quorum is not present and those who are present adjourn the
meeting with the intent to reconvene at a time when a quorum
will be present, at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice of the
reconvening . shall be given t.o all members who were not
present at the meeting which was adjourned. Notice shall also
be given in the same manner to media representatives.
17-7. Vacancies.
If a seat in the Library Board of Trustees becomes vacant, the
cancy shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council for the
texpired term within sixty (60) days from the date that the vacancy
curred.
17-8. Rules and procedure.
The Library Board of Trustees shall provide for keeping a record of
> proceedings and shall determine its own rules of procedure and
ake regulations for enforcing the same.
17-9. Secretary of Board.
The Librarian shall act as Secretary of the Board and shall keep a
eord of all proceedings of the Board.
1704
•
~
~
•
§ 17-10 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES § 17-14
I 17·10. Appointment of IJbrarian.
The Library Board of Trustees may advise the Manager in the
appointment of a Librarian, who shall have the powers and perform
the duties provided for in this chapter. The Librarian shall be
appointed for an indefinite term. No member of the Board of Trustees
shall receive such appointment during the term for which he or she
shall have been appointed nor within one (1) year after the expiration
of his or her term, nor shall any member of the Board act in that
capacity.
§ 17-11. Remo\'81 of Ubrarian.
Removal of the Librarian shall follow the procedure set forth in the
Millinocket Personnel Policy, Chapter 2, Article II.
§ 17-12. Budget and explanatory message.
The Library Board of Trustees, at least forty-five (45) days prior to
the beginning of each budget year. shall submit to the Town Manager
a budget and an explanatory budget message in accordance with the
procedure set forth in§ C502 of the Town Charter.
I 17-13. Compliance with Charter.
The Library Board of Trustees shall operate subject to all provisions
of the Town Charter with respect to operation of town offices,
departments or agencies.
§ 17-14. Qualifications and powers of Ubrarian; absence.
A. Qualifications. The Librarian shall be chosen by the Manager,
giving special consideration to his or her executive and
administrative qualifications and to his or her actual
experience in or knowledge of accepted practices with respect
to the duties of the office as hereinbefore set forth. Other
factors outlined in Section 2·203 of the Personnel Policy shall
also be considered. At the time of his or her appointment, the
Librarian need not be a resident of this town or state.
1705
§ 17~14 MILLINOCKET CODE § 17·14
B. Chief administrator. The Librarian shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Millinocket Memorial Library
and shall be responsible to the Town Manager for the proper
administration of all library affairs. He or she shall have the
power and be required to:
(1) Exercise such authority as the Town Manager may grant
tD appoint, prescribe the duties of and, when necessary •
for the good of the library, remove employees of the
library, pursuant to procedures authorized by the
Charter and Personnel Policy.
(2) Prepare, in conjunction with the Board of Trustees,
budgetary r~mmendations and submit same to the
Board of Trustees.
(3) Prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees as of the end
of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the library for the preceding
year, a copy of said report tD be filed with the Town
Manager.
(4) Attend the meetings of the Board of Trustees, except
when excused by the Board, keep the Board advised of
the financial condition and future needs of the library
and make such recommendations as may seem desirable.
(5) Act as Purchasing Agent for the library, to the extent
that such authority is delegated by the Manager and
subject to the Manager's supervision.
(6) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law.
ordinance or required by the Manager. not inconsistent
with this chapt.er or the Charter.
C. Absence of Librarian. The Librarian may, with the consent of 8'
the Town Manager, designate by letter filed \\ith the Town wj
Clerk a qualified person tD perform his or her duties during
his or her temporary absence or disability. In the event that
the Librarian fails to make such a designation. the Town
Manager may appoint any qualified employee to perform the
duties of the Librarian until he or she shall return or his or her
disability shall cease.
1706 •
J,· ';.,·'. ·9.
•. .".."..'
~-
e'tlf'~l
1·3· · \ . ~.·~. ! .'
I 21-1 NURSINli COMMISSION § 21-1
Chapter 21
NURSING COMMISSION
t 21-1. Establishment; appointment.
I 21-2. Membership; term.
I 21-a. Qualllleatlons.
I 21-4. Vacancies.
I 21-0. Responsibilities.
I 21.a. Compensation of members.
I 21-7. Powers and duties.
§ 21..S. Budget and explanatory messap.
I 21-9. Compliance with Charter.
I 21·10. Meetings.
I 21·11. Nurse.
(HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21..Sl as Art. IV of Ch. 5 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REPERENCES
Cnatfon of •d"'IOrJ cemmmlo•- See Ch. 3.1 :1-21.
§ 21-1. Establishment; appointment.
There shall be a Millinocket Nursing Commission, which shall
consist of members appointed by the Town Council and responsible to
the Manager. The responsibility of the Nursing Commission is to
oversee the activities of the District Nurse. The present Commission
2101
§ 21-l MILLINOCKET CODE § 21-5
shall coMtitute the Nursing Commission under this chapter, and each
member thereof shall serve the remainder of his or her present term.
§ 21-2. Membership; term.
The Millinocket Nursing Commission shall be composed of five (5) (
members, one of which shall be a. qualified nurse. Each member shall
be appointed for a term of five (5) years or until his or her successor
is appoint.eel and qualified.
§ 21-3. Qualifications.
Commission members shall be qualified electors of the town and
shall reside in the tnwn during their t.erm of office. They shall comply
with provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 2251 with respect tn conflicts of
interest. If a member shall cease to possess any of the above
qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, his or her office shall immediately become vacant.
§ 214. Vacancies.
Whenever a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by Town Council for the unexpired term within sixty
(60) days from the date that the vacancy occurred.
§ 21-5. Responsibilities.
The Millinocket Nursing Commission shall be responsible t.o the
Town Manager for the performance of the Millinocket District Nurse
and the Public Health Nurse, who shall operat.e within budgetary
limitations and the limitations of statutory authority. the Millinocket
Town Charter and the provisions of this chapter.
2102
,.· .~' ., ~.
\ ~ ""'
I 21-6 NURSING COMMISSION · I 21-s
I 21.a. Compensation of memben.
The Commission members shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(. I 21-7. Powen and duties.
( •.. .., . ...... .:.
'~,.
-I~
\J
A. The Millinocket Nursing Commission shall have power to:
(1) Advise the Manager in the appointment of. fixing the
compensation of and removal of the Nurse and emploYees
serving under the Nurse. The Nurse shall have the
powers and perform the duties provided for in this
chapter. The Nurse shall serve for an indefi.nite term. No
member of the Nursing Commission shall receive such
appointment during the term for which he or she shall
have been appointed nor within one (1) )·ear after the
expiration of his or her term, nor shall any member of the
Commission act in that capacity. A first substitute and
second substitute who are qualified nurses shall also be on
call in the absence of the regular Nurse.
(2) Make. alter and repeal rules and regulations for the
purpose of carrying out the responsibilities of the
Commission, subject to Uie approval of the Town Council.
(3) Inquire into the conduct of any activities of the Nurse
performed in the line of duty.
B. The Millinocket Personnel Policy shall govern the removal of
the Nurse.
I 21-8. Budget and explanatory message.
The Millinocket Nursing Commission, at least forty-five (45) days
prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall submit to the Town
Manager a budget and an explanat.ory budget message in accordance
with the procedure set forth in I C502 of the Town Charter.
21Q3
§ 21-9 MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 21·9. Compliance with Charter.
The Millinocket Nursing Commission shall operate subject t.o all
provisions of the Town Charter with respect to operation of t.own
offices, departments or agencies.
§ 21-10. Meetings.
A. Induction of Millinocket Nursing Commission int.o office. The
members of the Commissiono.elect shall be sworn to the faithful
performance of their duties by a Justice of the Peace or by the
Town Clerk at the first regular meeting following the date of
their appointment
B. Regular meetings. The Millinocket Nursing Commission shall.
at it.a first meeting or as soon thereafter as possible, establish
by rules and regulations a regular place and time for holding
its regular meetings and shall meet regularly at least once a
month. It shall also provide a method for calling special
meetings.
C. Attendance at meetings. Whenever a Millinocket Nursing
Commission member shall be absent from more than three (3)
consecutive regular meetings of the Commission without
suitable reason therefor satisfactory t.o the Commission, the
Chairman of the Millinocket Nursing Commission shall notify
the absent member and the Town Council that a vacancy
exists, and the Town Council shall fill .such vacancy in the
manner herein provided.
D. Chairman. At it.s first meeting or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Millinocket Nursing Commission shall elect.
by majority vot.e of the entire <l>mmission, one of its members
to serve for the ensuing year as Chairman, and the Commission
may fill for an unexpired term any vacancy in the office
of the Chairman that may occur. The Chairman shall preside
at the meetings of the Millinocket Nursing Commission and
shall be recognized as head of the Millinocket Nursing
Commi8sion for · all ceremonial purposes. In the temporary
absence or disability of the Chairman, the Millinocket Nursing
Commission may elect a Chairman Pro Tempore from among
2104
I 21-10 NURSING COMMISSION I 21-11
its members. and he shall have aH the 1»wen of the Chairman
durins such temporary absence or disability of the Chairman.
E. Secretary. The Secretary of the Commission shaJJ be
appointed by the membership of the Commission.
F. Quorum. A ~rity of the Millinocket Nursing Commission
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
G. Rules and procedures. The Millinocket Nursing Commission
shall provide for keeping a record of its proceedings and shall
determine its own rules of procedure and make regulations for
enforcing the same.
I 21-11. Nune.
A. Qualifications. In hiring the Nurse. the Manager shall give
special consideration to his or .her actual experience in and
knowledge of accepted practices in the nursing profession, but
other fact.on outlined in Sec. 2-203 of the Personnel Policy
shall also be considered.
B. Head Nurse. The Head Nurse shall be responsible to the
Manager for the proper administration of all nurse affairs. He
or she shall have the power and be required ta
(1) Prepare, in conjunction with the Nursing Commission.
budgetary recommendations and submit the same t.o the
Millinocket Nursing Commission.
(2) Prepare and submit t.o the MiJlinocket Nursing Commission
as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on
the finances and administrative activities of the Nurse for
the preceding year, a copy of said report tO be filed with
the Town Manager.
(3) Attend the meetings of the Millinocket Nursing Commission,
except when excused by the Commission,. keep the
Commission advised of the financial condition and future
needs of the Nurse and make such recommendations as
may seem desirable, sending copies of those recommendationa
t.o the Manager.
2105
§ 21-11 MILLINOCKJ.~T CODE
(4) Act as Purchasing' Agent for the Millinocket Nursing
Commission to the extent that such authority is delegated
by the Manager and subject to the Manager's supervision.
(5) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law,
ordinance or required of him or her by the Nursing
Commission, not inconsistent with this chapter or the
Charter.
C. Absence of Nurse. In the absence of the Head Nurse, his or
her duties would be undertaken by the first qualified
substitute, with the second qualified substitute to fill in when
necessary.
D. Duties of District Nurse. The duties of the Millinocket District
Nurse will be to furnish nursing assistance to residents of the
Town of Millinocket under the direction of the Millinocket
Nursing Commission. These duties would include assistance to
the Town Welfare Department. local doctors, local school
health clinics and state health departments such as crippled
children, tuberculosis. premature births, etc. In each instance
the Nurse will first call to determine what is needed. All
follow-up calls made will be under the direction of a local
medical doctor. A minimum charge for a visit by the Nurse
will be one dollar ($1.) if the patient is able or desires to pay for
the service; otherwise the service is furnished free of charge.
E. An answering service shall be maintained by the Millinocket
Nursing Commission. It will be the duty of the Nurse to
provide the answering service with the calls t.o be made each
day and where the Nurse may be contacted. If assistance of
the District Nurse is needed during the day, the answering
service will have the responsibility of contacting the Nurse to
give him or her the message.
F. All moneys collected from patients will be turned over to the
Town of Millinocket monthly.
G. Professional liability insurance for the Nurses will be provided
by the Town of Millinocket.
H. All bills, including supplies, telephone, snow removal,
answering service and traveling expense, will be paid by the
Town of Millinocket
2106
().· ., .
()
I 21-11 NURSING COMMISSION I 21-11
I. Service will be maintained by the District Nurse six (6) days
a week. Monda-.v through Satunl". Workday will be from 8:00
a.m. to 4;00 p.m. Regular Nurse wiU have a forty-hour week,
with substitute Nurse covering on the day off and on vacationR.
J. Benefits.
(1) Sick leave time. The Nurse shall be a weekly salaried
emploYee aa stat.ed in the Personnel Policy.
(2) Vacation and holiday schedule. The Nurse shall be a
weekly salaried employee as stated in the Personnel
Policy.
2107
l)
§ 23-1 PLANNING BOARD § 23-2
Chapter23
PLANNING BOARD
§ 23-1. Establishment.
Q § 23-2. Membership; appointment; terms; vacancies.
§ 23-3. Chairman and Secretary; other offices; terms.
§ 23-4. Disqualification from voting.
~.)
§ 23-5. Meetings; quorum; minutes.
§ 23-6. Powers and duties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-1981 as Ch. 12 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planainl Board - See Charter, I C701.
§ 23-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the Maine Constitution, Art. 8, Pt. 2, and 30
M.R.S.A. § 1917, the Town of Millinocket hereby establishes the
Millinocket Planning Board.
§ 23-2. Membership; appointment; terms; vacancies.
A. Appointment by municipal officers. Appointments to the
Board shall be made by the municipal officers.
B. Number of members. The Board shall consist of seven (7)
members and two (2) alternates, who shall be allowed to
participate fully in Board discussions and, when
appointed by the Chair or Acting Chair to replace an
absent or excused regular member, allowed to vote as a
2301 7-10-915
§ 23-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 23-5
regular member. [Amended 1-12-1995 by Ord. No.
9-94]
C. Term. The term of each member shall be five (5) years.
D. Vacancy. When there is a permanent vacancy, the
municipal officers shall, within sixty (60) days of its
occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired
term.
E. Municipal officers as members. No-municipal officer may
serve as a member.
§ 23-3. Chairman and Secretary; other offices; terms.
The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from
among its members and create and fill such other offices as it
may determine. The term of all offices shall be one (1) year,
with eligibility for reelection.
§ 23-4. Disqualification from voting.
Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from
voting on a particular matter shall be decided by a majority
vote of the members except the members who are being
challenged.
§ 23-5. Meetings; quorum; minutes.
A. Regular meetings. The Chairman shall call at least one
(1) regular meeting of the Board each month, or the
Board shall meet as required.
:)
) .
()
B. Quorum. No meeting of the Board shall be held without Q
a quorum consisting of four ( 4) members.
C. Rules; minutes. The Board shall adopt rules for
transactions of business, and the Secretary shall keep a
record of its resolutions, transactions, correspondence,
2302 7 - 10-95 (. J
(. ,.;:Jl
C)
,_)
§ 23-5 PLANNING BOARD § 23-6
findings and determinations. All records shall be deemed
public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
§ 23·6. Powers and duties.
A. Comprehensive Plan. The Board shall prepare a
Comprehensive Plan pursuant to 30 M.R.S.A §§ 4961
and 4962.
B. Other duties. The Board shall perform such duties and
exercise such powers as are provided by town ordinance
and the laws of the State of Maine.
C. Goods and services. The Board may obtain goods and
services necessary to its proper function within the
limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
2303 '1-10 - 94
(J
\J
( .. , ....... ./
~ -~) ' ..
()
I 26-t RECREATION COMMISSION I 26-1
Chal*r21
RECREATION COMMISSION
1 H-1. Eatabllahment
I 28-2. Membenhl~ appointment; term.
t 21-.1. QuaJUleation&
I 28-4. Vaeaneles.
I 26-5. Powen and dude&
I 2M. Compensation.
I 2&-7. Meednp.
I 26-8. Compliance with Charter.
I 28-9. ReereatlOn Dlreetor.
(HISTORY: Adopjed by the Town Council of the Town of
MlDlnoeket 7-21-81 u Art. V of Ch. 5 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendmena neted where applicable.)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cnadon of advbor1 eemmW.• - See Cll. S. t S-21.
I 26-1. ZltabUlhment
There shall be a Recreation Commission, which shall consist of
members appointed by the Town Council and responsible to the
Manager. The responsibility of the Recreation Commission is to
oversee the activities of the Recreation Director. The present
Commission shall constitute the Recreation Commission under this
chapter, and each member thereof shall aerw the remainder of his or
her present term.
2601
§ 26-2 MILLINOCKET CODft~ § 26-5
§ 26-2. Membership; appointment; term.
The Recreation Commission shall be composed of seven (7)
members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Millinocket Town
Council. Members shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms
or until their successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 26-3. Qualifications.
Commission members shall be qualified electors of the town and
shal1 reside in the town during their term of office. They shall comply
with the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 2251 with respect to conflicts of
interest. and if a member ceases to possess any of the above
qualifications or shall be convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, his or her office shall immediately become vacant.
§ 26-4. Vacancies.
()
()
If a seat in the Commission becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be )
filled by appointment by the Town Council for the unexpired term (_
within sixty (60) days from the date that the vacancy occurred.
§ 26-5. Powers and duties.
The Recreation Commission shall be responsible to the Town
Manager for the operation of recreational programs for the
inhabitants of the Town of Millinocket, within the limitations of
statutory authority, the Millinocket Town Chart.er and the provisions
of this chapter. The Commission's powers and duties include the
following:
A. Advise the Manager in the compensation of, appointment of
and removal of the Recreation Director and employees serving
under the Director.
B. Make, alter and repeal rules and regulations for the purpose of
carrying out the responsibilities of the Commission, with the
approval of the Council.
C. Inquire into the conduct of any activities of the Department.
2602
1'7\
\.J
()
()
()
()
RECREATION COMMISSION I 26-7
D. Submit to the Town Manqer a budpt and an explanatory
budpt meuaice. in accordance with the procedure set forth in
I CliO'l of the Town Charter. at least forty-five (46) days prior
to the betrinnin1r of each budret year.
I 26-a. Compematlon.
Commissionen shall receive no compensation for their aervices.
I 2&.7. Meetlnp.
A. Induction of Commisioners into office. The Commission shall
meet at the usual place for holdinar meetings at 7:00 p.m. on
the first Wednesday of the month following the enactment of
this chapter, and at such meeting Commissioners-elect shall be
sworn to the faithful discharge of their duties by a Justice of
the Peace or by the Town Clerk.
B. Regular meetings. The Commission shal1, at its first meeting
or as soon thereafter as possible. establish by rules and
regulations a regular place and time for holding ita regular
meetings and shall meet regularly at least once a month. It
shall also provide a method for calling special meetings.
Actions of the Commission shall be recorded by the Recreation
Director, and a copy thereof shall be filed with the Town
Council within a reasonable time after such action is taken.
C. Attendance at meetings. Whenever a Commission member
shall be absent for more than three (8) consecutive regular
meetings of the Commission without suitable reason therefor
satisfactory to the Commission. the Chairman of the Commission
shall notify the absent member and the Town Council that
a vacancy exists, and the Council shall fill such vacancy in the
manner herein provided.
D. Chairman. At its first meeting or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Commission shall elect, by majority vote of the
entire Commission, one of its members to serve for the ensuing
year as Chairman, and the Commission may fill for an
unexpired term any vacancy in the office of Chairman that
may occur. The Chairman shall preside at the meetings of the
2603
§ 26-7 MILLINOCKET. CODE § 26-9
Commission and shall be recognized as head of the C.-0mmission
for all ceremonial purposes. In the temporary absence or
disability of the Chairman, the Commission may elect a
Chairman Pro Tempore from among ita members. He or she
shall have a11 the powers of Chairman during such temporary
absence or disability of the Chairman.
E. Quorum. A majority of the Commissioners shall constitut.e a ().
quorum for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not
present and those who are present adjourn the meeting with
the intent t.o reconvene when a quorum will be present. at least
twenty-four (24) hours' notice of the reconvening shall be given
to all members who were not present at the meeting which
was adjourned. Notice shall also be given in the same manner
to media representatives.
F. Rules and procedure. The Commission shall provide for
keeping a record of its proceedings and shall det.ermine its
own rules of procedure and make regulations for enforcing the
same.
§ 26-8. Compliance with Charter.
The Commission shall operate subject to all provisions of tbe Town
Charter with respect to operation of t.own offices, departments or
agencies.
§ 26·9. Recreation Director.
A. Appointment. The Manager shall appoint a Recreation
Direct.or for an indefinite term, who shall have the powers and
perform the duties provided in this chapter. No member of the
Commission shalJ receive such appointment during the term
for which he or she shall have been appointed nor within one
(1) year after the expiration of his or her term, nor shall any
member of the Commission act in that capacity.
B. Removal. Removal of the Director shall be in accordance with
the Personnel Policy.
2604
C)
()
.• ') ~
\
()
()
()
I 26-9 RECREATION COMMISSION I 26-9
C. Qualifications. In hirins the Director, the Manager shall give
special eonafderation to his or her executive and administrative
qualifications and to his or her aetual experience and
knowledge or accepted practices with respect t.o the duties of
the office u set forth below. Other facton as outlined in See.
2-203 of the Penonnel Policy shall also be eonsidered. At the
time of his or her appointment. the Director need not be a
resident of the town or state.
D. Chief administrator. The Recreation Director shaJI be ·the
chief administrative officer of the Recreation Department and
shall be responsible to the Manager for the proper administration
of all departmental affairs. He shall have the power and
be required to:
(1) Exen:ise such authority as the Manager may grant to
appoint, prescribe the duties ol and, when necessary for
the good of the recreation program, remove employees of
the Recreation Department.
(2) Prepare a budget annually, submit it to the Recreation
Commission and be responsible for its administration
after adoption.
(3) Prepare and submit to the Recreation Commission as of
the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the Department
for the preceding year, a copy of said report to be filed
with the Town Manager.
(4) Attend the meetings of the Commission, except when his
removal is being considered, keep the Commission
advised of the financial condition and future needs of the
Department and make such recommendations as may
seem desirable to him or her.
(5) Act as Purchasing Agent for the Commission to the
extent that the Town Manager may grant such authority
in writing.
(6) Act as Clerk of the Commission and keep a public record
of all proceedings of the Commission.
§ 26-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 26-9
(7) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law
or ordinance or required of him by the Manager, not
inconsistent with this chapter.
E. Absence. The Director may, with the consent of the Town
Manager, designate by letter filed with the Town Clerk a
qualified person to perform his or her duties during his or her
temporary absence or disability. In the event that the Director
fails to make such a designation, the Town Manager may
appoint any qualified employee to perform the duties of the
Director until he or she shall return or his or her disability
shall cease.
2606
' "".) \.:~ .
!)
()
(i\ ~~;
(:'\ \. -y
('J"
Chapter 27
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 27-1. Intent.
§ 27-2. Authority.
ARTICLE I
Town Council
§ 27-3. Establishment of compensation.
§ 27-4. Amount.
§ 27-5. Other compensation and expenses.
§ 27-6. Effective date of salary increases.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GEl"o"ERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government - See Cb. 3.
ARTICLE I
Town Council
[Adopted 2-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
§ 27-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to set the compensation for
members of the Millinocket Town Council.
27:1 05. 01 . 2011
§ 27-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 27-6
§ 27-2. Authority.
Authority for this article is. found in Article II, § C205 of the
Millinocket Town Charter.
§ 27-3. Establishment of compensation.
The Council shall establish its compensation through
amendment to this article, using the ordinance process.
§ 27-4. Amount. [Amended 5-24-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
Regular Council members will be paid the amount of $1,200 per
year; the Council Chairperson will be paid the amount of
$1,600 per year.
§ 27-5. Other compensation and expenses.
Members of the Council will be eligible to receive expenses for
travel and other costs incurred for the benefit of the town upon
approval of the full Council.
* 27-6. Effective date of salary increases. [Amended
5-24-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
These increases will commence with the Town Council seated
following the November 2007 General Election.
27:2 05 . 01 • 2011 -' ). \ .. . " -.
t)
§ 29A-1 WARRANT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Chapter 29A
WARRANT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
§ 29A-1. Appointment; purpose.
§ 29A-2. Meeting time.
§ 29A-2
§ 29A-3. Review to be in open session; questions;
signing of warrant ..
§ 29A-4. Presentation of ·warrant; approval for
payment.
§ 29A-5. Inability of member to fulfill assignment.
§ 29A-6. Meetings to be publicly listed.
§ 29A-7. Review by other Councilors.
(
,-..) [HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
... .__ .,, Millinocket 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 5-2003. Amendments
<)
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration or government - See Ch. 3.
§ 29A-l. Appointment; purpose.
The Millinocket Town Council Chairperson shall appoint at
each regular Council meeting two Councilors as an ad-hoc
Warrant Subcommittee to review the warrants to be considered
at the next regular Council meeting.
§ 29A-2. Meeting time. [Amended 9-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3-2005)
A. The Warrant Subcommittee shall meet in the Town
Manager's Office 45 minutes prior to the start of the
29A01 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 29A-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 29A-4
regular Town Council meeting of the meeting day for the
next regular Council meeting to review the warrants to
be considered at that Council meeting.
B. If the time of this regular Council meeting Is changed
from its normal 4:30 p.rn. start time, the Warrant
Subcommittee shall meet 45 minutes prior to the start of
such meeting.
§ 29A-3. Review to be in open session; questions: signing
of warrant.
A. The Warrant Subcommittee shall review the warrants in
open session. Other Councilors, the public, and the
media may be present. After the Warrant Subcommittee
has finished its review, other Councilors, members of the
public, or the media may examine the warrants.
B. The Town Manager or his designee will provide the
Warrant Subcommittee with answers to any questions it
may have about any item contained in the warrants. ( ,..),
Routine bills that are higher than normal are to be '-·
flagged by the Town Manager for discussion by the
Warrant Committee. Nonroutine warrants are to be
referred to the entire Council for review before
considering such warrants for approval. Should a special
project experience a significant cost overrun of 10% or
more. the Town Manager shall prepare a memo to the
Town Council to explain the cause(s) of the overrun at
least two days prior to the meeting of the Warrant
Committee, when possible. [Amended 9-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 3-2005]
C. Upon completion of the warrant inspection, the Warrant
Subcommittee shall sign the warrants.
§ 29A-4. Presentation of warrant; approval for payment.
A. At the regular meeting, one of the Warrant
Subcommittee members shall offer an order to approve
29A02 07 - 01 - 2006 I· .0_.
\ . . . !.
/'~ ('0
()·
"
.........
( \ ". .... ,.,,.. -
;.'..)?.; ~: ... ...
r)·· \, ,
§ 29A-4 WARRANT REVIEW AND APPROVAL § 29A-7
each warrant. The presenter shall present the full
Council with the Warrant Subcommittee's
recommendation to approve or disapprove the warrant
as presented or as amended.
B. The warrant(s) shall only be approved for payment upon
a majority vote of the Town Council. after which a
majority of the Council shall sign the warrant(s).
§ 29A-5. Inabillty of member to fulfill assignment.
Should a Warrant Subcommittee member not be able to fulfill
the assignment, (s)he shall inform the Council Chairperson,
and the Chairperson shall appoint another Council member to
replace him/her.
§ 29A-6. Meetings to be publicly listed.
Meetings of the Warrant Subcommittee shall be . publicly
listed on the Town Council meeting agenda.
§ 29A-7. Review by other Councilors.
Nothing in this policy shall prevent other members of the
Town Council from reviewing the warrants at their leisure in
the discharge of their fiduciary duties.
29A03 07 - 01 - 2006
i--:-.• ~· /9- I .~' ·•'
0 ,.
(
'··
()
()
() ' ~
(/ ). .
§ 29-1 TRANSPORTATION, DEPARTMENT OF § 29-2
Chapter29
TRANSPORTATION, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 29-1. Establishment; supervision.
§ 29-2. Transportation Commission.
§ 29-3. Airport Manager.
[filSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-1981 as Art. VI of Ch. 5 of the
Millinocket Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GE.~RAL REFERENCES
CTeaUon of advisory commiHions - See Cb. 3, I 3-27.
Airpori - See Ch. 33.
§ 29-1. Establishment; supervision.
There shall be a Department of Transportation, which shall
be headed by a Transportation Commission, members of which
shall be appointed annually in the month of March by the
Council. The present Commission shall constitute the
Transportation Commission under this chapter, and each
member thereof shall serve the remainder of his or her present
term.
§ 29-2. Transportation Commission.
A. Composition. The Commission shall consist of five (5)
members who shall serve for terms of three (3) years.
Initial appointments shall peas follows: one (1) member
appointed for one (1) year, two (2) members appointed for
two (2) years and two (2) members appointed for three
(3) years, respectively. The Board shall elect a Chairman
and a Secretary from its own membership. Vacancies in
the membership shall be :filled by the Council within a
2901 4-25-93
§ 29-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 29-2
reasonable time after the vacancies occur. [Amended
5-22-1986 by Ord. No. 6-86)
B. Conflict of interest. No member of the Commission shall
profit directly or indirectly from airport activities under
Commission control.
C. Rules. The Commission shall determine its own rules of
procedure.
D. Duties. Duties of the Commission shall include but not
be limited to the following:
(1) Advise the Council as to both air and ground
transportation needs of the town and recommend
desirable improvements.
(2) Keep advised as to air and ground transportation
developments at both federal and state levels.
(3) Have knowledge of state and federal programs
designed to aid towns in construction, maintenance
and operation of transportation facilities.
(4) Operate and maintain the Millinocket Municipal
Airport and, with respect thereto, give full
consideration to the fact that justification for using
public funds for the support of the airport is to:
(a) Provide safe air transportation to and from
other landing facilities for its citizens and for
the businesses and industries which support its
citizens.
(b) Encourage incidental aeronautical activities not
inconsistent with Subsection D(4)(a) above.
(5) In operating and maintaining the airport, the
following specific duties and obligations:
(a) Administer the airport budget as approved by
the Town Council, to the extent authorized by
the Manager and subject to the Manager's
supervision.
2902 4-25-93
()
()
C.)
C.)
(\_J~
0
0
(}
0
§ 29-2 TRANSPORTATION, DEPARTMENT OF
(b) Recommend a budget to the Town Council and
present it to the Town Manager as provided by
Article Vofthe Town Charter.1
(Cont'd on page 2903)
1 Editor's Note: The Charter i• included at the berinninr of this volwne.
2902.1
()
()
()
0
()
Q
(): ,.
;""""\
\ ...... '
()
TRANSPORTATION. DEPARTMENT OF I 29-2
(c) Establish and maintain emerpncy procedures with
police. fire, ambulance, hoepital and eivil defense
agencies and local maintenance departments.
(d) Maintain all airport property with particular
reference to glide zone areas. safety strips. runways.
ramps. tie-down areas, fences, signs, roadways,
lighting structures and installations, buried cables.
water wells. drainage systems, hangars. navigational
aids. weather installations. · petroleum installations,
sewerage facilities. airport buildings and equipment
and all off-airport safety navigational aids.
(e) Keep insurance in force oovering all airport property
and provide adequate liability insurance.
(f) Develop and maintain records as follows:
[1] Land maps showing dimensions of airport
property and abutting owners.
[2] Plans showing airport drainage facilities.
[3] Plans showing airport lighting installations and
underground cables.
[ 4] Plans showing location of all buildings and
structures on the airport.
[5] Plans showing dimensions of all airport land
under lease.
[6] Inventory of all property owned by the t.own
and on airport land.
[7] Plans of all utility lines.
[8) Copies of all leases or agreements pertaining to
airport property or the use or maintenance
thereof.
[9] Plans of or agreements pertaining to aJl off.
airport facilities for which the t.own is responsible
that affect the airport.
(10] Copies of all laws, rules, regulations or ordinances
relating to the operation of the airport.
2903
§ 29-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 29. .'.J
(6) Develop and administer rules and regulations, subject to
approval of the Town Council, for the following purposes:
(a) Ensuring adequate safety practices on the airport.
(b) Providing for accommodation of aeronautically
~iated clubs and organizations.
(c) Providing for leasing of airport land and buildings,
subject to approval of the Town Council.
(d) Providing for regulation and control of commercial
activities on airport property and abutting airport
property.
(7) Provide all services and facilities required by the Maine
Aeronautics Commission from time to time for designation
as a commercial airport.
(8) See that all activities conducted on airport property or
under the control of the Transportation Commission are
in conformity with state and federal laws, rules and
regulations, local ordinances and rules and regulations
developed by the Commission and approved by the Town
Council. (Particular attention is directed to the limitations
on granting of "exclusive rights" as set forth in
federal laws or regulations.)
E. Duties delegated by Town Manager. For the purposes of
carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Town Manager
may authorize the Commission to hire adequate personnel,
provide adequate office space and equipment and negotiate
concessions on airport property within budgetary limitations.
§ 29-3. Airport Manager.
A. Duties and responsibilities of the Airport Manager are to be
limited to:
(1) Buildings and grounds. Overseeing the rental. care and
maintenance of hangar. buildings and grounds of airport.
(2) Rental fees. Collecting rental fees of hangars and tiedowns.
2904
r:)
()
()
()
0 .
()
0
()·
I 29-3 TRANSPORTATION, DEPARTMENT OF
(3) Gas and oil. Sellina paoline and oils, and turning in
receipt&
(4) Radio. Maintaining radio communications through the
Millinocket unicorn as needs require.
(5) Special activities. Representing the community in
supervision of any special actiVities involving airport
property, i.e .• spraying operation, snow removal, brush
cutting, field and building maintenance. flying activities.
i.e., model flying, parachute jumping, air shows and fiyins,
and generally managing all activities and maint.enance
problems at the airport for the Town of
Millinocket.
(6) Operational recommendations. Recommending operational
maintenance and policy needs and changes t.o the
Transportation Commission.
(7) Lighting system. Monitoring the lighting system and
handling emergencies in the event of a failure of the
aut.omatic system.
B. Fixed base operations. The appointment of an Airport
Manager does not preclude the establishment of a fixed base
operation or operations. As per Paragraph (6), Subparagraph
(c), of the Transportation Charter or bylaws, bid forms for
fixed base operation and other lease agreements are t.o be
initiatal by the Department of Transportation.
2905
()
......
\_)
()
I ao-1 WELFARE HEARING BOARD § 30-1
Chapter 30
WELFARE HEARING BOARD
I 00.1. Membenhlp.
(HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7·21'"81 as Art. VII of Ch. 5 of the Milllnocket Code.
Amendments noted where applfcable.]
I 30-1. Membenhfp.
The Welfare Hearing Board shall be composed of three (3)
memben of the Millinocket Town Council, and, except for conflict of
interest, membership shall be rotat.ed within the Council.
3001
(· < :-) _ _,/
AIRPORT
Chaa*r 3.1
AIRPORT
I 33-1. Preaumptlon reprdlns use of airport property.
I 33-2. Applicability of ordlnanees.
I 33-3. Promulption of rules and regulations; distribution of
eoples.
I 33-4. Busines1 licenses.
I 33.fi. Compliance with building construction regulatlons.
I 33-6. Permit& and fees.
I 33-7. Use of buildinp.
I 33-8. Use of airport.
§ 33-9. Exclusive use of airport prohibited.
§ 33-10. Adoption of rules and regulations.
§ 33-11. Responsibilities of Airport Manager.
§ 33-12. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Ch. 3 of the Millinocket Code. Amendments
noted where applicable.)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Departinot al Tranepartatlett - See Ch. 29.
Bulldlns eonlt~tion - See Ch. 48.
Zonlns - See Ch. 121.
3301
§ 33-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 33-5
§ 33-1. Presumption regarding use of airport property.
Any person using the airport or adjacent areas or found thereon
shall be held to have consented to all ordinances of a general nature as
being applicable to his conduct in or over the airport in the same
manner as applicable to persons within the town limits.
§ 33-2. Applicability of ordinances.
All general ordinances of the town pertaining to the conduct of
persons shaU be in fuU force and effect in and on the airport.
§ 33-3. Promulgation of ruin and regulations; distribution of
copies.
The Town Council may promulgate such rules and regulations as
necessary to ensure the orderly conduct of the affairs of the airport.
Such rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be printed, and copies
of the rules and regulations shall be given to alJ persons leasing any ( )
real property within the airport at the time the lease is entered into
or upon adoption.
§ 33-4. Business licenses.
Any person conducting a business for which a license would be
required if it were located within the town shall secure a license and
pay the fee required. The Town Clerk or person authorized to issue
such license may designate a deputy for the purpose of issuing such
license and receiving a fee therefor.
I 33-0. Compliance with building construction regulations.
All buildings constructed within the airport shall be constructed in
compliance with the ordinances pertaining to such construction within
the town limits.1
l Editor'• Note: See Ch. '8, Bulldlnir Conltruetlon.
3302
()
·*~ CJ
AIRPORT
I 33-'. Permit& and fees.
Permits sha11 be secured for each construction project in the same
manner as though it were being built in the town, and the fees for
such construction shall be similarly paid.
I 33·7. Use of buildinp.
The regulations concerning the use of buildings in the town shall
apply to buildings in the airport just as tho!-!gh they were in the town.
I 33-8. Use of airport.
A. Each lessee shall observe and obey all rules and regulations
governing the conduct and operation of the airport, promulgated
from time to time by the Town Council, which are
reasonably required for the prudent and efficient operation of
the airport and are not inconsistent with the reasonable
exercise by such lessee of any right or privilege granted to it
hereunder or under any agreement between such lessee and
town relating to the airport or any part thereof, nor
inconsistent with safety nor with the rules and regulations of
any federal or state agency having jurisdiction with respect
thereto, nor inconsistent with the procedures prescribed or
approved from time t.o time by the Federal Aviation Adminiir
tration or any other governmental authority having jurisdiction
over ope.rations at the airport.
B. The town, however, shall have no control over the rates. fares
or charges that any Jessee may prescribe in connection with
the conduct of it.a business.
C. The town shall keep each lessee supplied with five (5) sets of
the current airport rules and regulations applicable to such
lessee. Except in cases of emergency, no such rule or
regulation shall be applicable to any lessee unless it has been
given fifteen (15) days' notice of the adopting thereof and an
opportunity to be heard.
3303
§ 33-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 33-11
§ 33-9. Exclusive use of airport prohibited. (Amended 6-14-83
by Ord. No. 7-83)
No rules or regulations shall be promulgated to grant or authorize
exclusive use of the airporl
§ 33-10. Adoption of rules and replations.
All such rules and regulations shall be adopted only in accordance
with Maine law and the Millinocket Town Charter.
I 33-11. Responsibilities of Airport Manager.
A. The Manager of the leased operator shall be engaged as the
Airport Manager for the town. His responsibilities shaU
include but not be limited to:
,.·) ' •
(1) Maintenance of radio communications with aircraft using ( )
the MiHinocket Airport.
(2) Supervision of all special activities involving airport
property, including but not limited tn spraying operations,
snow removal, brush cutting, model flying,
parachute jumping, air shows and fly-ins.
(3) Recommending maintenance and other operational
policies to the town.
(4) Monitoring lighting and handling emergencies in the
event of failure of the automatic system.
B. The precise services of the Manager may be ext.ended or
curtailed from time to time by the Town Council.
C. The Airport Manager shall devote his entire time, attention
and energies t.o the duties set forth herein and shall not during
the term or his agreement be engaged in any other business
activities except those of the lessee.
3304
' ·-I ·") ( •," .
\
, :f\
fJ l:>
§ 33-12 AIRPORT § 33-12
I 33-12. Violations and penalties.
Anybody found in violation of this chapter shall pay a fine of not Jess
than twenty-five dollars ($25.) and not more than one hundred dollars
($100.), which shall be recovered (or the use of the town through the
filing of a legal complaint by the town's authorized agent.
3305
()
()
, . . )
.... .,/
(~
-~.J
PART II
GENERAL
LEGISLATION
0
() I 35-1.
f 35-2.
§ 35-3.
I 35-4.
I as.s.
13".
I as.1.
ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 35
ALARM SYSTEMS
Title.
Purpose.
Definitions.
Permit required.
Application procedure.
Fees.
Prohibited systems.
f 35..S. Approval and inspection by Chief.
I 35-9. Municipal fire alarm system; fees.
( ) I :JS.10. Reeponse to alarm by owner.
f 35-11. Nonemergency alarms.
()
()
§ 35·12. Revocation of permit.
I 35-13. Appeals.
§ 35-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 35·15. Applications for existing systems.
§ 35·16. Initial applicatio111 and renewals.
§ 35-17. Burglar and security alarm systems.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 9-14.S2 as Art. VII of Ch. 9 of the MilUnocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.)
3501
§ 35-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 35-3
§ 35-1. Title.
This chapt.er shall be known and may be cited as the •Alarm
System Ordinance" of the Town of Millinocket, Maine.
§ 35-2. Purpose.
This chapt.er recognizes the need for regulation of the installation
and use of alarm systems in order to assure compatibility with the
equipment at the Mil1inocket Fire Department Communications
Center. to avoid use of improper equipment, t.o assure adequate and
proper installation of equipment, t.o minimize false alarms or other
interference with the orderly conduct of t.own business and to clarify
the rights and responsibilities of the property owner, the provider and
the town.
§ 35-3. Definitions.
(~ ·J
()
As used in this chapter, the following t.erms shall have the meanings ()
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM - Any mechanism. equipment or device
designed to automatically transmit a signal, message or
warning indicating fire, burglary, health emergency or like
need for police, fire or ambulance from a private facility
through telephone facilities to the Fire Department Communications
Center.
AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM - An alarm which causes an
audible alarm signal to sound at or near the alarm premises
for the purpose of obtaining emergency response by the Police
or Fire Departments.
CENTER - The Millinocket Fire Department Communica·
tions Cent.er.
CHIEF - The Chief of the Millinocket Fire Department.
FALSE ALARMS - Signals transmitt.ed by an alarm
system as a result of human error or equipment malfunction.
A deliberate "false alarm" is a criminal offense.
(7.. )· ·.
)
()
()
(E)
()
§ 35-3 ALARM SYSTEMS
MUNICIPAL SYSTEM - The Town of Millinocket municipal
fire alarm system.
PERMANENTLY CONNECTED ALARM SYSTEM - An
alarm system which transmits a signal to the center by means
of a wire or cable connection or radio equipment which ia used
only or primarily for that purpoae.
PROVIDER - The private alarm company or companies
retained by the Town of Millinocket to provide alarm-receiving
equipment installed at the center.
TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEM OR DIALER - An
alarm system which operates automatically through the use of
public telephone facilities to connect to a telephone within the
center or other location.
I 35-4. Permit required.
No person shall install, operate, maintain, alter or replace an alarm
system within the town after the effective date of this chapter without
holding an effective permit therefor signed by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
I 35-5. Application procedure.
A. Application for an alarm system permit shall be made to the
Chief of the Fire Department by the owner of the premises to
be protected, upon forms to be prepared by the town,
accompanied by:
(1) Prepayment of appropriate fees.
(2) Copies of signed contracts with the provider.
(3) Copies of the provider information sheet.
(4) Tender of an agreement, signed by the applicant,
releasing and discharging the Town of Millinocket, its
officers, agents and employees from any and all liability
arising from the failure of such alarm system to operate
properly or from any failure to respond to an a1arm sent
by such system or from any other act or omission by the
3503
§ 35-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 35-6
town, its officers, agents and employees except any
knowing and intentional act or omission.
8. The application shall require the full name, telephone number
and address of the owner of the premises to be protected, of his
designat.ed agent within the t.own and of the proposed installer,
who must have the capacity t.o maintain and service such
alarm system from a point where the following response
schedule can be met:
( 1) Requests for emergency repair service made before 12:00
noon on any given day will be serviced before 12:00 noon
on the following day.
(2) Any request for service made between 12:00 noon and
5:00 p.m. on any given day will be serviced between 12:00
noon and 5:00 p.m. on the following day.
(3) Requests for service made after 6:00 p.m. on any given
day will be serviced as soon as possible and no later than
twenty-four (24) ·hours after the request for service is
made.
C. The application shall also require a description of the principal
use of the premises to be proU!cted, a description of the
proposed system and the location of its installation and other
such data as the Chief may reasonably require in order to
assume the use of appropriate equipment and its proper
installation.
D. The Chief shall issue any permit with such conditions as he
deems reasonably designed to assure the foregoing objectives
and the Chief shall establish procedures and guidelines for
processing such applications. as endorsed by the Town Council.
I 35-6. Fees.
The annual service fee shall be fixed and may be changed by order
of the Town Council Such fee shall apply to each alarm system
connected from the same premises or by the same owner and to any
dialer system programmed to activate the center telephones. For any
alarm system installed after June 30 of the calendar year, the fee shall
be one-half (~) of the regular fee. Such fees shall be for the calendar
3504
()
()
,.) .. .
0
(.,.......
l
,,/
()
0
ALARM SYSTEMS § 30-9
year. Annual renewal fees are due and payable on or before January
31 of each year.
I 35-7. Prohibited 1yatems.
No system shal1 be permitted which automatically transmits to the
center telephone lines except to a number designated by the permit or
as otherwise approved by the Chief. Each alarm shall be reported
indi\'idually, and no system shall be permitted which uses a constant
signal for one type of alarm and a pulsating signal for another.
§ 35-8. Approval and inspection by Chief.
A. No alarm system shall be placed in operation until its location,
equipment and installation have been finally approved by the
Chief as conforming to the terms of the permit and the
provisions of this chapter. Thereafter, the Chief or his
d~ignated representative may inspect or cause the inspection
by a qualified person of any alarm system to determine that its
condition, location and use comply with its permit and this
chapter and to assure that it will not interfere with the
operation of the center. Access will be permitted at all
reasonable hours for such purpose. Any deficiency noted shall
be reported to and promptly corrected by the owner.
B. Information concerning any alarm system shaU be confidentially
maintained, and the release of any such information is
prohibited except to center personnel and those authorized in
writing by the owner.
C. If necessary, the Chief may use District Court Civil Rule BOE
to inspect an alarm system.
§ 35-9. Municipal fire alarm system; fees.
A. The municipal fire alarm system is maintained primarily as
an alternate fire alarm system for the citizens of Millinocket
through the street fire alarm boxes. Connection of an alarm
system to the municipal system is authorized for specific highhazard
locations as designated by the Chief. Such systems
3505
§ 35-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 36-11
must meet all other specifications and requirements as set out
by this chapter and must connect to the municipal system
using a local energy box. Such box shall be furnished at the
expense of the owner of the premises to be protected and
become the property of the Town of Millinocket Fire
Department.
r;..': ':.)
B. The initial fee for connection to the municipal system shall be t)
fixed and may be changed by order of the Town Council and
is initially fixed at one hundred dollars ($100.). Systems
installed after June 30 of the calendar year shall pay a fee of
fifty dollars ($50.). Annual renewal fees shalJ be fixed at fifty
dollars ($50.) and are due and payable on or before January 31
of each year.
C. AH such systems are subject to the same permit requirements
as systems connected to the center.
§ 35·10. Response to alarm by owner.
The property owner or his designated agent, as kept on file at the ( )
center, shall respond to each alarm at the request of the appropriate
Department for the purpose of securing the premises.
§ 35-11. Nonemergency alarms.
A. Any permit holder whose alarm system causes the transmittal
of a nonemergency alarm more than three (3) times in any
calendar year, aft.er a thirty-day start-up period for new
inst.allations. shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for
each instance of a nonemergency burglar alarm and one
hundred dollars ($100.) for each instance of a nonemergency
fire or ambulance alarm in excess of that number, upon ()· ..
written demand by the Chief. The Chief shall give suitable
written warning to any permit holder or his designated agent
whose alarm system sends a third nonemergency alarm in any
calendar year.
B. Nonemergency alarms shall include but shall not be limited to
false alarms caused by malfunction of equipment, accidental
or negligent activation of the alarm or improperly monitored
3606 0
():
'·
()". .. ,
_,.·"'~. \. ) . . ./
~·..). ()
§ 35-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 35-12
equipment. In the event that an alarm is activated as a result
of a natural or unnatural event beyond the owner's control
(disruption by electrical service, int.erruption due to storm,
motor vehicle accident and the like), no fee shall be imposed.
C. The Chief shall give written notice that a nonemergency alarm
fee is being charged and must be paid by a definite date, state
the circumstances and solution and schedule a meeting with
the owner to explain circumstances and hear the owner's
explanation.
§ m;.12. Revocation of permit.
A. The Chief may revoke the permit for any alarm system in the
event that:
(1) Payment of any fee (renewal or nonemergency alarm) is
not made within thirty (30) days after the due date.
(2) Any deficiency mentioned in this chapter and reported to
the owner is not corrected within a reasonable period of
time as determined by the Chief, according to the nature
and scope of the deficiency.
(3) Such alarm system persistently causes an excessive
number of nonemergency alarms or otherwise persistently
interferes with the orderly operation of the center.
(4) The owner or his designated agent refuses reasonable
access for inspection of such system.
(5) Such system is placed in operation without the final
approval of the Chief.
(6) Any data provided in the application for such system is
found to be or have been willfully falsified or through
gross negligence of the applicant.
B. Such revocation shall not be effective until the Chief has given
the permit holder actual written notice of the reason therefor
and reasonable opportunity to rectify the same.
3507
§ 35-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 35-16
§ 35-13. Appeals.
In the event of the refusal tD issue or the revocation of any permit
hereunder, the permit holder or applicant may appeal, in writing, to
the Town Manager within ten (10) business days after actual notice of
such decision is given to the permit holder or applicant or his
designated represent.ative or agent. The Town Manager may affirm,
modify or rescind such decision if he finds such decision not t.o be in
agreement with the provisions of this chapter, and his action thereon
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 35-1". Violations and penalties.
In addition t.o the foregoing grounds for revocation of a permit
hereunder, the following events shall each constitute a civil violation,
punishable in proceedings before the District Court by a fine not
exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.) and recoverable to the t.own's
use:
A. The installation, operation, maintenance, alteration or
(. :~:';\1
r)
replacement of an alarm system in the absence of an effective ( )
permit therefor issued and signed by the Chief.
B. The falsification of any data provided in an application for an
alarm system, done: willfully or through gross negligence.
C. The release of any information concerning any alarm system
except to center personnel and those authorized in writing by
the owner.
I 35-15. Applications for existing systems.
Permit applications for existing alarm systems must be filed within
sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter.
I 35-16. Initial applfcation1 and renewal&
Initial applications and renewals shall be upon such forms as
comply with this chapter and may be administratively changed or
modified from time to time upon recommendation of the Chief and
approval of the Town Manager. Renewals may be aut.omatic upon
3508
()
()
()
()
§ 36-16 ALARM SYSTEMS § ru;.17
payment of the annual fee, except where changes have been made in
the system since the issuance of the immediate first permit. In such
case, a new application must be submitted.
I 35-17. Burglar and security alarm systems.
In each instance of an application involving a burglar alarm or
other security device (nonfire security), the Chief of Police will be
notified. He shall review the application, inspect the premises and
offer any comments to the officer approving the application,
recommending approval. If the Chief of Police recommends
disapproval, he shall list the reasons and recommend alternatives.
3509
(.. ..... ) .
~
0
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 38
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE I
Bottle Cluba
§ 38· 1. IJceme required; location.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
§ 38-3. Fees.
§ 384. Application for license.
I 38·5. Inspections and reporta by town offtciall.
§ 38-6. Notice of public hearing.
I 38·7. Nontransferability of license.
'-..) § 38-8. Display of license.
()
§ 38-9. Expiration of license.
§ 38-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 38-11. Appeals.
§ 38-12. Violations and penaJties.
I 38-13. Houn of operation.
§ 38-14. Application form.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket Art. I. 8-10-82 u Art. V of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket
Code. Amendmenta noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curlew - S. Ch. 38.
Eniertalnmeat Heeneee - See Ch. 66.
3801
§ 38-1 MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE I
Bottle Clubs
§ 38-2
[Adopted 8-10-82 as Art. V of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket Code]
§ 38-1. License required; location.
I
(·.)
A. No person, firm or corporation shall keep, maintain, operate,
lease or otherwise furnish, either to its members and guests or ( )
to the general public, any premises in the Town of Millinocket
for use as a bottle club without first having obtained a license
therefor, to be issued by the Town Clerk after approval of the
Town Council in accordance with this Article.
B. No license shall be granted to any club which will be locat.ed
within three hundred (300) feet of a residence, excluding the
owner's or operator's.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise defined herein or in the text, all words used
will have their common meaning.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOTTLE CLUB:
(1) Any establishment or premises which is operated on a
regular basis in the following manner:
(a) No alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises.
(b) All members, guests or members of the public must
provide their own alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the premises.
(c) Fees or other charges are imposed on all members,
guests or members of the public for admission to the
premises or for setups, i.e., liquid mixers, cups, ice
and other items associated with the consumption of
alcoholic beverages, or for any other reason.
3802
()
{.: . ).
0
I 38-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 38-4
(2) Includes but is not limited t.o all such premises designated
for municipal regulation under 28 M.R.S.A. §I 2 (1-A)
and 4.
OFFICER - Any officer, director, stockholder, owners.
manager or penon who either has a financial interest of any
nature in a bottle club or directs any policy of a bottle club.
PERSON - Any individual, person, firm, corporation,
asaociation, partnership or organization.
§ 38-3. Fees.
The annual license fee for a bottle club shall be established by the
Town Council by resolution. Chanps in fees shall be made by Town
Council resolution.
) § 38-4. Application for license.
~ ........
(.. ·J~
A. Every applicant for a bottle club license shall:
(1) Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by
the Town Manager and Town Council.
(2) Depasit the prescribed license fee in advance with the
Town Clerk.
(3) Submit with the completed application to the Town Clerk
the following:
(a) An attested copy of the Articles of Incorporation and
bylaws if the applicant is a corporation, of the
Articles of Association and bylaws if the applicant is
an association, or partnership document.a if the
applicant is a partnership. as well as a list of all
principal officers of the bottle club.
(b) An affidavit which will identify all principal officers
and their places of residency at the present time and
for the immediately precedinl' three (3) years.
380.1
§ 38-4 MILLINOCKET CODE § 38-6
(c) A description of the premises for which a license is
desired and such other material information,
description or plan of that part of the premises
where liquor will be consumed.
B. If an application should be denied or withdrawn, the license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
§ 38-5. Inspections and reports by town officials.
A. Upon receipt of each application for a bottle club license:
(1) The Town Manager shall verify that the premises of the
proposed bottle club comply with the applicable ordinances
of the Town of Millinocket, including. but not by way of
limit.ation, the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing
Code and Zoning Ordinance,1 and shall report his
findings in writing.
(2) The Health Officer shall cause an inspection to be made
of the proposed location of the bottle club for the purpose
of determining whether the applicable ordinances
relating to health and safety have been complied with. A
report of his findings shaJI be made in writing.
(3) The Fire Chief and Police Chief shall cause an inspection
to be made of the proposed location of the bottle club for
the purpose of determining if town ordinances concerning
fire and safety have been complied with. They shall
submit a report of their findings in writing.
B. All reports required under this section shall be filed with the
Town Clerk.
§ 38~. Notice of public hearing.
After receipt of the written reports required by § 38-5, the Town
Clerk shall give notice of a public hearing on the application in the
form and manner and to the persons herein specified.
1 Editor'• Note: See Ch. 48, Buildlnr Conttruetfon, and Ch. 125. 1.cmin«.
3804
()
(~ ,~J
.)
()
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES I 38-8
A. The notice shall include the time and place of such hearing,
the nature of the matter to be heard and the address or
location of the property involved. Where notice by mail is
required, it shall be mailed at Jeut seven (7) days in advance
of the hearing dat.e by regular United States Mail
B. Notices. ....
(1) Notice shall be given to each of the foUowinr.
(a) The applicant.
(b) All residents of the town by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the town at least
once not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen
(15) days before the dat.e of the hearing.
(c) The ownen of property within three hundred (300)
feet of such parcel or tract by mail.
(2) For the purpose of this section, the "owners of property"
shall be considered to be the parties listed by the
~r's office of the Town of Millinocket as those
against whom taxes are usesaed.
(3) Failure of any property owner t.o receive a notice of
public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing and
shall not invalidate any action of the Town Council
I 38-7. Nontransferability of license.
A separate license must be obtained for each bottle club. Each
Jicense shall authorize the operation of such an est.ablishment only at
the location described in such license and in conformity with all
(~ applicable ordinances and laws. No license shall be transferred to
J another peraon or to any other location.
§ 38-8. Display of license.
Every bottle club shall exhibit its license at all times in a
conspicuous place on it.a premises.
3805
§ 38-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 38-13
I 38-9. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this Article shall expire on the last
day of April each year.
§ 38-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
A license to operate a bottle club, as· provided for by this Article, ( )
may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Town Council for either
violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
Article or any other ordinance of the town. Det.ermination of the
severity of the violation and whether or not a denial, suspension or
revocation is warranted shall be made by the Town Council aft.er
notice and hearing.
§ 38-11. Appeals.
An appeal from any final decision of the Town Council shall be
taken by any party to the Superior Court in accordance with the
provisions of Rule SOB of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. )
§ 38-12. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any action which the Town Council may take,
violation of any provision of this Article shall be a civil violation and
a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.) may be imposed.
Each day that a violatfon continues will be treated as a separate
offense. All fines collected hereunder shall inure to and be recovered
by the Town of Millinocket.
§ 38-13. Hours of operation.
The hours a bottle club shall be open for business shall be no earlier
than 9:00 p.m. to closing no lat.er than 1:00 a.m. the following
morning. During the hours that a bottle club must remain closed, no
members, guests or other persons, other than regular employees. may
be on or remain therein, and the use by anyone of the premises or
facilities of a bottle club for the drinking of alcoholic beverages during
such hours when a bottle club must remain closed is prohibit.ed.
3806
c.'J
()
()
§ 38-14 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 38-14
§ 38-14. Application form.
The application form, per se, shall be recommended by the Town
Manager and approved by the Town Council by resolution, and may
be changed in the same manner from time t.o time.
aso1
(J • .J
•..3
()
I 42·1 BANDSTAND I 42·2
Chapter 42
BANDSTAND
t 42·1. Use by nonprofit organizations by permit authorized.
I 42·2. Iuuanee of permit; validity.
I 42-3. Faeton in eonsidering grantins of permit.
I 42-4. Written report of Chief of Police.
I 42..fi. Permit required.
f 42-6. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Mlllinocket 2-14~4 as Ord. No. 4~4. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
I 42-1. Use by nonprofit organizations by permit authorized.
The bandstand may be used by permit by a nonprofit organization
for the purpose of the playing of music or putting on plays. Tickets
may be sold or contributions solicited, provided that the receipts are
used solely for the nonprofit organization's basic tenets. Nonprofit
organizations include Town of Millinocket departments, commissions,
agencies, etc.
() I 42·2. lsauance of permit; validity.
)
The Recreation Director, after consulting with the Chief of Police,
may issue a permit to use the bandstand, which permit shall be valid
for only the date (s) indicated and for the hours indicated. No permit
shall authorize use before 1:00 p.m. nor after 11:00 p.m. The
application for a permit will be designed by the Recreation Director
and Chief of Police.
4201
§ 42-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 42~
§ 42-3. Factors in considering granting of permit.
In deciding whether to grant or deny a permit with conditions, the
Director shall consider the following factors:
A. Size of group performers.
B. Type of performance.
C. Name of group organization.
D. Anticipated size of the audience.
§ 42-4. Writt.en report of Chief of Police.
Prior to making a decision, the Director shall receive a written
report from the Chief of Police indicating the Department's ability to
provide adequate law enforcement and traffic control for the
performance based upon information provided by the applicant
relating to the time of day and day of the week of the performance
and the anticipated size of the audience.
I 42·5. Permit required.
No person shall sit, stand, lie, nor in any other manner use the
bandstand for any purposes without a valid permit
I 42~. Violatlom and penaltlee.
Persons using the bandst.and for any reason at any time without a
valid permit will be considered to be trespassing and, upon conviction.
will be fined no less than twenty.five dollars ($25.) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.), recoverable to the Town of Millinocket
4202
)
l_)
t-:\
\.JI
.g.~. ·-..· . ·
/'.~ v:v
§ 48-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
Chapter48
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 48-1. Adoption of code by reference.
§ 48-2. Repealer.
§ 48-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
§ 4S.4. Alternative building process requirements.
§ 48-5. Renovations.
§ 48-6. Building permit checklist.
§ 48-7. Saving clause.
§ 48-1
[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 1-12-1995 as Ord. No. 8-94.1 Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals - See Cb. 5.
Floodplain management-See Cb. 88.
Mobile home parka and manufactured housing - See Cb. 88.
Sewers - See Cb. 104.
Zoning - See Ch. 12G.
§ 48-1. Adoption of code by reference.
There is hereby adopted for the purposes of regulating the
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and
structures, the Building Code known as the "BOCA National
Building Code, Eleventh Edition, 1990," as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.,
1 Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 48, Buildin1
Construction, adopted '7·21-1981 as Ch. 8 of the Millinocket Code, amended 8-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 3-90.
4801 03-80-iOO~
§ 48-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 48-3
excepting such portions as are hereinafter added, deleted,
modified or amended. Not fewer than three copies of the code
have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk of the
Town of Millinocket. This BOCA National Building Code, as
amended, is hereby incorporated by reference as if set up at
length in these ordinances.
§ 48-2. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 48-3. Additions. insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Building Code, 1990 Edition, are
hereby revised as follows:
A. Section 100.1. Insert words: "Towri of Millinocket."
:J
B. Section 100.2 is amended to read as follows: [Amended
8-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002] tl
100.2 Scope: Except as noted in § 48-4 below, these
regulations shall control all matters concerning the
construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal,
demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
all new commercial and industrial buildings and
structures and shall apply to existing commercial
buildings and structures, except as such matters are
otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes, or
in the rules and regulations authorized for promulgation
under the provisions of this code.
With respect to existing commercial buildings, these
regulations apply only to:
(1) New additions which increase the building foot
print.
(2) Any structural alteration or change of use which
may affect the structural integrity of the building.
4802 OS-30-2006
§48-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 48-3
Articles VIII, IX and X of this code, concerning means of
egress, fire-resistive construction and fire-protective
systems, and other provisions of these regulations
related to fire prevention and fire safety, shall not apply
and are superseded by the Life Safety Code adopted by
the Town of Millinocket. 2
The handicapped accessibility and property maintenance
provisions of this code shall apply to both existing and
proposed commercial and industrial buildings and
structures.
C. Section 103.4. Insert words: "September 8, 1990."
D. Section 114.3.1. Insert words: "Article XIII of Chapter
125, Part 2, of the Millinocket Town Code."
E. Section 117.4. Delete the existing language and replace
with the following words:
117.4 Violation penalties: Any person, including but
not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in
violation of the provisions of this code shall be penalized
in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
F. Section 118.2. Insert words: "an amount consistent with
the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452."
G. Section 123.0. Delete the entire section.
H. Section 124. Delete the existing language and replace
with the following words:
SECTION 124. BOARD OF APPEAL
An appeal from a decision of the Building Inspector
made under this Article shall be to the Millinocket
Zoning Board of Appeal or Superior Court in accordance
with the provisions of Article XV, Chapter 125, Part 2, of
the Millinocket Town Code.
ll Editor's Note: See Cb. 49, Life Safety Code.
4803 03-30-2006
§ 48-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 48-4
I. Article 29. Delete the entire Article.
§ 48-4. Alternative building process requirements.
[Added 8·22-2002 by Ord. No. 2-200~]
For construction of new structures of 5,000 square feet of
·-1
floor area or less, excluding basements or foundations except as .:•
noted in Subsection H below, the applicant may choose to follow •
the alternative building process requirements outlined in this
section as an alternative to the BOCA Code as referenced in §
48-3 above. The following requirements shall apply:
A. Plans. The applicant will submit a detailed drawing and
written specifications, including the submission of use
classification and life safety code compliance plans, of the
proposed project.
B. Plans to be signed. All project plans are to be reviewed
and signed by a currently licensed professional engineer
or architect.
C. Permit issuance. Submission of the appropriate
documentation will result in the issuance of a building
permit, upon review by and discretion of the CEO.
D. Inspections. The CEO may inspect the project from time
to time, as necessary, and notify the applicant of areas of
concern, if any.
E. Certificate of occupancy. The CEO will issue a certificate
of occupancy upon satisfactory inspection of the project
and evidence of life safety code compliance, unless
significant concerns are found with the project.
F. Dispute resolution. In the event that a dispute arises
over the project, the CEO will make every attempt to 4
resolve the issue(s) with the applicant and his/her
engineer/architect. If the matter(s) cannot be resolved,
the CEO may retain another engineer/architect, at the
3 Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated rormer § 48-4, Savings clause, as §
~7.
4804 03-30-2005
•
§ 48-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 48-5
expense of the applicant, to review the work and render
a professional opinion on the issue(s) in dispute.
G. Applicability. This section will apply only to the first
5,000 square feet of new construction of a totally new
structure of floor area, excluding basements or
foundations. If the initial project is less than 5,000
square feet, the applicant may increase the structure up
to 5,000 square feet of total area under this section,
subject to the other elements of this section being met by
the applicant. Should the new addition increase the
square footage above 5,000 total square feet, BOCA will
apply to the entirety of the new addition, except as noted
in Subsection H below.
H. Waiver. The CEO may grant a waiver for projects
constructed under this section up to 6,000 square feet of
floor area, excluding basements or foundations, if the
CEO determines such waiver to be prudent and
reasonable and in the best interests of the Town of
Millinocket.
I. Responsibility. The applicant and his/her contractor(s)
will be held solely responsible for the quality of work
performed and shall sign a waiver of liability and indemnification
for the Town of Millinocket upon issuance of
the building permit.
§ 48-5. Renovations. [Added 8-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002)
Renovations will be governed by the BOCA Code except as
noted below: ·
A. Renovations totaling $4,000. For renovation projects of
$4,000 or less, a building permit will be granted upon
presentation of an adequate description of the work to be
done. No involvement of an engineer or architect will be
necessary for such projects, unless a structural change is
required.
4805 oa1-so-2oms
§ 48-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 48-7
B. Governance. Renovations will be governed by the Life
Safety Code in Chapter 49 of the Millinocket Code,
except for structural changes which will be governed by
the BOCA Code.
§ 48-6. Building permit checklist. [Added 8-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 2-2002] ;i
The Town will provide the applicant for a building permit a
checklist of all items needed to complete the permit process.
§ 48-7. Saving clause.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court or any rights acquired or liability
incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing,
under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in§ 48-2 of
this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
4806 OS - SO - 2003
§ 49-1 LIFE SAFETY CODE § 49-1
Chapter49
LIFE SAFETY CODE
§ 49-1. Adoption of code.
• § 49-2. Conflict with other ordinances.
(~ .. -~~.··. .·.-.·
§ 49-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
§ 49-4. Enforcement and legal action.
§ 49-5. Appeals.
§ 49-6. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 11-30-1995 as Ord. No. 3-95. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction - See Ch. 48.
Zonin1-See Ch. 121, Part 2.
§ 49-1. Adoption of code. [Amended 8-22-2002 by Ord. No.
3-2002]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Millinocket, being
marked and designated as the current NFPA Life Safety Code,
as prepared and published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of
the Town of Millinocket establishing the minimum
requirements considered necessary to provide a reasonable
degree of safety from fire in buildings and structures, to address
those construction, protection and occupancy features necessary
to minimize danger to life from fire, smoke, fumes and panic, for
the design of egress facilities so as to permit prompt escape of
the occupants from buildings or, where desirable, into safe
4901 03-30-2005
§ 49-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 49-3
areas within the building; and providing for the inspection, the
issue of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such Life
Safety Code on file with the Town Clerk, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter,
subject to the additions and deletions set forth in § 49-3 below.
§ 49-2. Conflict with other ordinances.
Whenever the requirements of this code are in conflict with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation,
ordinance or code, the requirement imposing the most
restrictive or higher standard shall apply.
§ 49-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Life Safety Code, 1994 Edition,
are hereby revised as follows:
A. Chapter 1, Section 1-4.1, is hereby amended as follows:
1-4.1 This code applies to both new construction and
existing buildings, except existing single-family owneroccupied
dwellings, but including any structure
containing one or more residential rental units. For
structures containing only one residential rental unit,
this Code will apply only to the residential rental unit
unless Code problems in such rental unit are caused in
whole or in part by deficiencies in the remaining part of
the structure, in which case the Code will be applied to
the entire structure. This Code shall' not apply to
industrial occupancies in existence prior to February 25,
1996. [Amended 8-22-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002)
B. Chapter 3, Section 3-2, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
3·2 Authority Having Jurisdiction: The Millinocket
Code Enforcement Officer or a designee of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
4902 OS - SO - 20015
1
•
§ 49-3 LIFE SAFETY CODE § 49-3
C. Chapter 4, Section 4-1.12, is hereby added to read as
follows:
4-1.12 Unoccupied. Buildings and structures or parts
thereof which have not been occupied by one of the other
classifications of this section for more than 12 calendar
months shall be classified as unoccupied. Any
reoccupancy of a building or structure or part thereof
classified as unoccupied by another occupancy
(Cont'd on page 4903)
4902.1 03 - 30 - 20015
!f
•
cI • . .~
§ 49-3 LIFE SAFETY CODE § 49-6
classification shall be considered a change of occupancy
for the purposes of Section 1-6.3.
D. Chapter 21, One- and Two-Family Dwellings, is hereby
repealed.
E. Chapter 28, Section 28-1.1, is hereby amended by adding
additional language as follows:
28·1.l Application. The requirements of this chapter
shall apply only to new and not to existing industrial
occupancies. Industrial occupancies shall include
factories making products of all kinds and properties
used for operations such as processing, assembling,
mixing, packaging, finishing or decorating, repairing or
similar operations.
§ 49-4. Enforcement and legal action.
This code shall be enforced by the Millinocket Code Enforcement
Officer, and legal action under this code may be instituted
by the Millinocket Town Council, each utilizing the procedures
set forth in Article XIV of Chapter 125, Zoning, of the
Millinocket Town Code.
§ 49-5. Appeals.
Appeals from decisions of the authority having jurisdiction or
from enforcement actions of the Code Enforcement Officer
under this code may be taken to the Millinocket Board of
Appeals in the same manner and under the provisions
governing administrative appeals set forth in Article XV of
Chapter 125, Zoning, of the Millinocket Town Code.
§ 49 .. e. Violations and penalties.
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner's agent or a contractor, who orders or conducts any
4903 2-U-88
§ 49-6 MILLINOCKET CODE
activity in violation of this code commits a civil violation and
shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
4904
ORDINANCE #1 - 2012
PROVIDING FOR: Amendments to Chapter SO, Property Maintenance Code
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF MIWNOCKET, IN COUNOL
ASSEMBLED, that Chapter so. Property Maintenance Code. for the Town of Millinocket, is
amended, as attached.
First Readln1: May 10. 2012
Second Readln1: May24. 2012
Passed by the CouncH: {15--J4 .. Jo ld.
Effective Date: 0~ ,. J ~ -;)D /UORDINANCE
#14 2012
PROVIDING FOR: Amendments to Chapter 50, Property
Maintenance Code for the Town or Millinocket
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF
MILLINOCKET, IN COUNCIL ASSEMBLED, that Chapter 50, Property
Maintenance Code for the Town of Millinocket, is amended, as stated below, to wit:
"CHAPTER 50 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
FOR THE TOWN OF MILLINOCKET
"Section 50-01. General.
A. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
the Town of Millinocket, hereinafter referred to as the "Code".
B. Scope. This Code is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare on all
existing premises in the Town by establishing minimum requirements and
standards for premises; fixing the responsibility of owners; and providing for
administration, enforcement, and penalties.
C. Intent. This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is
to ensure public health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by
maintenance of premises. Existing premises that do not comply with these
provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health,
safety, and welfare as required herein.
"Section 50-02. Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of
this chapter and as stated elsewhere in this Code, have the meanings shown herein.
A. Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
B. Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
C. Notice. A written warning issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct
a violation of this Ordinance.
D. Occupant. Any person living or sleeping in a building or having possession
of space within a building.
E. Order. A written document issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to
correct a violation of this Ordinance. where failure to comply will result in
formal legal action.
F. Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property or otherwise
having control of the property including the guardian of the estate of any such
person and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
G. Penon. An individual, corporation. partnership. or any other group acting as
a unit.
H. Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
I. Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. ·
The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and
other combustible materials; paper; rags; cartons; boxes; wood; excelsior;
rubber. leather~ tree branches; yard trimmings; tin cans; metals; mineral
matter; glass; crockery; dust; doors; clothing; construction and demolition
debris; and other similar materials.
J. Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
"Section 50..03. Exterior Property Areas.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean,
safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant shaJI keep that part of the exterior
property, which such occupant occupies or controls, in a clean and sanitary
condition. '
B. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of ten ( 10) inches. All nmcious weeds shall
be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and
vegetation other than trees or shrubs. However, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens.
C. Motor Vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, not more than
one currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked. kept,
or stored on any premises and no vehicle shall at any time .be in a state' of
major disassemblyt disrepair, or in the state of being stripped or dismantled.
However, a vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure
or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. For
purposes of this section, a motor vehicle is any vehicle that is or can be
licensed for travel on public ways (i.e.t automobiles, trucks, buses. motorized
recreational vehicles. motorcycles, etc.).
"Section 50-04. Rubbish and Garbage.
A. Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. All exterior property and premises
of every structure shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
8. Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
C. Rubbish Storage Facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall
supply approved, covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shaJI be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
2
D. Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage container.
E. Garbage Facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the
following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit
or an approved leak·proof. covered, outside garbage container.
F. Containen. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall
provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak·proof containers
provided with close· fitting covers for the storage of such materials until
removed from the premises for disposal.
G. Composting. Owners may compost organic material in their yards, provided
such composting is done per established procedures that do not promote odor,
offense. vermin, or other undesirable effects upon others. Guidelines for
proper composting techniques may be obtained from the Town.
"Section S0-05. Notices and Orders.
A. Notification to Owner or to Penon(s) Responsible. Whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer (CEO) determines that there has been a violation of this
Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notification shall
be given to the owner or to the person(s) responsible therefore in the manner
prescribed below.
B. Entry onto Property and into Buildings.
I. In accordance with Maine law and Title 30·A Section 44S2 as in effect
from time to time or as replaced by another statute addressing the same
subject matter, the CEO is authorized to enter any property at reasonable
hours to inspect the property for compliance with this Ordinance.
2. In accordance with Maine law and Title 30•" Section 4452 as in effect
from time to time or as replaced by another statute addressing the same
subject matter, the CEO is authorized to enter any building at reasonable
hours. with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent, to inspect the
building for compliance with this Ordinance.
3. In the event the CEO is prevented from entering property for inspection or
the owner, occupant or agent does not consent to the CEO entering any
building for inspection, the CEO is authorized to apply to any court with
jurisdiction for an administrative inspection warrant in accordance with Maine
law and Maine Rule of Civil Procedure 80E as in effect from time to time or
as replaced by another rule addressing the same subject matter.
C. Notices and Orders. A written notice or written order may be given to the
owner or person(s) responsible, at the discretion of the CEO.
I. Notices. A Notice is a written document to give the owner or person(s)
responsible a warning of an apparent violation of this Code. The Notice
shall be in writing, include a description of the real estate sufficient for
proper identification, contain a statement of the reason(s) for the Notice
being issued, and include a corrective action plan and reasonable time
frame to allow the required improvements to be made in accordance with
3
the Code. While not required, a Notice may be issued prior to issuance of
an Order. Upon receipt of a Notice for a violation, the owner or person(s)
responsible for the property shall have ten (IO) business days from the
date the Notice is mailed by first class postage to correct the violation. If a
responsible person fails to correct the violation in accordance with the
corrective action plan, or if the CEO becomes aware of another violation
before a responsible person corrects a pending violation, the CEO shall
proceed to issue an Order, as described in paragraph 2 below, to compel ·
correction of the pending violation and the subsequent violation.
Z. Orders. An Order is a written document ordering the owner or person{s)
responsible to correct a violation of this Code. The Order shall be in
writing. include a description of the real estate sufficient for proper
identification. contain a statement of the reason(s) for the Order being
issued, and include a corrective action plan with a specific date to
complete the required improvements to be made in accordance with the
Code. Failure to comply with the Order shall result in legal action. From
the date the Order is received by the owner or person(s) responsible for the
property shall have ten (10) business days to take corrective action on the
violation(s) contained in the Order.
3. Court. If the vioJation(s) contained in the Order are not corrected within
ten (IO) business days of receipt of the Order sent by certified mail or
hand delivered by the Code Enforcement Officer. the CEO will issue a
summons to the owner or responsible person for violation of this Code in
accordance with Maine law and Rule SOK as in effect from time to time or
as replaced by another rule addressing the same subject matter.
4. Methods of Service. A Notice or Order shall be deemed to be properly
served ifa copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally by the
CEO or (b) sent by certified mail addressed to the owner or person( s)
responsible at the last known address with return receipt requested.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or
upon the person(s) responsible for the structure and/or property shall
constitute service upon the owner. In cases taken to Court, service of the
summons shall be in accordance with Maine law and Rule SOK as_in effect
from time to time or as replaced by another rule addressing the same
subject matter.
D. Means or Appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the CEO resulting in
the issuance of an Order i~sued under this Code shall have the right to appeal
to the Millinocket Zoning Board of Appeals. provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within ten (10) calendar days of the date the
Order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that no
violation of this Code has occurred or the provisions of this Code do not
apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other
means. The appellant will pay a fee to the Town of$50.00 to defray the costs
of the appeal procedure. Said fee will be reimbursed to the appellant if the
appellant prevails.
"Section 50-06. Yard Maintenance. The owner or person{s) responsible for the
property shall be subject to the following process for corrective action in yards that have
Weeds, as described in Section 50-03.B, in excess of ten (IO)inches in height. In the
event the owner or responsible party does not correct a violation after service of a Notice
and/or Order and the CEO issues a summons for violation of this Code. the CEO shall
request the Court to order the owner or responsible party to correct the violation and. in
the alternative, to authorize the Town , through a contractor or the Millinocket Public
Works Department, to mow or cut and remove the weeds in violation of this Code and to
assess the cost of such work to the owner or responsible party with a minimum charge of
$50.00 and $50.00 per hour or each fraction of an hour thereafter.
"Section 50-07. Duties and Powen o( the Code Enforcement Officer. In accordance
with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, the CEO shall enforce all of the provisions of this Code.
The CEO shall issue all necessary Notices and Orders and initiate legal action in Maine
District Court, as necessary, to ensure compliance with this Code. Citizen complaints of
possible violations of this Code may be made to the CEO for review and, if appropriate,
investigation. Citizen complaints may be in writing, by phone, or in person. Citizen
complainants may choose to remain anonymous if complaints are submitted verbally or
by unsigned instrument. The CEO shall also have the power to identify and take
appropriate action on possible violations discovered in the normal course of his/her
work. The CEO, in consultation with the Town Manager, may engage legal counsel to
prosecute violations of this Code.
"Section 50-08. Violations. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code shall,
upon conviction in Maine District Cou~ be subject to a penalty of $100.00 for each
occurrence. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate occurrence
with a maximum penalty as provided in Title 30-A MRSA Section 4452 as in effect from
time to time or as replaced by another statute addressing the same subject matter. Any
person who violates this Code shall also be responsible for the costs and expenses,
including attorney's fees, incurred by the Town in prosecuting and correcting violations
of this Code.
IT IS FURTHER ORDAL~ED that the Town Clerk make appropriate changes to
incorporate this Chapter into the Millinocket Code and distribute new pages to all persons
known to have a copy of the Code.
Fint Reading: May to, 2012
Second Reading: May 24. 2012
Passed by the Council: May 24, 2012
Effective Date: June 24. 2012
Attest: EJC
5
-
,
1J)
§ 61-1.
§ 61-2.
§ 61-2.1.
§ 61-3.
§ 61-4.
§ 61-5.
§ 61-6.
§ 61-7.
§ 61-8.
§ 61-9.
§ 61-10.
§ 61-10.1.
§ 61-11.
§ 61-12.
§ 61-13.
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Chapter61
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Definitions.
ARTICLE I
Dogs
Running at large prohibited; exceptions.
Adequate shelter required.
Enforcement; Dog Constable.
License and tag required.
Impoundment.
Registry and notification of owner of
impoundment.
Conditions of release.
Confinement of certain dogs.
Barking or howling.
Violations and penalties.
Dogs on public property; exceptions.
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Animals
Keeping of swine prohibited.
Other animals prohibited.
Violations and penalties.
6101 7-5-2001
~.. .,
~
ORDINANCE #1·2013 - REVISED
PROVIDING FOR: Amendment to Chapter 61 of the Code of the Town of
Millinocket Entitled "Dogs and Other Animals"
BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Millinocket In Town Council assembled
that the Millinocket Code, Chapter 61 be amended as attached
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that this amendment take effect 30 days after
enactment.
-
l 5tReadlng ~- d.~·<)S4~ ~
2"dReading J./-25:-~/3 ~
Council Approved J./ l,5 ·JOJ.3
Effective Date 5"d5.-dfj /::3
I
Attest::@a 11 U~!lln\..,.
ORDINANCE# , ... a,o \ D
PROVIDING FOR: An Amendment to Chapter 61 of th• cod• of the Town of Mllllnockat
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNOL OF THE TOWN OF MIWNOCl<ET that Chapter 61 of the
MIHlnocket Code Is amended by addfn1 Artlcl1 IV as follows:
ARTICLEIY
FEEDING WILD ANIMAl.S AND FOWL PROHIBITED
61.15 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It has been determined that:
A. feedln1 of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds Is both detrimental to those
spedes, causes a public health nuisance and a public safety hazard that is
detrimental to the health and general weJfare of the public; and
B. feeding of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds Is extremely disruptive to the
natural feedln1 habits of those species; and
C. while some individuals enjoy handing out food to wild animals, waterfowl and
other birds, the action Is detrimental to thosespedes and to the public; and
D. The Intentional feedlf11 of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds not only
attracts predators, but also .can result In such wlldllfe being concentrated at
artifldaJ feeding areas, makins them more susceptible to disease transmission
and Inappropriate human Interaction; and
E. Wild animals, waterfowl and other birds fed by humans are drawn Into heavy
traffic areas seekln1 handouts and are kllled by vehicles or cause accidents to
humans;
F. Waste from concentrations of feeding wild animals, waterfowl and other birds
causes a human health hazard and disrupts the enjoyment of other property
and publlc places In the vldnlty of the concentration of such species.
61.1& Definitions. The followlna words and terms, as used In this article, shall have the
meanln1s Indicated, unless the context indicates otherwise.
A. Fowl shall be any bird other than songbirds indudlns but not lfmited to ducks, 1eese,
pigeons, crows, seagulls and birds of prey such as eagles, hawks and others.
B. Feed shall mean sfve, place, expose, distribute or scatter any edible material with the
intention of feeding, attractin1 or entlcfn1 wild animals and/or fowl, but shall not
include baiting In the legal taking of wffd animals and/or fowl in areas where such
baftlns Is allowed.
c. Notice. A written warning issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation
of this Ordinance.
D. Occupant. Any person ilvina or sfeepfn1 In a buHding or having possession of premises
wfthfn the Town of Miiiinocket.
E. Order. A written document Issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct a
violation of this Ordinance, w~ere failure to comply will result in formal legal action.
®.
'
F. Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
Interest In the premises or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or
municipality as holding title to the premises or otherwise having control of the premises
Including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property
or premises by a court.
G. Person. An Individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting as a unit.
H. Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land lncludlns any structures thereon.
I. Wiid animals shall Include any animal which is not normally domesticated in this State
including but not limited to coyotes, bears, deer, feral cat, foxes, raccoons, skunks,
squirrels, mice, rats, other rodents, waterfowl and other birds.
J. Yard. An open space on the same tot with a structure.
61.17 Feedln1 wild animals and fowl prohibited.
A. No person shall scatter or deposit any feed or other attractants on public or private
premlseswhlch results In attracting wild animals and/or fowl. Leaving feed In a yard for
any purpose, f ncludlng the purpose of feeding domestic animals and pets, in a place
where wild animals and/or fowl can access ft, shall be a violatfon of this sectJon if the
feed, In fact,attracts wild anfmafs or fowl.
This section shall not apply to birdseed held in receptacles for songbirds which are
reasonably designed to prevent, and do prevent, access to the food by wild animals and
fowl •
This section shall not apply to providing feed during daytime hours f n live traps used to
capture feral cats for spaying and/or neutering.
61.18 Feedlna of son1blrds and other backyard birds permitted.
A. Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds other than fowl as defined in this
article, shall be permitted In yards at such times and In such numbers that:
1. Such feedlns does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects the
rights of surround Ing property owners and renders other persons Insecure in
the use of their property;
2. Does not create an accumulation of bird feces on the property and surrounding
properties;
3. Does not become an attractant for rodents or other wild animals or fowl; and
4. Bird feeders are placed at least five feet above the ground.
61.19 Enforcement.
A This ordinance may be enforced by the Animal Control Officer, Code Enforcement
Officer, and Local Health Officer or by any Police Officer of the Town of Miiiinocket,
based upon either personal observation or upon complaint. Alt enforcement actions
(
(
shall be initiated by serving a citation upon the defendant in accordance with Rule
80(b), Maine Rules of Cl~il Procedure, as the same may be amended, directing the
defendant to appear in district at the date, time and location stated In the citation.
All court proceedings under this ordinance shall be conducted in accordance with
Rule 80H, Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
B. Each property owner or occupant of property shall have the duty to remove any
feed or device placed on property which Is in violation of this ordinance. Failure to
remove such feed or devices or to make such modifications within (24) hours after
notice from the Town shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance for each
day after notice Is received by the property owner or property occupant until the
feed or devices are removed or acceptable modifications to any such devices are
made.
C. No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered
to perform any duties under this ordinance.
61.20 Penaftfes.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this artide shall, upon conviction In
Maine District Court, be subject to a penalty of $100.00 for each occurrence. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate occurrence with a
maximum penalty as provided in Title 30-A MRSA Section 4452 as in effect from
time to time or as replaced by another statute addressing the same subject matter.
Any person who violates this Code shall also be responsible for the costs and
expenses, lndudln1 attorneys fees, Incurred bv the Town In prosecuting
and correcting violations of this Code.
For any first time offense within a one year period, dvil proceedin1s may be waived by
the defendant upon payment to the Town of MUJfnocket a $50 fine within 7 days after
the service of the citation upon the defendant. Civil proceedinas may not be waived
when the defendant has been dted two or more times for a violation within a one year
period.
61.ll SeverabDlty;
Every section of this ordinance or subdivision or separate part thereof shall be
considered a separate provision to the Intent that If any portion shall be dedared
unconstitutional It shall not affect the remaining parts of this ordinance.
~, IT IS FURTHER ORDAINED that the Town Clerk make appropriate changes to incorporate this article into ., ;. ~I
ill.'/ the Millinocket Code and distribute new pages to all persons known to have a copy of the Code.
First Readln1:
Second Reading: L{ · d5 · do ~
Effective Date: !5 · ;;>5 · Go (3
0.
'
§ 61-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 61-1
ARTICLE III
Cats and Other Domestic Animals
§ 61-14. Applicability to cats and other domestic
animals.
[filSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council ol the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 7-21-1981 by Art. I of Ch. 4 of
the Millinocket Code.]
§ 61-1. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings indicated, unless the context indicates otherwise:
AT LARGE - Off the premises of the owner and not
under the immediate control of the owner or other
person representing the owner, either by a leash, cord,
chain or other positive means of restraint.
•
DANGEROUS DOG [Added 6-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1-91):
A. Any dog:
(1) Which, when unprovoked, approaches any
person upon the streets, sidewalks or on any
public grounds or places in a vicious or
terrorizing manner or in any apparent attitude
of attack;
(2) With a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause
injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals; or
6102 '1-5-2001

§ 61-1
• .
'
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 61-1
(3) Which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or
otherwise attacks a human being or domestic
animal without provocation on public or private
property.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no dog may be
considered to be a "dangerous dog" by reason of any
iajury or damage sustained by a person when such
person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or
assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting
to commit a crime; any iitjury or damage sustained
by a domestic animal which, at the time such injury
or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the dog; or any iajury or
damage caused by the dog in protecting or defending
a human being within the immediate vicinity of the
dog from an unjustified attack or assault.
DOG-Both male and female canines.
KEEPER - Any person other than the owner of a
dangerous/vicious dog who harbors or has in his or her
possession a dangerous/vicious dog or manages, controls
or cares for a dangerous/vicious dog. [Added 6-13-1991
by Ord. No. 1-91]
OWNER- Any person or legal entity having a
possessory property right in a dog or who harbors, cares
for or exercises control over a dog or knowingly permits a
dog to remain on premises occupied by him. [Amended
6-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1-91)
UNCONFINED - Outside the confines of a residence
commonly occupied by human beings or a commercial or
industrial structure or an enclosure of at least six feet in
height, with the exception of small dogs which, in the
opinion of the Dog Constable, require less height, with
secure sides, top and bottom or, if there is no bottom,
with sides which extend at least one foot underground
and which shall be locked and designed to prevent the
escai>e of the animal or the entry of young children.
Signs shall be one foot by one foot on all sides of the
6103 7-5-2001
MILLINOCKET CODE
enclosure, stating "WARNING. DANGER: DANGEROUS
DOG INSIDE." Similar signs shall be posted at the
entrance of all buildings confining a dangerous or vicious
dog or dogs. [Added 6-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1-91)
VICIOUS DOG [Added 6-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1-91):
A. Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in
part for the purpose of dog fighting;
B. Any dog owned, harbored or trained primarily or in
part for the purpose of attacking a human being or
domestic animal upon command; or
C. Any dog which has bitten, injured or assaulted a
human being or domestic animal without
provocation on public or private property. This
subsection shall apply only to incidents which occur
after the effective date of this article.
§ 61-2. Runnhig at large prohibited; exceptions.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run at
large at any time. This section shall not be construed, however,
to prevent the use of dogs for legal hunting purposes, field trials
or shows or the use of dogs on farms or residences for any
lawful purpose not inconsistent with the intent and provisions
of this article.
§ 61-2.1. Adequate shelter required. [Amended 6-13-1991
by Ord. No. 1-91]
The owner of every dog within the limits of the Town of
Millinocket shall provide adequate shelter for each such animal.
"Adequate shelter" shall be defined as an enclosure which is
sufficient to protect the animal from rain, snow, wind and
extremes of temperature such that the animal does not suffer
from exposure to the elements.
6104 7-5-2001
§ 61-3 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 61-6
§ 61-3. Enforcement; Dog Constable.
It shall be the duty of all municipal police officers to enforce
all provisions of this article. Further, there shall be appointed a
Dog Constable, who shall have the prime responsibility of
enforcing this article. Said Dog Constable shall be appointed by
the Town Manager and shall perform under the direction and
supervision of the Chief of Police.
§ 614. License and tag required.
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their respective
owners in the Town of Millinocket shall be licensed and tagged
in accordance with the appropriate laws of the State of Maine.
§ 81-5. lmpoundment.
If shall he the duty of the Dog Constable or municipal police
officer to seize any dog found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this Article and to impound such dog.
§ 61-6. Registry and notification of owner of
impoundment.
A. When impounding any dog, the Dog Constable or police
officer shall, at the time of such impounding, make a
complete registry, entering the date of impounding, the
breed, color, sex and general condition of such dog, as
can be reasonably ascertained, and if licensed or
unlicensed and the name of the owner or keeper, if
known, on a registry form prepared, approved and
supplied by the Chief of Police. A copy of this registry
form shall be furnished to the poundmaster or
kennel.keeper, together with written instructions setting
forth conditions under which the dog may be released.
B. When any dog is impounded under the provisions of this
article and the owner of the dog cannot be contacted with
reasonable diligence or the owner is unknown, the dog
6105 ·'1-5-2001
§ 61-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 61-8
shall be disposed of in accordance with M.R.S.A, Title 7,
§ 3913, or Title 32, § 4872, and as such sections may be
amended or replaced from time to time. [Amended
6-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1-91]
C. The person having control of impounding shall keep a
record of every dog disposed of by sale or otherwise. Such
record shall include: a description which identifies the
dog with reasonable certainty, the manner of disposing
of the dog and, if the dog was transferred to another
person, the name and address of the transferee. In
addition, the transferee must sign a statement giving his
name, address and the date of delivery or receipt of the
dog.
§ 61-7. Conditions of release. [Amended 4-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 3-2000)
Any dog impounded under the provisions of this Article shall be
released to the owner or keeper thereof on presentation of
written authorization from the Dog Constable or a police officer
and on further condition that all impoundment charges be paid
to the pound or kennelkeeper before release. The fees charged
by pound- or kennelkeepers shall not exceed those approved for
humane agents from time to time by the State Department of
Agriculture. Cats and other domestic animals as described
under Article III of this chapter shall be subject to the retrieval
of the same fees applied to dogs contained in this section.
§ 61-8. Confinement of certain dogs. [Amended 6-13·1991
by Ord. No. 1-91)
A. Female dogs in heat shall be confined in such manner as
to avoid the creation of a nuisance by other dogs
congregating in the area. If the owner of a female dog in
heat is found in violation of this section, such dog shall
be impounded and shall be released on the approval of
6106 7-S-2001
•
§ 61-8 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 61-8
the Dog Constable, police officers or Chief of Police if all
provisions of§ 61-7 and this article have been met.
B. No person shall sell, purchase, possess, rent, lease or
harbor a vicious dog within the jurisdiction of the Town
of Millinocket other than a vicious dog that has been
acquired prior to the effective date of this article and
registered as required pursuant to this section.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Animal shelters designated by the Department of
Health to keep or hold animals, including all
shelters operated by the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
(2) Facilities which are maintained by or are under the
control of the town.
(3) Places of public exhibition, contest or show
sponsored by a dog club association or similar
organization and persons who have brought a dog
temporarily within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Millinocket for the purpose of showing a dog at such
an exhibition, contest or show or for other
entertainment purposes as defined in regulations
promulgated by the Town Council, provided that the
sponsor of the exhibition, contest, show or
entertainment has obtained written permission
from the Town Council and has provided protective
measures adequate to prevent dogs from escaping or
injuring the public.
(4) Police dogs belonging to, working for or assigned to
the Town of Millinocket or any law enforcement
agency.
(5) Persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this
article.
D. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit any business
transaction concerning a dog that is not physically
present in the town.
6107 7-5-2001
§ 61-8 MILLINOCKET CODE
E. It shall be a violation of this article for the owner or any
person who possesses or harbors any dangerous or
vicious dog to fail to confine such animal such that the
animal is unconfined as defined in this article.
F. Any vicious dog found by the Dog Constable or any police
officer to be unconfined shall be impounded in
accordance with § 61-6 of this article. If the owner of any
such vicious dog does not agree to permanently remove
the dog from the limits of the Town of Millinocket within
24 hours, the animal shall be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner in accordance with§ 61-10. In the event
that any such vicious dog is not claimed by the owner
within 10 days after impoundment, the animal shall be
destroyed in accordance with§ 61-10. The owner shall be
contacted in accordance with§ 61-6.
G. Muzzling and leashing.
(1) No person shall permit or allow any vicious dog
acquired prior to the effective date of this article to
remain unconfined on property within the Town of
Millinocket or to go beyond the boundaries of such
property unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain or leash not exceeding three
feet in length and is under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.
(2) No person shall permit or allow any dangerous dog
to remain unconfined on property within the Town
of Millinocket or to go beyond the boundaries of such
property unless such dog is securely muzzled and
restrained with a chain or leash not exceeding three
feet in length and is urider the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.
H. Any dangerous dog found by the Dog Constable o:r any
police officer to be unconfined shall be impounded in
accordance with § 61-6 of this article. If the owner of any
such dangerous dog does not agree to permanently
remove the dog from the limits of the Town of
Millinocket within 24 hours, the animal shall be
6108 7-5-2001
(
) .
'i.
•l .
.
§ 61-8 DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS § 61-8
destroyed in a proper and humane manner consistent
with § 61-10. In the event that any such dangerous dog is
not claimed by the owner within 10 days after
impoundment, the animal shall be destroyed in
accordance with§ 61-10. The owner shall be contacted in
accordance with § 61-6.
I. Any dog shall be immediately impounded upon biting,
inflicting injury, assaulting or otherwise attacking a
human being or domestic animal without provocation on
public or private property. Any such dog shall be
destroyed in a proper and humane manner in accordance
with§ 61-10.
J. Registration.
(1) The owner of any dangerous/vicious dog who
acquired such dog prior to the effective date of this
section shall register such dog with the office of the
Town Clerk no later than 90 days after the effective
date of this Article. Dangerous dogs shall be
registered annually thereafter during the month of
January and prior to ·January 31 of each year.
Vicious dogs acquired prior to the effective date of
this section shall also be registered annually
thereafter during th~ month of January and prior to
31st of each year. Failure to register any
dangerous/vicious dog shall be a violation of this
Article.
(2) The owner of any dog required to be registered shall
complete a registration form promulgated by the
Chief of Police. The Town Clerk shall inform the Dog
Constable and Police Department of any dog
registered hereunder.
K. Insurance required.
(1) No owner of any dangerous or vicious dog shall be
allowed to register said animal unless such owner
produces proof that he has obtained liability
insurance in the amount of at least $300,000
6109 7-5-2001
§ 61-8 MILLINOCKET CODE § 61-9
covering any damage or injury which may be caused
by such dog during the twelve-month period for
which registration is sought. The policy shall
provide for notice to the town in the event of
cancellation of the policy.
(2) The owner of a dangerous or vicious dog shall
maintain liability insurance in full force and effect
at all times as required by Subsection K( 1) of this
section, unless he shall cease to own, keep or harbor
the dog prior to the expiration of such registration.
(3) Any owner who is not able to produce insurance as
required herein concerning any dangerous or vicious
dog shall permanently remove the animal from the
limits of the Town of Millinocket within 24 hours of
the expiration of such insurance coverage or within
24 hours of the effective date of this article, if such
insurance coverage cannot be obtained, or shall
destroy such animal within said twenty-four-hour
time limit. In the event the owner fails to do so, the
dog constable or any police officer shall impound the
animal and if the owner of such animal fails to
produce insurance within an additional 24 hours or
fails to agree to permanently remove the animal
from the town immediately upon regaining
possession of the animal, the Dog Constable shall
destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner
in accordance with§ 61-10.
L. Enforcement. Any police officer or Dog Constable or
Animal Control Officer of the Town of Millinocket is
authorized to issue a civil summons for the violation of
any provision of this article.
§ 61-9. Barking or howling.
No person shall keep or harbor any dog which by loud,
frequent or habitual barking, howling or yelping shall disturb
the peace and tranquility of any person or persons.
6110 7-5-2001
ft; .,·r.., ·~~
"-'· •'!'
§ 61-10 DOGS AND OTHER ANil\IIALS § 61-10.l
§ 61-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 1-91]
A. Any owner or keeper of a dog found in violation of any of
the . provisions of this article shall be guilty of a civil
violation and shall be punished by a fine of $50 for the
first such offense and $100 for the second such offense.
All fines so assessed shall be recovered for the use of the
Town of Millinocket.
B. Any dog found in violation of this article on three
separate occasions shall be impounded, and, if the owner
does not agree to permanently remove the dog from the
limits of the Town of Millinocket, the animal shall be
destroyed in a proper and humane manner in accordance
with this section.
C. In addition to any monetary penalty imposed by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the dog to
be euthanized for violation of this article.
§ 81-10.1. Dogs on public property; exceptions. [Added
12-8-1988 by Ord. No. 5-88]
A. No person shall allow any dog "owned by him/her or
under his/ her control to be on any property utilized by
the Town of Millinocket for organized recreation
activities. This property shall include but not be limited
to softball, soccer, baseball, basketball or football :fields,
public beaches and designated playgrounds. This
subsection would not prohibit any dog trained for the
purpose of aiding a sight-impaired person and engaged
in that function nor would this subsection prevent
persons from walking dogs along roadways or paths
outside of recreation compounds.
B. No person shall allow any dog owned by him/her or
under his/ her control to enter or remain on the grounds
of any educational institution within the Town of
Millinocket. This subsection would not prohibit any dog
6111 03-30-2005
§ 61-10.1 IVIILLINOCKET CODE § 61-12
trained for the purpose of aiding a sight·impaired person
and engaged in that function nor would this subsection
prevent persons from walking dogs along roadways or
paths outside of recreation compounds.
C. Duty to protect the health and safety of the public. No
person shall allow any dog owned by him/her or under
his/her control to defecate upon a public street, road,
sidewalk, park, or other public property within the Town
of Millinocket, or upon private property (except for that
property owned by the owner of the dog) unless such
defecation is immediately removed and disposed of by
said owner or controller of the dog in a proper manner.
This subsection shall not apply to any dog trained for the
purpose of aiding a sight-impaired person and engaged
in that function or to any person with a handicap who,
by reason of that handicap, is physically unable to
comply with the requirements of this subsection. [Added
8-22-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002)
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 7-21-1981 as Art. II of Ch. 4
of the Millinocket Code]
§ 61-11. Keeping of swine prohibited.
Swine of any kind shall not be kept within the limits ofthe
Town of Millinocket. Whenever the Health Officer discovers the
continuance of swine on any premises within the Town, he may,
by written notice to the occupant(s) of said premises, order the
removal of the swine from the premises. The occupant(s) shall
remove the swine within 48 hours after receiving the notice.
§ 61-12. Other animals prohibited.
No person shall keep fowl, goats, cattle, sheep or horses of
any kind on any premises within the limits of the Town of
Millinockei.
6112 03-30-2005
.1. "l
(j
.. ..} ' t. ·" . ~· . .._
§ 61-13 DOGS AND OTHER ANll\'IALS § 61-14
§ 61·13. Violations and penalties.
Any person offending against any of the above provisions
shall forfeit and pay a sum of not less than $25 nor more than
$100. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. All fines shall be recovered for the use of the Town.
ARTICLE III
Cats and Other Domestic Animals
[Adopted 4·27·2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000]
§ 61-14. Applicability to cats and other domestic
animals.
It is the intent of this section to include cats and other
domestic animals (i.e., rabbits, ferrets, birds, etc.) commonly
referred to as ''pets" under this chapter for the purpose of
retrieval of fees incurred in the boarding and care of such
animals as contained under Article I, Dogs. Reference is made
specifically to § 61-7, Conditions of release, for the retrieval of
such fees from owners or keepers of such animals.
6113 oa - so - 2001>

Dogs and Other Animals Ordinance
61.15 Statement of Purpose.
61.16 Definitions.
OfAPTER61
61.17 Feeding wild animals and fowl prohibited.
61.18 Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds permitted.
61.19 Enforcement.
61.20 Penalties.
61.2.1 Severability.

ORDINANCE #1-2013 - REVISED
PROVIDING FOR: Amendment to Chapter 61 of the Code of the Town of
Millinocket Entitled "Dogs and Other Animals"
BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Millinocket in Town Council assembled
that the Millinocket Code, Chapter 61 be amended as attached
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that this amendment take effect 30 days after
enactment.
...
l 5t Reading 0~ d.g . q.<4~ ~
2"dReading lf-;t5"·dCJl3 ~
Council Approved J./-l.5 · Jo/3
Effective Date 5 ":J5,, dl> / .3
I
Attest:¥a J tLJ'::n~JJ\11\.._

ORDINANCE# I ... i¥) \ ~
PROVIDING FOR: An Amendment to Chapter 61 of the code of the Town of Miiiinocket
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF ntE TOWN OF MllllNOCKET that Chapter 61 of the
Mlllfnocket Code Is amended by adding Artlde IV as follows:
ARTIQEN
FEEDING WILD ANIMALS AND FOWL PROHIBITED
61.15 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It has been determined that:
A. feedf ns of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds is both detrimental to those
species, causes a public health nuisance and a public safety hazard that is
detrimental to the health and seneral welfare of the public; and
B. feeding of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds is extremely disruptive to the
natural feeding habits of those species; and
C. while some individuals enjoy handing out food to wild animals, waterfowl and
other birds, the action is detrimental to thosespecies and to the public; and
O. The intentional feeding of wild animals, waterfowl and other birds not only
attracts predators, but also can result in such wildlife beins concentrated at
artificial feeding areas, making them more susceptible to disease transmission
and Inappropriate human interaction; and
E. Wild animals, waterfowl and other birds fed by humans are drawn into heavy
traffic areas se~klns handouts and are killed by vehicles or cause accidents to
humans;
F. Waste from concentrations of feeding wild animals, waterfowl and other birds
causes a human health hazard and disrupts the enjoyment of other property
and public places in the vicinity of the concentration of such species.
61.16 Definitions. The following words and terms, as used in this artide, shall have the
meanings Indicated, unless the context indicates otherwise.
A. Fowl shall be any bird other than songbirds including but not limited to ducks, geese,
pigeons, crows, seagulls and birds of prey such as eagles, hawks and others.
B. fffd shall mean give, place, expose, distribute or scatter any edible material with the
Intention of feedins, attracting or entlcf na wild animals and/or fowl, but shall not
indude baiting In the legal taking of wild animals and/or fowt in areas where such
baiting is allowed.
C. Notice. A written warning issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation
of this Ordinance.
D. Occupant. Any person llvina or sleeping in a buildins or having possession of premises
within the Town of Miiiinocket
E. Order. A written document issued by the Code Enforcement Officer to correct a
violation of this Ordinance, w~ere failure to comply will result in formal legal action.

F. owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the premises or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or
municipality as holding title to the premises or otherwise having control of the premises
Including the guardian of the estate of any such person and the executor or
administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property
or premises by a court.
G. Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, or any other group acting as a unit.
H. Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
I. Wild animals shall include any animal which is not normally domesticated in this State
including but not limited to coyotes, bears, deer, feral cat, foxes, raccoons, skunks,
squirrels, mice, rats, other rodents, waterfowl and other birds.
J. Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
61.17 Feedln1 wild animals and fowl prohibited.
A. No person shall scatter or deposit any feed or other attractants on public or private
premiseswhich results in attracting wild animals and/or fowl. Leaving feed in a yard for
any purpose, induding the purpose of feeding domestic animals and pets, in a place
where wild animals and/or fowl can access it, shall be a violation of this section if the
feed, In fact,attracts wild animals or fowl.
This section shall not apply to birdseed held in receptacles for songbirds which are
reasonably desisned to prevent, and do prevent, access to the food by wild animals and
fowl.
This section shall not apply to providing feed during daytime hours in live traps used to
capture feral cats for spaying and/or neutering.
61.18 Feedfn1 of sonplrds and other backyard birds pennltted.
A. Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds other than fowl as defined In this
article, shall be permitted In yards at such times and in such numbers that:
1. Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects the
rights of surrounding property owners and renders other persons Insecure in
the use of their property;
2. Does not create an accumulation of bird feces on the property and surroundin1
properties;
3. Does not become an attractant for rodents or other wild animals or fowl; and
4. Bird feeders are placed at least five feet above the ground.
6L19 Enforcement.
A. This ordinance may be enforced by the Animal Control Officer, Code Enforcement
Officer, and Local Health Officer or by any Police Officer of the Town of Millinocket,
based upon either personal observation or upon complaint. All enforcement actions

shall be initiated by serving a citation upon the defendant in accordance with Rule
80(b), Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, as the same may be amended, directing the
defendant to appear in district at the date, time and location stated in the citation.
All court proceedings under this ordinance shall be conducted in accordance with
Rule SOH, Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
B. Each property owner or occupant of property shall have the duty to remove any
feed or device placed on property which is in vfolation of this ordf nance. Failure to
remove such feed or devices or to make such modifications within (24) hours after
notice from the Town shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance for ead1
day after notice is received by the property owner or property occupant until the
feed or devices are removed or acceptable modifications to any such devices are
made.
C. No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered
to perform any duties under this ordinance.
61.20 Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this artide shall, upon conviction in
Maine District Court, be subject to a penalty of $100.00 for each occurrence. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate occurrence with a
maximum penalty as provided in Title 30-A M RSA Section 4452 as in effect from
time to time or as replaced by another statute addressing the same subject matter.
Any person who violates this Code shall also be responsible for the costs and
expenses, including attorneys fees, Incurred by the Town in prosecuting
and correcting violations of this Code.
For any first time offense within a one year period, civil proceedings may be waived by
the defendant upon payment to the Town of Millinocket a $50 fine within 7 days after
the service of the citation upon the defendant. Civil proceedings may not be waived
when the defendant has been cited two or more times for a violation within a one year
period.
61.21 Severability;
Every section of this ordinance or subdivision or separate part thereof shall be
considered a separate provision to the intent that if any portion shall be declared
unconstitutional it shall not affect the remaining parts of this ordinance.

IT IS FURTHER ORDAINED that the Town Clerk make appropriate changes to incorporate this article into
the Millinocket Code and distribute new pages to all persons known to have a copy of the Code.
First Reading: ~ • 'd%·C)c?\3 ~~
Second Reading: t../ · d5 ~do l3
Effective Date: .5 · d5 · Oo t.3

'.. ~ ·',:'
·-···.
r .. } .; -~ " :·· .....
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES
Chapter 60
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES
I 65-1. Title.
§ 65-2. Purpose.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
§ 66-4. Permit required.
§ 65-5. Application tor permit
§ 65-6. Issuance of permit.
§ 66-7. Conduct constituting offenses by licensees.
I 66-8. Suspension or revocation of permit
§ 65-9. Fees.
(HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 9-14-82 as Art. IV of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket Code.
Section 65-68 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1.
Gene.-al Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments not.ed where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vlolalion1 and penaltl• - See Ch. 1, Art. (,
Bottle clubs - See Ch. 38, ArL I.
§ 65-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be citA!d as the .. Entertainment
Ordinance" of the Town of Millinocket, Maine.
6501

§ 65-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 65-3
I 66-2. Purpo11e.
The purpose of this chapter is to control the issuance of special
permits for music, dancing or entertainment in facilities licensed by
the State of Maine to sell liquor.
I 65-3. Deflnitfolll.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC - The matter or performance
or act may be purchased or attended on a subscription
basis, on a membership fee arrangement or for a separate fee
for eaeh item ·or performance or act, or available merely by
being a patron of or present in an establishment that is
licensed to sell liquor.
DISSEMINATE - To transfer possession of, with or without
consideration.
ENTERTAINMENT- Includes any amusement, performance,
exhibition or diversion for patrons or customers of the
licensed premises whether provided by professional entertainers
or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed
premises whose incident.al duties include activities with an
entertainment value.
KNOWINGLY - Being aware of the· character and the
content of the material.
LICENSEE - Includes the holder of a license issued under
the alcoholic beverages statutes of the State of Maine, or any
person, individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation
or other legal entity, or any agent or employee of any such
licensee, acting on behalf of any such licensee or left in charge
of or in control of such licensee's premises.
MATERIAL - Any book, magazine, newspaper or other
printed or written material, or any· picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation,
or any statue or other figure, or any recording. transcription
6502
§ 73-21 MILLINOCKET CODE § 73-24
receiving personal notice to that effect from the Health
Officer.
C. Whenever any person shall have been notified to remove
any nuisance or substances mentioned in the preceding
subsections or to perform any act which it may be his duty
to perform for preservation of the health of the town and
the time limit for removal or performance of the duty shall )
have elapsed without compliance with the notice, the ·
Health Officer shall forthwith cause such nuisance to be
removed at the expense of the person so notified and said
expenses shall be collected by such officer and sued for in
the name of the Town Treasurer. The town shall also be
entitled to collect any attorneys fees incurred by it. If, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, it shall be necessary for
the health and comfort of the residents of the town that
any particular nuisance shall be removed forthwith, it
shall be his duty to cause the same to be removed.
§ 73-22. Refuse on public lands prohibited.
No person shall make use of any land within the bounds of a
street, highway or other public place, drain or catch basin for
the deposit of any waste material of any kind.
§ 73-23. Parking of garbage collection vehicles.
The parking of garbage collection vehicles is prohibited within
200 feet of any residential or commercial building unless they
are emptied, washed and disinfected, except that said vehicles
may stop for short periods of time in the performance of
collecting garbage or oiher refuse from residential or
commercial buildings or in case of emergency breakdown.
§ 73-24. Deposit of refuse on private property.
No person shall make use of any land within the Town of
Millinocket for the disposal of septic sludge, dredge spoils,
73:12 05. 01 - 2011 ()
.)
()
\ .. .,'._/ i
SOLID WASTE
liquid waste, agricultural waste or solid waste as defined by
Section 400. HHHHH) of the Solid Waste Management
Regulations adopted by the Board of Environmental Protection,
as the same may be amended or redefined from time to time,
without appropriate licenses and permits from the town and
any state agency with jurisdiction over the disposal of such
material.
§ 73-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section of this Article, in addition to
any other penalty, shall forfeit and pay the sum of $100 for
every six hours the nuisances or substances mentioned in this
Article are suffered to continue or remain after due notice of
the time limit for their removal and shall be liable to pay the
expenses of removal, transportation and disposal as herein
provided. Such penalties shall be recovered on complaint for the
use of the town and shall include, in addition, any attorney's
fees incurred by the town.
, * 73-26. Enforcement.
The Health Officer of the Town of Millinocket, the Chief of
Police of the Town of Millinocket, the Public Works Director or
their authorized representatives shall enforce this chapter.
73:13 05. 01. 2011
()
().
"·
§ 65-7 ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES § 65-9
(a) The licensee's or any or his agent's or employees'
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region
or pubic hair region.
(b) Any device. costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulat.es the genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region.
(c) Any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.
(5) Knowingly promot.e the commission of any of the abovelist.
ed acts of this section.
§ 65-8. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The municipal officers may suspend or revoke a special amusement
permit which was issued under this chapter if the permit holder is in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or has knowingly made an
incorrect statement of a material nature on the application for a
permit Determination of the severity of the violation and whether a
suspension or revocation is warranted shall be made by the municipal
officers after a public hearing preceded by notice t.o interested parties.
§ 65-9. Fees.
The annual license fee for an amusement permit shall be
established by the Town Council by resolution. Changes in fees shall
be made by Town Council resolution.
6507
(-)
()
()
~ v
(3
(";:~,-'.,
• '"· . " ,
r_:~
\;;/
§ 66-1 FEES
Chapter 66
FEES
ARTICLE I
Nonprofit Housing Facilities
Service Fees
§ 66-1. Intent.
§ 66-2. Authority.
§ 66-3. Service charges; appeals.
§ 66-4. Collection of unpaid fees.
§ 66-5. When effective.
§ 66-1
[mSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
General assistance - See Ch. 75.
§ 66-1. Intent.
ARTICLE I
Nonprofit Housing Facilities
Service Fees
It is the intent of this article to create an ordinance to allow
the Town of Millinocket to assess a service fee in lieu of
property taxes for nonprofit housing facilities in the Town of
Millinocket, also known as a "payment in lieu of taxes"
(PILOT).
6601 4-1-2000
§ 66-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 66-3
§ 66-2. Authority.
This article is established through the authority provided in
36 M.R.S.A. § 652, paragraph L.
§ 66-3. Service charges; appeals.
The owners of any nonprofit housing facilities located in the
Town of Millinocket shall be subject to the payment of a service
fee in lieu of property taxes based on tb.e costs of providing
municipal services to such facilities.
A. Application. Such payment shall not include any
contribution toward the costs of education or welfare but
shall apply to all other services provided by the town,
including but not limited to police protection, fire
protection, ambulance service, public works, sanitation
services, general administration, library services and
recreation services.
B. Amount. The amount of the service fee shall be 2% of the
gross annual revenues of the organization. To qualify for
this limitation, the organization shall file with the town
a copy of its annual audit showing the revenues of the
organization for the year immediately prior to the year
which the service fee is levied. At its discretion, the town
may also request a copy of the organization's IRS Form
990 Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax.
The gross revenues contained therein shall be used to
calculate the fee. Any service fee amount that is in
excess of 2% of the gross annual revenues shall be
abated by the town.
C. Assessment. The annual assessment of the service fee
shall occur at the time property taxes are assessed or
upon receipt of the preceding year's audit from the
organization, whichever is later. In no case, however,
shall the fee for the town's current fiscal year be assessed
any later than April 1 of that fiscal year. Should an audit
not be available by that time, the previous year's service
fee will be charged. This fee will be adjusted per the
6602 4-1-2000
1 ..·J.· ~
()
,··-.....
( ~
· ..• ··"
()
FEES
requirements of Subsection B above to meet the twopercent
maximum. Assessed fees shall be payable within
60 calendar days of initial billing.
D. Appeals. Should an organization believe its service fee to
be in error due to noncompliance with this article, it
shall have the right to appeal the assessment to the
Millinocket Board of Assessment Review if the Tax
Assessor is unable or unwilling to make the requested
adjustment.
§ 66-4. Collection of unpaid fees.
Unpaid service fees will be collected in a manner consistent
with Maine State Law.
§ 66-5. When effective.
This article shall be effective with the town's fiscal 2000 tax
year.
6603 4-1-2000
(1 ·9;.:1. ~.
"·- .. ,
.·:- l)
. ~ ., ·- -
(_)
I ..· ! ·~ .9• · (\ -.~...' ·
\' 9:r. ·'
'•.
... ~-....,\ ( ,
-. ···-"
()
§ 68-1.
§ 68-2.
§ 68-3.
§ 68-4.
§ 68-5.
§ 68-6.
§ 68-7.
§ 68-8.
§ 68-9.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 68
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Purpose; establishment; statutory authority.
Permit required.
Application for permit.
Application fee; expert's fee.
Review standards for flood hazard
development permit applications.
Development standards.
Certificate of compliance.
Review of subdivision and development
proposals .
Appeals and variances.
§ 68-10. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 68-11. Severability.
§ 68-12. Conflicts with other regulations.
§ 68-13. Word usage; definitions.
§ 68-14. Repealer.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 6-9-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005.1 Amendments
noted where applicable.]
l Editor's ~ote: This ordinance also replaced former Ch. 68, Floodplain Management.
adopted 12-21-1989 by Ord. No, 3-89.
6801 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 68-1 MILLINOCKET CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction - See Ch. -18.
Mobile home parks: manufactured housin& - See Ch. 83.
Zoning - See Ch. 125.
§ 68-1
§ 68-1. Purpose; establishment; statutory authority.
A. Certain areas of the Town of Millinocket. Maine, are
subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief ls avaJtable in the
form of flood Insurance as authorized by the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
B. Therefore, the Town of Millinocket, Maine has chosen to
become a participating community in the National Flood
Insurance Program, and agrees to · comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this
Floodplain Management Ordinance.
C. It ls the intent of the Town of Millinocket, Maine to
require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards
In all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain
areas having special flood hazards.
D. The Town of Millinocket has the legal authority to adopt
land use and control measures to reduce future flood
losses pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 through 3007,
4352 and 4401 through 4407.
E. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in
the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town of
Millinocket having a special flood hazard be identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that
floodplain management measures be applied in such
flood hazard areas. This chapter establishes a flood
hazard development permit system and review
procedure for development activities in the designated
flood hazard areas of the Town of Millinocket, Maine.
F. The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE are
identified by the Federal Emergency Management
6802 07-01-2006
(~)
<)
\/ .!!..}..."
'· .
§ 68-1 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-3
Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study -
Town of Millinocket. Maine. Penobscot County." dated
December 5. 1989. with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Map, dated December 5, 1989, which are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.2
§ 68-2. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in
§ 68-13). including the placement of manufactured homes.
begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 68-1, a flood hazard development permit shall be obtained
from the Planning Board and Code Enforcement Officer. This
permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be
required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of
Millinocket, Maine.
§ 68-3. Application for permit.
A. The application for a flood hazard development permit
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and
shall include:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the
applicant. owner, and contractor;
(2) An address and a map indicating the location of the
construction site;
(3) A site plan showing location of existing and/or
proposed development, including but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities. water supply
facilities, areas to be cut and filled. and lot
dimensions:
(4) A statement of the intended use of the structure
and/or development:
2 Editor's Note: Said report and map are on nle lo the Town offices.
6803 07 - 01- 2006
§ 68-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-3
(5) A statement of the cost of the development including
all materials and labor;
(6) A statement as to the type of sewage system
proposed:
(7) Specification of dimensions of the proposed
structure aml/or development;
(8) The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally established
datum in Zone A only, of the:
(a) Base flood at the proposed site of, all new or
substantially improved structures. which is
determined:
( l l In Zone AE, from data contained in the
Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Millinocket, Maine, as described in § 68-1:
or
[21 In Zone A:
(a] From any ba se flood elevation data
from federal, state, or other technical
sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2
model. FEMA 265/J uly 1995).
including information obtained
pursuant to §§ 68-6K and 68-80;
[b] From the contour elevation
extrapolated from a best fit analysis of
the floodplain boundary when overlaid
onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other
topographic map prepared by a
professional land surveyor or
registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant
correlation to the elevation contour
line(s); or
[c] In the absence of all other data, to be
the elevation of the ground at the
6804 07 - 01-2006
.·).. ·
~-· .. ~.
;.-· . .;,._·
., .
·~~ (y
§ 68-3
/) ( ..
\ -- -
-i • .., . •
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-3
intersection of the floodplain boundary
and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the
ground through the site of the
proposed building.
(b) Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent
to the walls of the proposed building:
(c) Lowest floor, including basement. and whether
or not such structures contain a basement; and
(d) Level. In the case of nonresidential structures
only, to which the structure will be floodproofed.
(9) A description of an elevation reference point
established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in § 68-6:
( 10) A written certification by a professiona I land
surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect, that the base flood elevation and grade
elevations shown on the application are accurate:
(11) The following certifications as required in § 68-6 by
a registered professional engineer or architect:
(a) A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65,
08/99, as amended). to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
§§ 68-3A(8)(d), 68-6G, and other applicable
standards in§ 68-6;
(b) A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that
engineered hydraulic openings in foundation
walls will meet the standards of§ 68-6L (2) (a):
(c) A certified statement that bridges will meet the
standards of§ 68-6M:
(d) A certified statement that containment walls
will meet the standards of § 68-6N:
6805 07 - 01-2006
§ 68-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-5
{l 2) A description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and
( 13) A statement of construction plans describing in
detail how each applicable development standard in
§ 68-6 will be met.
B. The requirements of Subsection A(8) through (1 l)(b)
apply only to new construction and substantial
improvements.
§ 68-4. Application fee; expert's fee.
A A nonrefundable application fee of $25 for all minor
development (as defined) and $50 for new construction or
substantial improvement (as defined) shall be paid to the
Town Clerk. and a copy of a receipt for the same shall
accompany the application.
B. An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board
and/or Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of
Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer
or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by
the applicant within 10 days after the Town submits a
bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall
constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for
the issuance of a stop-work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant
until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in
writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the
subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision
to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the
Board of Appeals.
§ 68-5. Review standards for flood hazard development
permit applications.
The Planning Board and Code Enforcement Officer shall:
6806 07 - 01-2008
·~)· - '
r)>.- · ' .
'·
()
()
,.·-···)
( • ' ... -
§ 68-5 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-5
A. Review all applications for the flood hazard development
permit to assure that proposed developments are
reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all
pertinent requirements of § 68-6 (Development
standards) have been, or wlll be met.
B. Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development
permit applications:
( l) The base flood data contained in the Flood
Insurance Study - Town of Millinocket, Maine. as
described in § 68-1.
(2) In special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation data are not provided, the Planning Board
and Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data from federal, state, or other technical
sources. including Information obtained pursuant to
§§ 68-3A(8)(a)[2]. 68-6K and 68-80, in order to
administer § 68-6 of this chapter; and
(3) When the community establishes a base flood
elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
§ 68-3A(8) (a) [2}, the community shall submit that
data to "the Maine Floodplain Management Program
in the State Planning Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of
special flood hazard areas shown on the maps described
in § 68-1 of this chapter.
D. In the review of flood hazard development permit
applications, determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal. state. and local
government agencies from which prior approval is
required by federal or state law, including but not
limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain
Management Program in the State Planning Office prior
6807 07-01 - 2006
§ 68-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-5
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit copies of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
F If the application satisfies the requirements of this
chapter. approve the issuance of one of the foUowing
flood hazard development permits based on the type of
development:
(1) A two-part flood hazard development permit for
elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the
first horizontal floor only above the base flood level.
At that time the applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer with an elevation certificate
completed by a professional land surveyor,
registered professional engineer or architect based
on the Part I permit construction, as-built, for
verifying compliance with the elevation
requirements of§ 68-6F, G, or H. Following review
of the elevation certificate data, which shall take
place within 72 hours of receipt of the application,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of
the flood hazard development permit. Part II shall
authorize the applicant to complete the construction
project: or
(2) A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing
of nonresidential structures that are new
construction or · substantially improved
nonresidential structures that are not being
elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards
of§ 68-6G(l)(a). (b) and (c). The application for this
permit shall include a floodproofing certific.ate
signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or
(3) A flood hazard development permit for minor
development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as
repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions,
6808 07- 01- 2008
~
-~/
( _)
r)
()
§ 68-5 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-6
whose value is less than 50% of the market value of
the structure. Minor development also includes. but
is not limited to. accessory structures as provided for
in§ 68-6J, mining. dredging. filling. grading. paving,
excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment
or materials. deposition or extraction of materials.
public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures; and
nonstructural projects. such as bridges. dams,
towers, fencing , pipelines. wharves and piers.
G. Maintain. as a permanent record. copies of all flood
hazard development permit applications. corresponding
permits issued. and data relevant thereto, including
reports of the Board of Appeals on variances granted
under the provisions of§ 68-9 of this chapter. and copies
of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates.
certificates of compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of§§ 68-3, 68-6
and 68-7 of this chapter.
§ 68-6. Development standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet
the following applicable standards:
A. All development. All development shall:
(1) Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation (excluding piers and docks).
collapse or lateral movement of the development
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) Use construction materials that are resistant to
flood damage;
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage; and
(4) Use electrical, heating, ventilation. plumbing, and
air-conditioning equipment. and other service
6809 07- 01 - 2006
§ 68-G MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-6
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water supply. All new and replacement water supply
systems shall be designed to minimize or elirninate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
C. Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement
sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
floods.
E. Watercourse carrying capacity. All development
associated with altered or relocated portions of a
watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such
'I )• ·. . "
a manner that no reduction occurs in the flood-carrying · )
capacity of the watercourse. (.,
F. Residential. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure located within:
( 1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained
pursuant to § 68-3A(8) (a) (2], 68-SB or 68-80.
G. Nonresidential. New construction or substantial
improvement of any nonresidential structure located
within:
( 1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation. or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
6810 07- 01- 2006
(' 3..., · .· .
' .
, ~'0 t " . \.."
(<J~
i.· ·.~ ·~-. •' -·
\ •' · .... .. ·
()
§ 68-6 FLOODPLAIN !\llANAGEMENT § 68-6
(a) Be floodproofed to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation so that below that elevation
the structure is water.tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(b) Have structural components capable of
reslsting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing
design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this section. Such
certification shall be provided with the
application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by § 68-3A(l 1) and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean
sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained
pursuant to § 68-3A(8)(a)[2]. 68-SB or 68-80, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
§ 68-6G(l).
H. Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved
manufactured homes located within:
(1) Zone AE shall:
(a) Be elevated such that the lowest floor (including
basement) of the manufactured home is at least
one foot above the base flood elevation;
(b) Be on a permanent foundation, which may be
poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers
or block supports, any of which support the
681 1 07-01-2006
§ 68-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-6
manufactured home so that no weight is
supported by its wheels and axles; and
(c) Be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse. or lateral movement.
I -:.:':'t!~"'. '.·•' ....
~ .. · .
[ 1) Methods of anchoring may include. but are
not limited to: (, .2)
[aj Over-the-top ties anchored to the
ground at the four corners of the
manufactured home, plus two
additional ties per side at intermediate
points (manufactured homes less than
50 feet long require one additional tie
per side); or by,
[h) Frame ties at each corner of the home.
plus five additional ties along each
side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than 50 feet (' )
long require four additional ties per
side).
[2) All components of the anchoring system
described in § 68-6H(l)(c)[l)[a) and [b)
shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800
pounds.
(2) Zone A shall:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as
described in § 68-6H(l)(b). such that the lowest
floor (including basement) of the manufactured
home is at least one foot above the h;isP. flood
elevation utilizing information obtained -~
pursuant to § 68-3A(8)(a)[2]. 68-SB or 68-SD;
and
(b) Meet the anchoring requirements of
§ 68-6H(l)(c).
6812 01 - 01-2006
I . 0
.
'·.·.. '.'
,.?\
'._"J
(' :) .. ·
~.
()
§ 68-6 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-6
I. Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located
within:
(l) Zone AE shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices. and has no
permanently attached additions; or
(c) Be permitted in accordance with the elevation
and anchoring requirements for manufactured
homes in § 68-6H ( 1).
J. Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in
§ 68-13, located within Zones AE and A. shall be exempt
from the elevation criteria required in § 68-6F and G
above, if all other requirements of § 68-6 and all the
following requirements are met. Accessory structures
shall:
(1) Be 500 square feet or less and have a value· of less
than $3000;
(2) Have unfinished interiors and not be used for
human habitation;
(3) Have hydraulic openings, as specified in § 68-6L(2).
in at least two different walls of the accessory
structure;
( 4) Be located outside the floodway;
(5) When possible, be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance
to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from
the source of flooding than is the primary structure;
and
6813 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 68-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-6
(6) Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets.
The electdc service disconnect shall be located above
the base flood elevation and, when possible. outside
the special flood hazard area.
K. Floodways.
(1} In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including
fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and
other development shall not be permitted within a
regulatory tloodway which is designated on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that such encroachments will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) In Zone AE and A riverine areas for which no
regulatory floodway is designated, encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be
permitted in the floodway as determined in
§ 68-6K(3), unless a technical evaluation certified by
a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all
other existing development and anticipated
development:
(a) Will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community; and
(b) Is consistent with the technical criteria
contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic
Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines
and Specifications for Study Contractors,
(FEMA 37/January 1995, as amended).
(3) In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no
regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
6814 07- OJ - 2006
_,·) (
''·
(J .2;1
t'~
'<°J
()
§ 68-6 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-G
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river
or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas to
a distance of l/2 the width of the floodplain as
measured from the normal high water mark to the
upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed areas below the lowest floor. New construction
or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones AE
and A that meets the development standards of § 68-6,
including the elevation requirements of § 68-6F. G or H
and is elevated on posts, columns, pier~. piles, stilts, or
crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood
elevation requirements, provided all the following
criteria are met or exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not basements as defined in
§ 68-13;
(2) Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either:
(a) Be engineered and certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or
(b) Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[ 1] A minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of the enclosed area;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be below
the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and
[3J Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices. provided that they permit the
entry and exit of floodwaters automatically
without any external influence or control,
such as human intervention, including the
6815 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 68-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-6
use of electrical and other nonautornatic
mechanical means.
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human
habitation: and
(4) The enclosed areas are usable solely for building
access. parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges. New construction or substantial improvement of
any bridge in Zone AE and A shall be designed such that:
(1) When possible. the lowest horizontal member
(excluding the pilings. or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
(2) A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
(a) The structural design and methods of
construction shall meet the elevation
requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of§ 68-6K; and
',<).· ..
(b) The foundation and superstructure attached (. )
thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values
used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment walls. New construction or substantial
improvement of any containment wall located within
Zones AE and A shall:
(1) Have the containment wall elevated to at least one
foot above the base flood elevation;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted
6816 07- 01-2006
I.~. ,.~·'''. ' \ ~.--.
i,, _·. ).· ·. · .-
(.:~J
."'.:) 1 ,_., . . ~- t ;c·-·~
"·-· -.
()
§ 68-6 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-7
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
this section. Such certification shall be provided
with the application for a Hood hazard development
permit, as required by§ 68-3A(l 1).
0. Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or
substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and docks
are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and
seaward of the mean high tide if the following
requirements are met:
( 1) Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all
applicable local, state, and federal regulations; and
(2) For commercial wharves, piers. and docks, a
registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction.
§ 68-7. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or
used and no structure which is constructed or substantially
improved shall be occupied until a certificate of compliance is
issued by the Code- Enforcement Officer subject to the fo1lowing
provisions:
A. For new construction or substantial improvement of any
elevated structure the applicant shall submit to the Code
Enforcement Officer, an elevation certificate completed
by a professional land surveyor, registered professional
engineer, or architect, for compliance with § 68-6F, G or
H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the
Code Enforcement Officer that the development is
complete and complies with the provisions of this
chapter.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall:
6817 01- 01- 2006
§ 68-7 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-8
( l) Review the elevation certificate and the applicant's
written notification; and
(2) Upon determination that the development conforms
to the provisions of this chapter, issue a certificate of
compliance.
§ 68-8. Review of subdivision and development
proposals.
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and
other proposed developments that require review under other
federal law. state law or local ordinances or regulations and all
projects on five or more disturbed acres. or in the case of
manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots. assure
that:
A All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas.
electrical and water systems are located and constructed
to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood
boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway data.
These determinations shall be based on engineering
practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition
of plan approval requiring that structures on any lot in
the development having any portion of its land within a
special flood hazard area, are to be constructed in
accordance with § 68-6 of this chapter. Such requirement
will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an
intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure,
including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
6818 07-0l - Z006
·' )..
~. ')
(.....'J. " 7\
()
, - ( ;
-_./
,,, ('
. 1.:. ~ ,.
'·.
()
§ 68-8 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-9
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality
may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the
deed or any other document previously described. The
construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on
any map. plat. or plan to be signed by the Planning
Board or local reviewing authority as part of the
approval process.
§ 68-9. Appeals and variances.
A. The Board of Appeals of the Town of Millinocket may,
upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and
decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error
in any order. requirement, decision, or determination
made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board in the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the
requirements of this chapter consistent with state law
and the following criteria:
(1) Variances shall not be granted within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(2) Variances shall be granted only upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
(b) A determination that should a flood comparable
to the base flood occur, the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to pubJic safety.
public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud
or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances: and
6819 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 68-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-9
(c) A showing that the issuance of the variance will
not conflict with other state, federal or local
laws or ordinances; and
(d) A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in "undue hardship,"
which in this subsection means:
[ l] That the land in question cannot yield a ()
reasonable return unless a variance is
granted; and
(2] That the need for a variance is due to the
unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
[31 That the granting of a variance will not
alter the essential character of the locality:
and
{4] That the hardship is not the result of
action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
(3) Variances shall only be Issued upon a determination
that the variance is the minimum necessary.
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the
Board of Appeals may impose "such conditions to a
variance as it deems necessary.
(4) Variances may be issued for new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use,
provided that:
(a) Other criteria of§§ 68-9 and 68-6K are met: and
{b) The structure or other development is protected
by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
6820 07 - 01 - 2006
(_- )
·)·· \ ~ .·
/'., ) I' . _·.. . ...
§ 68-9
c)
()
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-9
(5) Variances may be issued for the repair.
reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
historic structures upon the determination that:
(a) The development meets the criteria of
§ 68-98(1) through (4) above: and
(b) The proposed repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(6) Any applicant who meets the criteria of § 68-98(1)
through (5) shall be notified by the Board of Appeals
in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the
Board of Appeals that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result
in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage:
(b) Such construction below the base flood level
increases risks to life and property; and
(c) The applicant agrees in writing that the
applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent
in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend
the municipality against any claims filed
against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and
that the applicant individually releases the
municipality from any claims the applicant may
have against the municipality that are related
to the use of land located in a floodplain.
(7) Appeal procedure for administrative and variance
appeals.
6821 07-Ol - 2006
§ H8-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-9
(a) An administrative or variance appeal may be
taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party within 30 days after receipt of a written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board.
(b) Upon being notified of an appeal. the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board. as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record
of the decision appealed from.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal within 35 days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
(d) The person filing the appeal shall have the
burden of proof.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals
within 35 days after the close of the hearing.
and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(f) The Board of Appeals shall submit to the
Planning Board and Code Enforcement Officer
a report of all variance actions, including
justification for the granting of the variance and
an authorization for the Planning Board and
Code Enforcement Officer to issue a flood
hazard development permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
(g) Any aggrieved party who participated as a
party during the proceedings before the Board
of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior
Court in accordance with state laws within 45
days from the date of any decision of the Board
of Appeals.
6822 07 - 01- 2006
.)
,. ·.J"~ •••,. ~
I · •.
\ . '
'~
I ...J ..... .
! · . . :. ~I .
()
§ 68-10 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-1 1
§ 68-10. Enforcement and penalties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall
apply to any violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to any. other actions. the Code Enforcement
Officer. upon determination .that a violation exists, shall
submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal
Insurance Administration requesting a denial of flood
insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
( 1) The name of the property owner and address or
legal description of the property sufficient to confirm
its identity or location:
(2) A clear and unequivocal declaration that the
property is in violation of a cited state or local law,
regulation, or ordinance:
(3) A clear statement that the public body making the
declaration has authority to do so and a citation to
that authority;
(4) Evidence that the property owner has been provided
notice of the violation and the prospective denial of
insurance; and
(5) A clear statement that the declaration is being
submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended .
§ 68-11. Severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by the
courts to be invalid, such decision shal.I not invalidate·any other
section or provision of this chapter_
6823 07- 01- 2006
§ 68-12 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-13
§ 68-12. Conflicts with other regulations.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other applicable rule.
ordinance, regulation, bylaw. permit, or provision or law. Where
this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land,
buildings, or structures, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 68-13. Word usage; definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below. words and phrases
used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as
they have at common law and to give this chapter its
most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes
the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and
not discretionary.
... ~~ ""'
i' ,' )__.> .. - ••
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have (~)
the meanings indicated: -
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A small detached
structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE - The natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the pr;oposed
walls of a structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - The land in
the floodplain having a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the
Flood Insurance Study cited in§ 68-1 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD - The flood having a one-percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year,
commonly called the one-hundred-year flood.
BASEMENT - Any area of the building having its floor
subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
6824 07-01 - 2006
) I . .
I - :. - ... '
/~
l _J'.
§ 68-13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-13
BUILDING ~ See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE - A document
signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of
this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - Any person or
board responsible for performing the inspection,
licensing, and enforcement duties required by a
particular statute or ordinance.
DEVELOPMENT - Any change caused by individuals
or entities to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to the construction of buildings
or other structures; the construction of additions or
substantial improvements to buildings or other
structures; mining, dredging. filling. grading. paving.
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of
materials. public or private sewage disposal systems or
wacer supply facilities .
ELEVATED BUILDING:
(1) A nonbasernent building:
(a) Built. in the case of a building in Zones AE and
A. to have the top of the elevated floor elevated
above the ground level by means of pilings.
columns, post, piers, or stilts; and
(b) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a
flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of
. the base flood.
(2) In the case of Zones AE or A, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters , as required in § 68-6L.
6825 07-01 - 2006
§ 68-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-13
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE - An official form (FE.MA
Form 81-31, 07/oo, as amended) that:
(1) Is used to verify compliance wlth the floodplain
management regulatlons of the National Flood
Insurance Program: and
(2) Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
FLOOD or FLOODING:
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
(2) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of
a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or
::~
·~. .. j/
undermining caused by waves or currents of water (,' .. _-)
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a
natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge. or by some
similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which
results in flooding as defined in Subsection (l)(a) of
this definition.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY - An examination,
evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - An official
map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY - See "flood elevation
study."
6826 07 - 01 - 2008
",. '). '. -'~' .....
f'_)·'
( --.,
..... ... ,,
()
§ 68-13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-13
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Any land
area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source. (See "flooding.")
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - The operation of an
overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damage. including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans. flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS -
Zoning ordinances. subdivision regulations. building
codes. health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance. grading ordinance, and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention
and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural
and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities. str.uctures and contents.
FLOOD WAY - See "regulatory floodway."
FREE BOARD - A factor of safety usually expressed in
feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain
management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors. such as wave action. bridge
openings. and the hydrological effect of urbanization of
the watershed. that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height r.akulated for a selected size
flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - A use which
cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located
or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
6827 07-01-2006
§ 68- 13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-13
passengers. and ship building and ship repair facilities,
but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE Any structure that is:
( l) Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National
Register:
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
I·:~. ,r ·~
·'- ·.·
places in states with historic preservation programs
1
.. · .. )
which have been approved by the Secretary of the \
Interior: or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
{a) By an approved state program as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM- For purposes of
this chapter, an elevation established for a specific site to
which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This
elevation is generally not referenced to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other
established datum and is used in areas where mean sea
level data is too far from a specific site to be practically
used.
6828 07 - 01 - 2008
.. I '
t.' ...) '··.· ·
{' T?; .D. · ''· ..
(-_·J~
.......... ( )
.-"'
C)
§ 68-13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68- 13
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
floor. provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements described in § 68-6L of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure. transportable
in one or. more sections, which is builc on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION - A
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale .
MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National
FloodJnsurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD} of 1929, or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT - All development that is not .
new construction or a substantial improvement. such as
repairs. maintenance, renovations, or additions. whose
value is less than 50% of the market value of the
structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in § 68-6J, mirii11g, dredging,
filling. grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations.
storage of e_quipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve
structures; and nonstructural projects such as bridges,
dams. towers. fencing. pipelines, wharves, and piers.
6829 07-01 - 2006
\·"J:'\
§ 68-13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-13
LOWEST FLOOR - The lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or
flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
floor. provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements described in § 68-6L of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A structure, transportable
in one or. morn sections. which ls built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION - A
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL - For purposes of the National
Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929. or other datum. to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT - All development that is not
new construction or a substantial improvement, such as
repairs, maintenance. renovations, or additions, whose
value ls less than 50% of the market value of the
structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in § 68-61. mining. dredging.
filling. grading. paving. excavation, drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve
structures: and nonstructural projects such as bridges,
dams. towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
6829 07 - 01 - 2006
§ 68-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-13
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) -
The national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based upon
mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929
Mean Sea Level (MSL).''
NEW CONSTRlJCTION - Structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of the Initial floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
ONE-HuNDRED-YEAR FLOOD - See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:
( 1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection, not including
slideouts;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a motor vehicle; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORYFLOODWAY:
(1) The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than
onP. foot; and
(2) When not designated on the community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map. it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas to a distance of 1/2 the width of
the floodplain, as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
6830 07 - 01 - 2006
··;y~.
') t " '•:
)
.,, I ' . • · ~
~ •.. :-.
' ·. . .
( , ... ) ·:J
(.--:;)
,J
,,.,7
·.;·"!'. ~~' ti ; •
' • ..
\ .~
J
§ 68-13 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT § 68-13
IUVERINE - Relating to. formed by. or resembling a
river (including tributaries), stream. brook. etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - See "area of
special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date the building
permit was issued. provided the actual start of
construction. repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation.
addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns. or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling: nor c.loes it include the installation of strnets
and/or walkways: nor does it include excavation for
basement. footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms: nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement. the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall. ceiling. floor, or other structural part of a
building. or modification of any constn.1ction element,
whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE - For floodplain management purposes, a
walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground is also a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE- Damage of any origin
sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to Its before-damage condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
6831 07-01-Z006
§ 68-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 68-14
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction.
rehabilitation. addition, or other improvement of a
structure. the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage.
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
( 1) Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of an historic structure. provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a
variance is obtained from the community's Board of
Appeals.
VARIANCE - A grant of relief by a community from the
terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION - The failure of a structure or development
to comply with a community's floodplain management
regulations.
§ 68-14. Repealer.
This chapter repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance
previously enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance
J\ct of 1968 (P.L. 90-188, as amended).
6832 07-01-2006
(. ·9: :·:.
.
()
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 70
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 70-1. Definitions.
§ 70-2. License required; expiration; certification.
§ 70-3. Fees.
§ 70-4. Application information; refund of fee.
§ 70-5. Persons with communicable diseases.
§ 70-6. Sanitation of premises; cleaning.
§ 70-7. Sleeping equipment.
§ 70-8. St.orage of soiled linen and employee clothing.
§ 70-9. Animals prohibited; exception.
\.) § 70-10. Floors and waJJs.
\ .. )
I 70-11. Protection of food from contamination; storap.
§ 70-12. Serving utensils.
§ 70-13. Use and storage of poisonous materials.
§ 70-14. St.orage and disposal of garbage and rubbish.
§ 70-15. Vermin control
§ 70-16. Lighting requirements.
§ 70-17. Ventilation.
§ 70-18. Insect control; screening.
§ 70-19. Cleaning of utensils and food contact surfaces; sinks.
§ 70-20. Hot and cold running water required.
§ 70-21. Lavatories.
§ 70-22. Common towels and drinking containers prohibited.
§ 70-23. Sewage and refuse disposal.
7001
._, . ,_ .. ' ,,.
1~M£J...,~:~. ...; w;.,...,~,..;.,...,.~-_.. ·i .:!t i/KtF: .... ''"-!
I 10-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 70-1
I 70-24. Compliance with state plumbins and sewa.re laws.
I 70-25. Speelal requirements for mobile food service units.
§ 70-26. Speeial requirements for eaterinar establishments.
I 70.-27. Outside food service.
I 70-28. CIB.88iflcatlon of licenses and fees set by Town Council.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
MiDlnoeket 9-14-82 as Art. VI of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
VlolatioM and penald• - See Ch. l, Art. J,
Garbap, rubbllh and refuae - See Ch. 73.
Sewen - See Ch. UM.
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following t.erms shall have the meanings
indicat.ed:
CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS - Any kitchen, commissary
or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for
sale or service elsewhere or for food service in the premises
during special cat.ered events.
EASILY CLEANABLE - Surfaces are readily accessible
and made of such materials and finish and so fabricat.ed that
residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning
methods.
EATING PLACE - Any place where food or drink is
prepared and served or served to the public for consumption
on the premises, or catering establishments or establishments
preparing food for vending machines dispensing foods other
than in original sealed packages, such as hot.els, motels,
boardinghouses, fixed or mobile restaurants, coffee shops,
cafeterias, short-order cafes, luncheonett.es, grills, t.earooms,
7002
()
()
0
§ 70-1
0
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
sandwich shops. soda fountains, bars, cocktail lounges,
nightclubs, roadside stands. industrial feeding establishments,
stores, theaters and other catering or drinking establishments
or operations where food is prepared and served or served for
consumption on the premises, and catering establishments
where food is prepared or where foods are prepared for
vending machines dispensing foods other than in original
sealed packages. The words "eating place" shall not be
construed to apply to stores selling food or beverages to be
taken from the premises where only soft drinks are permitted
to be consumed on the premises, nor t.o any other st.ore where
there is not an express invitation to consume any food on the
premises; provided, however, that such stores which also
engage in the preparation of food shall not be exempt from
this chapter. An "eating place" shall specifically include a
mobile food unit as defined herein.
EMPLOYEE - Any person working in a food service
establishment who transports food or food containers, who
engages in food preparation or service or who comes in contact
with any food utensils or equipment, and includes the
proprietor or manager or any member of his family if they
handle said food or drink, as well as any other person
employed in or about eating places and any catering
establishment or establishments preparing foods for vending
machines dispensing foods other than in original packages.
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE UNIT - A unit, including a
mot.or vehicle or a pushcart or stand or any other such unit.
designed and constructed to transport. prepare, sell or serve
food at a number of sites and which shall be capable of being
moved from its serving site.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS - Any food that
consists in whole or in part of milk or milk products. eggs,
meat, poultry, fish or shellfish, edible crustacea or their
ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, in a form capable
of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or
toxigenic microorganisms. The term does not include clean,
whole, uncracked, odor-free shell eggs.
i003
§ 70-1 MILLINOCKET CODE I 70-4
SANITIZATION - Effective bactericidal treatment by a
process that provides enough accumulative heat or
concentrations of chemicals for enough time t.o reduce the
baterial count. including pathogens. t.o a safe level on utensils
and equipment.
SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES - Cups, containers. lids or
closures. plat.es. knives, forks, spoons, stirrers. paddles, straws, ,,.""'\
place mats, napkins, doilies, wrapping materials and all { J
similar articles which are constructed wholly or in part from
paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, ,plastic, synthetic
or other readily destructible maU!rials and which are intended
by the manufacturers and generally recognized by the public
as for one (1) usage only, then t.o be discarded.
VICTUALER, - Any person operating an eating place where
food i1t prepared and/or served t.o the g.e. •n ...e ral public.
§ 70-2. License required; expiraticm; certification.
A. No person shall engage in the business of victualer without ()
first obtaining a license therefor.
B. All licenses issued under this chapU!r shall expire on the 31st
of May after the date of issuance.
C. Such license shall not be granU!d except on the certification of
the Health Officer, Fire Chief and Police Chief.
~ ... ~.-'
§ 70-3. Fees.
The annual license fee for a victualer shall be established by the
Town Council by resolution. Changes in fees shall be m~e by Town
Council resolution. ()
.§ 704. Application information; refund of fee.
A. Every applicant for a victualer license shall:
(1) Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by
the Town Manager and Town Council.
7004
...... ,... :~ .... . .
. ' '~· ',, ,--:.·
t,J
() .,
1.,_)
t \
l .• :_J
§ 70-4 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 70-5
(2) Deposit the prescribed license fee in advance with the
Town Clerk.
(3) Submit with the completed application to the Town Clerk
the Collowing:
(a) An attested copy of the Articles of Incorporation and
bylaws if the applicant is a corporation, of the
Articles of Association and bylaws if the applicant is
an association, or partnership documents if the
applicant is a partnership, as well as a list of all
principal officers of the business.
(b) An affidavit which will identify all principal officers
and their places of residency at the present time and
for the immediately preceding three (3) years.
(c) A description of the premises for which a license is
desired and other materials, information. description
or plan of that part of the premises where food will
be prepared or consumed.
B. If an application should be denied or withdrawn, the license
fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
§ 70-5. Persons with communicable diseases.
No person while affected with any disease in a communicable form
or while a carrier of such disease or while afflicted with boils, infected
wounds, sores or any aeut.e respiratory infection shall work in any
area of a food service establishment in any capacity in which there is
a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food contact surfaces
with pathogenic organisms or transmitting disease to other
individuals. No person known or suspect.ed of being affected with any
such disease or condition shall be emplayed in such an area or
capacity nor be retained as an employee in or about any part of an
eating place after written notice that such employee is a carrier of a
communicable disease has been sent to the proprietor by the local
Health Officer. ·
7005
§ 70-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 70-10
I 76-6. Sanitatf'oa of preml1e1; eleanlng.
A. Every operator of an eating place shall keep the establishment
and all substances used therein for food or drink in a clean and
sanitary condition. free from dirt. dust and insects, and its
premises shall be kept neat. clean and free of Jitter and
rubbish.
B. Cleaning operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize contamination of food and food contact surfaces.
§ 70-7. Sleepinar equlpmenl
Sleeping equipment shall not be allowed in any room where food is
prepared, served or stored.
§ 70-8. Storage of soiled linen and employee clothing.
A. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in suitable
)
.-:)· ! .
· ..
covered metal or plastic containers or laundry bags until r.· .. )
removed for laundering.
B. Adequat.e facilities shall be provided for the orderly storage of
employees' clothing and personal belongings. Such designated
facilities shall be located outside of the food preparation, food
storage and serving areas.
§ 70-9. Animals prohibited; exception.
No live birds or animals shall be allowed in any area for the conduct
of food service establishment operations. provided that guide dogs
accompanying blind per~ms may be permitted in dining areas.
§ 70-10. Floors and walls.
A. The floor surfaces in kitchens, mobile eating places, in all
other rooms and ~reas in which food is stored or prepared and
in which utensils are washed and in walk·in refrigerators.
dressing or locker rooms and toilet rooms shall be of smooth,
nonabsorbent and easily cleanable mat.erials. such as concret.e,
7006
0
I 0
§ 70-10 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 70-11
terrazzo, ceramic tile, durable grades o( linoleum or plastic or
tight wood painted or impregnated with plastic, provided that
the floors of nonrefrigerat.ed, dry-food-storage areas need not
be nonabsorbent. All fioors shall be kept clean and in good
repair.
B. The walls and ceilings o( all rooms shall be kept clean and in
good repair. All walls of rooms and areas in which food is
prepared or utensils or hands are washed shall be easily
cleanable, smooth and light-colored and shall have washable
surfaces up to the highest level reached by splash or spray.
§ 70-11. Protection of food from contamination; storage.
A. All food while being stored, prepared, displayed, served or
catered. vended or sold at food service establishments or
during transportation between such establishments shall be
protected from contamination. All perishable food shall be
stored at such temperatures as will protect. against spoilage.
Fish salads, meat· salads, poultry salads, potato salads, eg~
salads, cream-filled pastries, custards. custard pies and other
potentially hazardous prepared food shall be maintained at
safe temperatures [forty-five degrees Fahrenheit (45° F.) or
below; one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.) or
above] except during necessary periods of preparation and
service. Raw fruits and vegetables shall be washed before use.
Stuffing, poultry, stuffed meats and poultry and pork and
pork products shall be thoroughly cooked before being served.
Individual portions of food once served to a customer shall not
be served again; provided that wrapped food other than
potentially hazardous food, which is still wholesome and has
not been unwrapped, may be re-served.
B. The refrigerator, icebox, cooling units or other places where
food is stored or kept shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
C. Containers of food shall be stored above the floor, on clean
racks. dollies or other clean surfaces, in such a manner as to be
protected from splash and other contamination.
7007
I 10-11 MJLIJNOCKET CODE I 70-14
D. Where unwrapped food is placed on display in all types of food
service operations. it shall be protected against contamination
from customers and other sources by effective, easily
cleanable, counter-protection devices, cabinets. display cases.
containers or other similar types of protective equipmenL Selfservice
openings in counter guards shall be so designed and
arranged as to protect food from manual contact by customers.
I 70-12. Serving utensils.
Tongs, forks, spoons, picks, spatulas, scoops and other suitable
utensils shall be provided and shall be used by employees to reduce
manual contact with food to a minimum. For self-service by
cusoomers, similar implement.s shall be provided.
§ 70-13. Use and storage of poisonous materials.
Only such poisonous and toxic materials as are required to maintain
-·.-~:;
sanitary conditions and for sanitization purposes may be used or ( )
soored in food service establishments. Poisonous and toxic materials \·
shall be identified and shall be used in such a manner and under such
conditions as will not contaminate foods or constitute a hazard to
employees or cusoomers.
§ 70-H. Storage· and disposal of garbage and rubbish.
A. All garbage and rubbish containing food wastes shall, prior to
disposal, be kept in leakproof, nonabsorbent containers which
shall be kept covered with tia-ht·fitting lids when filled or
stored or not in continuous use, provided that such containers
need not be covered when stored in a special verminproof room
or enclmure or in a food-waste refrigerator. All other rubbish
shall be stored in containers, rooms or areas in an approved
manner. The rooms, enclosures, areas and containers used
shall be adequate for the storage of all food waste and rubbish
accumulating on the premises. Adequate cleaning facilities
shall be provided, and each container, room or area shall be
thoroughly cleaned after the emptying or removal of garbage
7008 . )
§ 70-14 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
and rubbish. Food-waste grinders, if used. shall be installed in
compliance with state and local standards and shall be of
suitable construction.
8. All garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of with sufficient
frequency and in such a manner as t.o prevent a nuisance.
C. Those establishments using dumpsters t.o contain garbage and
rubbish shall, prior t.o the stDrage of such garbage and rubbish
in the dumpster unit, contain all food wastes in leakproof,
nonabsorbent containers. It is the intention of this section to
require all garbage and rubbish st.ored in a dumpster unit
prior to disposal to be in the appropriate container. The
dumpster lid should be closed at all times except when the
dumpster is being filled or emptied. All dumpsters shall be
cleaned when emptied.
§ 70-15. Vermin control
Effective measures shall be taken t.o protect against the entrance
intD the establishment and the breeding or presence on the premises
of vermin.
§ 70-16. Lighting requirementa.
A. All areas in which food is prepared or stDred or utensils are
washed, handwashing areas, dressing or locker rooms, toilet
rooms and garbap and rubbish storage areas shall be well
lighted.
B. At least twenty (20) fooreandles of light shall be required on all
working surfaces and at least ten (10) footcandles on all other
surfaces and equipment, in food preparation, utensil-wuhing
and handwashing areas and toilet room& Sources of artificial
light shall be provided and used t.o the extent necessary to
provide the required amount of light on these surfaces when in
use and when being cleaned. At least five (5) footcandles of
light at a distance of thirty (30) inches from the fioor shall be
required in all other areas. including during cleaning
operations.
7009
I 10..11 MILLINOCKET CODE I 10..19
I 7~17. Ventllatlon.
All rooms in which food is prepared or served or utensils are
washed, dressing or locker rooms, toilet rooms and garbage and
rubbish storage areas shall be well ventilated. Ventilation hoods and
devices shall be designed to prevent grease or condensation from
dripping into food or onto food preparation surfaa!S. Filters, when
used, shall be readily removable for cleaning or replacement.
Ventilation s)'Btems shall comply with state and local fire prevention
requirements and shall. when vented to the outside air, discharge in
such manner as not to create a nuisance.
I 70-18. Inseet control; screening.
A. In establishments preparing and/or serving food or in mobile
eating places, all openings to the outer air shall be effectively
prot.ected against the entrance of mes and other Oying insects
by self-closing doors, closed windows. screening. controlled air
currents or other effective means.
B. Screening material shall be not less than sixteen (16) mesh to ( )
the inch or equivalent.
C. Screen doors to the outer air shall be self-closing; and screens
for windows, doors, skylights. transoms and other openings to
the outer air shall be tight fitting and free of breaks.
§ 70-19. Cleaning of utensils and food contact surfaces; sinks.
A. All cups, dishes, spoons, knives. forks and other eating and
kitchen utensils in eating places shall, after using, be
thoroughly washed with a suitable detergent and water having
a temperature of at least one hundred thirty degrees
Fahrenheit (130° F.), rinsed in clean hot water and then
immersed for at least on~half (~) minute in clean hot water of
at least one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit (180° F.) or
immersed for a period of at least two (2) minutes in a chlorine
solution containing, when freshly prepared. two hundred (200)
parts per million of available chlorine. The solution may not be
used after its strength has been reduced below fifty (50) parts
per million of available chlorine. Other adequate sterilizing
7010 .·) I
1_ . ~ I
I .. :'\ \.fj;/
()
§ 70-19 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 70-19
solutions may be used, provided that they have been approved
by the Health Officer. When dishwashing machines are used,
they shall be of such materials and so designed and constructed
as to be easily cleanable and shall be capable, when
operated properly, of rendering all surfaces of equipment and
utensils clean to sight and touch and sanitized. All articles
shall be placed in an inverted position on a clean drainboard or
rack and allowed to dry. Dishwashing machines shall have a
rinse-water temperature of at least one hundred eighty
degrees Fahrenheit (180° F.).
B. All kitchenware and food contact surfaces of equipment used
in the preparation or service of food or drink and all food
st.orage utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
Cooking surfaces of equipment shall be cleaned at least once a
day. All utensils and food contact surfaces of equipment used
in the preparation, service, display or st.orage of potentially
hazardous food shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized prior
to such use. Nonfood contact surfaces of equipment shall be
cleaned at such intervals as to keep them in a clean and
sanitary condition.
C. Food contact surfaces of equipment and utensils shall be
smooth, free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits and
similar imperfections, be in good repair and shall be easily
cleanable.
D. A three-compartment sink shall be provided and used
whenever dishwashing and sanitization of equipment or
utensils are conducted manually, provided that in establishments
where the only ut.ensils t.o be washed are limited to
spatulas, tongs and similar devices and where the only
equipment to be cleaned is stationary and does not require
disassembly for proper cleaning, a one-compartment sink may
be used for this purpose. At least a two-compartment sink
shall be provided and used for washing kitchenware and
equipment which does not require sanitization. Singlecompartment
utility sinks. such as cooks' and bakers' sinks,
may be used for the rinsing of utensils.
7011
I 10-19 MILLINOCKET CODE I 10-21
E. Sinks used for washing and sanitizing operations shall be of
adequate length. width and depth to permit the complete
immersion of the equipment and utensils. and each compartment
of such sinks shall be supplied with hot and cold runninr
water. Dish baskets shall be of such design as to permit
complete immersion of the utensils and equipment components
being sanitized therein.
F. When hot water is used as the sanitizing agent in manual
operations, thermometers accurate to plus or minus two
degrees Fahrenheit (2° F.) shall be provided convenient to the
sink to permit frequent checks of the water temperature.
G. After cleaning and until used, all food contact surfaces of
equipment and utensils shall be so stored and handled as to be
protected from contamination.
H. All single-service articles shall be stored, handled and
dispensed in a sanitary manner and shall be used only once.
·I .).
.... -~
I. In all new establishments and establishments which are
extensively altered. lavatories shall also be located within the ( )
area where food is prepared.
§ 70-20. Hot and cold running water required.
Hot and cold running water, under pressure, shall be provided in all
areas where food is prepared or equipment. utensils or containers are
washed.
f 70-21. Lavatories.
A. AU eating places shall be equipped with adequate toilets and
lavatories for the employees and shall be conveniently located
and accessible at all times.
B. All lavatories shall be equipped with hot and cold or tempered
running water, hand-cleaning soap or detergent and approved
sanitary towels or other approved hand-drying services. Such
facilities shall be 'kept clean and in good repair.
7012
()
\' '):
\.J
§ 70-21 lt.,OOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 70-.25
C. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition. in good repair.
well lighted and ventilated to the outdoors. Doors of all such
toilet rooms shall be tight fitting and self-closing. Signs
requiring employees t.o wash their hands after using the toilet
shall be posted in all roilet rooms. When toilet facilities are
provided for patrons, such facilities shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition at an times.
§ 70-22. Common towels and drinking containen prohibited.
Use of common towels and drinking containers is prohibited. No
operator of any eating place, any catering establishment or
establishment preparing food for vending machines dispensing foods
other than in original sealed packages shall provide for use or allow to
be used any common drinking container or any common towel by his
emploYees or the public.
§ 70-23. Sewage and refuse disposal.
The method of final sewage or refuse disposal utilized in connection
with the operation of any eating place, any catering establishment or
establishment preparing food for vending machines dispensing foods
other than in original sealed packages shall be such as not t.o create a
nuisance.
§ 70-24. Compliance with state plumbing and sewage laws.
Propriet.ors of eating places and any catering establishments or
establishments preparing food for vending machines dispensing foods
other than in original sealed packages shall comply with the state laws
and regulations regarding the installation of plumbing and disposal of
sewage.
§ 70-25. Special requirements for mobile food ser\.'ice units.
A. Mobile food service units shall be licensed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. Each unit shall be licensed to
sell and dispense only such items as are listed in the
701:1
t 70-26 MILLINOCKET CODE I 70.25
application and for which the unit is properly equipped to
dispense. In no ewnt shall a license granted to any mobile food
service unit be valid to permit operation or sales within a
distance- of. one hundred (100) feet from any licensed food
service establishment within the town without express written
permission of that establishment.
·)
B. Special structures or units in a temporary or permanent r.:)
manner shall not be built in the vicinity of a mobile food
service unit.
C. There shall be available to each mobile food service unit either
at the Mrvice site or at its parking site adequate facilities
consisting of a sink with running hot and cold water for the
washing of equipment and utensils used in connection with the
service of food by the mobile food service unit.
D. All mobile food service units in which food is prepared shall be
equipped with a water tank having a holding capacity of not
less than ten (10) gallons and provided with a spigot containing
water. Such tank shall be easily removable for cleaning and )
sanitation after each day's use. Water supply shall be used for ·
handwashing and minor cleaning purposes only. This
subsection shall not apply to those mobile food service units
preparing only hot dogs.
E. Any liquid waste from a mobile food service unit shall not be
allowed to run on the ground. Mobile food service units must
have & holding tank for the accumulation of liquid waste with
a capuity of not less than the total capacity of the portable
water tank.
F. Those mobile food service units which are vehicular in nature
and which are capable of being driven shall have the driver's '·.~. '··
compartment separat.ed from the food preparation, service or ..I
storage areas by a complete partition or adequate screening.
No food or food containers or utensils shall be kept in the
driver's compartmenl
G. Mobile food service units handling only prewrapped or
prepackaged foods which do not require further preparation
by the mobile food service unit operator need not comply with
7014 '._)
\.)
()
C)
§ 70·25 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 70-26
the foregoing provisions requirin1r a water supply and a
separate driver's compartrylenl
H. Only single-service containers and eating and drinking
utensils shall be provided for the customers of a mobile food
service unil Such containers and utensils shall be dispensed
directly by the proprietor or employee.
I. There shall be adequate refrigeration and storage space
provided in each mobile food service unit that prepares or
serves potentially hazardous foods.
J . All containers in which food is placed or stored shall be
covered except as necessary for service to customers.
K. All mobile food service units shall provide a trash container
for paper and other refuse. This container shall be covered.
L. The operator of a mobile food service unit is required to handle
all food material which is not prepackaged for service with
tongs or other utensils so as to avoid contact with said food.
The operator shall be required t.o have clean garments and t.o
have present on the unit a handwipe or other similar item for
handwashing and cleansing.
M. Mobile food service unit operat.ors must further comply with
the other sections of this chapter insofar as they are applicable
to this type of preparation and service of food.
§ 70·26. Special requirements for catering establishments.
A. Containers. All containers used to st.ore, keep or hold food and/
or drink for transportation from any caterer's premises to any
site designated by the customer for consumption shall be of the
following approved type:
(1) Bulk containers and single-service containers shall be
leakproof, and each shall be provided with an adequate
type of cover which will prevent the contents from
spilling over and from being contaminated while in
transit.
(2) Any reusable container used in the transportation of food
shall be easily cleanable and capable of being sanitized.
7015
I 70-26 MILIJNOCKET CODE I 70-28
(3) Containers shaH not be composed in whole or in part of
any poisonous or deleterious substance which may result
in the contamination of the contents injurious to health.
8. Vehicles. All vehicles used by the caterer for the transportation
of food or food products shall be constructed, operated and
maintained so aa to protect their contents from contamination.
I 70-27. Outside food service.
The following regulations shall apply to outside food service:
A. All food in the service area will be protected to the extent that
all containers of food will be covered.
B. There will be ~o presetting of tableware or place mats. This is
to be done only when the table is occupied and only after the
table has been wiped off.
C. No table with storage or waitress station will be allowed out of
doors.
D. After the meal is completed and customers have vacated, the
table or eating area shall be immediat.ely cleaned of soiled
tableware and wiped off.
E. All garbage containers in the out.side storage area are to be
constantly covered.
F. No animals shall be allowed in the food service area except as
provided in § 70-9 of this chapter.
§ 70-28. Classification of llcenset and fees set by Town Council.
()
The various classifications of victualers' licenses and fees corre- (<l
sponding to those classifications shall be set by the Town Council of . .J
the Town of Millinocket by resolutions. The Town Council shall have
the further power to adjust the fees and classifications, by resolutions.
as from time to time may be necessary or appropriate.
7016 ()
CHAPTER72
Consumer Fireworks Prohibition Ordinance
Section 1. Purpose
Section 2. Authority
Section 3. Definitions
Section 4. Prohibition
Section S. Penalties

ORDINANCE # 2-2015
PROVIDING FOR: The establishment of Chapter 72 of the Code of the Town of Millinocket
Entitled "CONSUMER FIREWORKS PROHIBITION ORDINANCE"
BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Millinocket in Town Council assembled that the
Millinocket Code, Chapter 72, be created as attached.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that this ordinance take effect 30 days after enactment.
ATTEST: /1.w ~!ull
(
15t Reading // - q -J.ot5
2"d Reading II -2 J - :l 0/1
Council Approved
Effective Date
II-~ 3 · «01r
/~ .. ;i3- 'Jot S·
'·
CONSUMER FIREWORKS PROHIBITION Ordinance
Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance Is to prohibit the use and sale of consumer fireworks
and all other fireworks prohibited by State Law, In order·to·ensure- the-safety of residents; Property
owners and the general public In the town of Mllllnocket.
Section 2. Authority. This ordinance shall be known as the Consumer Fireworks Prohibition Ordinance. It
Is adopted pursuant to enabling provisions of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of JO-A, MRS
subsection 3001, the provisions of P.L. 2011Ch.419 subsection S ( effective November JO, 2015)
codified-at& MRS subsection 223-A.
Section 3. Definitions. The followlna shall apply In this section:
(1} Consumer Fireworks shall have the same meanln1 as In 27 Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but Includes only products that are tested and
certlfled by a 3rd party testing klhoratory as conforming with United States Consumer
Products Safety Standards, In accordance with 15 United States Code 4 7. CONSUMER
FIREWORKS does not Include the following products:
Mlsslle·type Rockets as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule; and
Helicopter and Aerial Spinners as def!ned by the State Fire Marshall by rule; and
Sky rockets and Bottle rockets. For the-purpose of this paragraph, Sky rockets and Bottle
Rockets means a cyllndrlcal tuba containing not more than 20 grams of chemical
composition, as denned by the State Fire Marshal by rule. With a wooden stick attached for
guidance and stability that rise Into the air upon Ignition and that may produce a burst of
color or sound at or near the height of flight.
DISPt:AV means an entertainment featu'te where the publlc or private group Is admitted or
permitted to view the display or discharge of tlreworks for special effects.
fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or substance; any combination of
such compositions or ~ubstances; or any other artlde which was prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible elfect by combustion, explosion, deftagratlon or detonation,
Including blank cartridges or toy cannons In which explosives are used, the type of balloon
which requires nre underneath to propel It, nrecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles,
bombs, rockets, wheels, colored nres, fountains, mlnH, serpents, or other fireworks of like
constructJon; any nreworks containing any exploslve substance or nammable compound; or any
other device containing any e><ploslve substance or nammable compound. The term "Fireworks•
does not Include Consumer nreworks or toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices In
which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are
used It they are constructed so that the hand can not come In contact with the cap when In
place tor the explosion, toy pistol paper caps or piastre caps that contain less than 20/100
grains ot expfoslve mixture, sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates or perchlorates
or signal, antique or replica cannons It na. ptaJectUe lsllred.
Section 4. Prohibition. No person shall use, selt, or offer fpr safe consumer fireworks, and all other
fireworks prohibited by State Law, in the town of Mllllnocket.
This section does not apply to a person Issued a fireworks display permit by the State of Maine pursuant
~o 8 MRS,subsectlon 227 and the Fire chief of the town of Millinocket.
...
·•
Section S: Penalties.
( t) Any person who uses consumer Rreworks In the town of Miiiinocket shall be punished by a
flne of not less than five hundre4 dollars (500.00) and plus the costs of the town for
prosecuting violations shall be Imposed.
(2) Any person who offers for sale consumer nreworks In the town of Mllllnocket shall be
punished by a ftne of not less than Five Hundred dollars (S00.00) plus the costs of the town
for prosecuting vfolatlons.
(3) Seizure and disposal of fireworks; The town of Mllllnoclcet Pollce Department may seize
consumer ff reworks that the Police has probable cause to belleve are to be used, sold, or
offered for sale In violation of this section and shall forfeit such consumer fireworks to the
State for disposal.
()
--:~··-':2·.';..·..)· .
.......
Chapter 73
SOLID WASTE
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
§ 73-1. Definitions.
§ 73-2. Storage and transfer facilities; recycling.
§ 73-3. Operating criteria.
§ 73-4. through § 73-5. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Use of Transfer Station·
§ 73-6. Regulations for use.
§ 73-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 73-8. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Hazardous, Special and Other Waste
§ 73-9. Hazardous waste.
§ 73-10. Special wastes.
§ 73-11. Construction debris.
§ 73-12. Hot loads.
§ 73-13. Land clearing debris .
§ 73-14. Sludge.
§ 7.3-15. White goods.
§ 73-16. Woodwastes.
§ 73-17. Dredge spoils.
73:1 05 . 01 . 2011
* 73-1 MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 73-18. Liquid waste.
§ 73-19. Tires.
§ 73-20. Limitation on disposal.
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 73-21. Deposit of noxious materials on streets
§ 73-1
prohibited; notice to remove; removal by town.
§ 73-22. Refuse on public lands prohibited.
§ 73-23. Parking of garbage collection vehicles.
§ 73-24. Deposit of refuse on private property.
§ 73-25. Violations and penalties.
§ 73-26. Enfo1·cement.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 2-13-1992 by Ord. No. 4-91.1Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers - See Ch. 78.
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Management
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, terms shall have the meanings defined
in Section 400.1 of Chapter 400 of the Solid Waste Management
I. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 73, adopted as follows:
Art. I, 7·21-1981 as Art. l of Ch. 7 of the Millinocket Codes; Art. II, 7·21-1961 as
Art. II of Ch. 7 of the Millinocket Code, as amended; Art. III, 7-21-1961 aa Art.
Ill of Ch. 7 of the Millinocket Code aa amended 11·9-1982.
73:2 05 - 01 - 2011
t)
()
, ~·-.•. I• ·. "I.· .
~-:.
_D .. _;~_ ...
\.. ..
{'\
\_,0_1
C)
()
(..). .
\ . i:·
§ 73-1 SOLID WASTE § 73-2
Regulations adopted by the Board of Environmental Protection,
as such terms may be amended or redefined from time to
time.2 Terms not defined by the Solid Waste Management
Regulations shall have their ordinary and normal meanings.
§ 73-2. Storage and transfer facilities; recycling.
A. The Town shall maintain appropriate temporary solid
waste storage facilities and a transfer station for municipal
solid waste as defined by Section 400.l(Ill) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, such facilities to be
maintained in accordance with all state and federal laws,
rules and regulations and the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Town solid waste facilities shall be managed by the
Director of Public Works under the supervision of the
Town Manager. The Town Manager, Director of Public
Works or the duly authorized representative of either is
authorized to temporarily close the solid waste facilities or
any part thereof if necessary to deal with any emergency
or unforeseen situation.
C. The Town Manager and Public Works Director shall
develop a fee schedule for use of the Town's solid waste
facilities. The fee for depositing solid waste shall be based
on the Town's cost of operating the facility, the cost of
transporting the solid waste and the cost of ultimately
disposing of the solid waste at an appropriately licensed
facility. The fee schedule sha11 include separate charges for
any hazardous or special waste that can be accepted by· the
Town, construction debris, hot loads, white goods, wood
wastes, tires and such other categories as are appropriate.
The fee schedule, and any subsequent changes to the fee
schedule, shall go into effect when adopted by the Town
Council. The fee schedule shall be established by order of
2. Editor's Note: A copy of the Solid Waste Management Regulations i11 on file in
the Town offices.
73:3 05. 01. 2011
§ 73-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 73-3
the Town Council. [Amended 6-25-1992 by Ord. No.
5-92]
D. The Town Manager and Public Works Director are
authorized to develop voluntary recycling programs in
accordance with all state and federal laws, rules and
regulations. Mandatory recycling programs shall be
submitted to the Town Council for approval. ( __ )
E. Recycling. [Added 7-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003)
( 1) Recycling of the following items shall be mandatory
in the Town of Millinocket by all residents and
businesses:
(a) Newsprint, magazines, and catalogues.
(b) Metal cans.
(c) Plastic jugs: No. 1 clear plastic, No. 2 natural,
and No. 2 colored.
(d) Corrugated cardboard.
(e) Paper board boxes.
co Glass jars.
(2) All food containers must be cleaned before they are
recycled. The solid waste facility will have available
a brochure on what items will be accepted and in
what condition they must be presented.
('-)
§ 73-3. Opcr:iting criteria. [Amended 8-25-1994 by Ord. ---...
No. 6-94] (~9
A. The Town solid waste facilities shall be operated in
accordance with the Solid Waste Management Regulations
adopted by the Board of Environmental Protection, as the
same may be amended or replaced from time to time.
73:4 05 - 01 - 2011
(?
-~~J
()
.." ',:'.!! ':iJ,
~ . ·:_.~ :-r
'•,.
(,3 ··: .·.
. .
§ 73-3 SOLID WASTE
B. The following criteria shall apply to the operation of the
transfer station:
( 1) All normal domestic and commercial solid waste
shall be accepted.
(2) A separate storage area shall be provided for junked
vehicles, white goods and demolition debris.
(3) No hazardous waste shall be accepted except as
provided for by the regulations of the Board of
Environmental Protection.
(4) No salvaging shall be allowed in any manner, except
as approved by the Director of Solid Waste.
§ 73-4. through § 73-5. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
Use of Transfer Station
§ 73-6. Regulations for use.
The following shall govern use and operation of the solid waste
facilities:
A Use and operation.
( 1) Use of the solid waste facilities is restricted to
corporate, commercial and individual residents of the
Town of Millinocket who possess a necessary permit
for the disposal of municipal solid waste.
(2) Operation of the transfer station shall be in
accordance with Section 402.4 of the Solid Waste
Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection and this chapter. The
Public Works Director and Town Manager shall
prepare for approval by the Town Council an
operating manual as described in Section 402.4(9) of
73:5 05. 01 . 2011
* 73-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 73-6
the Solid Waste Management Regulations, including
a hazardous and special waste exclusion plan as
described in Section 405.2.
B. (Reserved)S
C. Hours of operation will be established by the Town Council
by order. [Amended 7-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
D. Types of vehicles allowed shall be any vehicle that can be
accommodated by the facility.
E. Depositing solid waste at the Town's solid waste facilities
without a permit is a violation of this chapter.
F. Depositing solid waste generated at a location outside of
the Town of Millinocket at the Town's solid waste facilities
shall be a violation of this chapter. However, residents of
Millinocket are allowed to deposit noncommercial
residential solid waste generated at a cottage or summer
home owned by the resident who does not have access to a
municipal landfill in the Town or Township where the
property is located. [Amended 9-24-2009 by Ord. No.
2-2009)
(1) In addition to the above-described users, the
residents and businesses located in the following
Unorganized Territories shall also be allowed to use
the Millinocket Transfer Site, effective October 1,
2009:
(a) The Penobscot County UTs of IP3, IP4, T3 R9
NWP, TA R7 WELS, Long A, and Tl RB WELS.
lb> The Piscataquis County U'l's of '1'1 .H.9 WELS
and Tl RlO WELS.
3. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Permits, a11 amended 5-14-11192 by Ord.
No. 2-92, was repealed 6-9-1992 by Ord. No. 3-92, after repeal by voters at the
referendum election held 6-9-1992.
73:6 05. 01 - 2011
c. ~)
t)· ' - .
.,,.. . .). .
• .. !-
•.
§ 73-6 SOLID WASTE § 73-7
(2) The Town Council reserves the right to change or
cancel this initial agreement from October 1, 2009, to
June 30, 2010, by order. All UT users will also be
required to participate in the Town's recycling
program and follow all other rules, regulations, and
fees applicable under Chapter 73.
G. Depositing solid waste or other material prohibited by this
chapter or any law, rule or regulation at the Town's solid
waste facilities shall be a violation of this chapter.
H. Commercial solid waste haulers shall not dispose of solid
waste at the transfer site but shall enter into an
agreement with the landfill operator by which compacted
residential and commercial solid waste is deposited at the
landfill and charged to the Town account. Only solid waste
generated within the Town of Millinocket shall be charged
to the Town account, and no solid waste generated outside
of the Town of Millinocket shall be mixed with solid waste
from the Town of Millinocket and deposited at the landfill.
The hauler shall reimburse the Town for the tonnage
deposited at the rate paid by the Town to the landfill
operator. The Town Manager is authorized to enter into
appropriate written agreements with commercial solid
waste haulers allowing their use of the landfill under the
Town's agreement with the landfill operator. Commercial
solid waste haulers may use the holding area at the Town's
solid waste facilities so long as the solid waste is generated
within the Town of Millinocket and the commercial solid
waste hauler has an agreement with the Town allowing
such use. All commercial solid waste hauler agreements
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council.
§ 73-7. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall
pay' a minimum penalty of $50 for a first offense and a
minimum of $100 up to a maximum penalty of $1,000 for
additional offenses, payable to the Town of Millinocket,
73:7 05. 01 . 2011
§ 73-7 MILLINOCKET CODE § 73-9
plus court costs and charges. [Amended 7-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 2-2003]
B. Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall
pay all costs, including attorney's fees, incurred by the
town in prosecuting the violation, remedying the violation
or properly disposing of any material deposited in violation
of this Article.
C. Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall
also pay any fine or fee imposed upon the town on account
of any solid waste being deposited at the town's facility in
violation of any law, rule or regulation.
D. Any person found guilty of an int.entional violation of this
chapter may be barred from future use of the town's solid
waste facility for an indefinite period of time or for any
lesser period of time.
§ 73-8. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
Hazardous, Special and Other Waste
§ 73-9. Hazardous waste.
Hazardous waste, as defined by Section 400.l(QQ) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection,4 as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, shall not be disposed of at the
town's solid waste facilities. Waste resulting from normal
household or agricultural adiv itit!s, which would otherwise be
defined as hazardous waste, may be accepted at a designated
location at the solid waste facilities and disposed of, from time
to time, at an appropriately licensed facility, by the town.
4. Editor's Note: These regulations are on file in the town offices.
73:8 05 - 01 - 2011
.,.:·. .·9.·.,...:. . .
t '-·•)
'· ' '
()
\
0 .
c~)
l.J
§ 73-10 SOLID WASTE § 73-14
§ 73-10. Special wastes.
No special wastes, as defined by Section 400. l(KK.KK) of the
Solid Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, shall be disposed of at the solid
waste facilities.
§ 73-11. Construction debris.
Construction/demolition debris, as defined by Section 400.l(X)
of the Solid Waste Management Regulations adopted by the
Board of Environmental Protection, as the same may be
amended or redefined from time to time, may be disposed of at
the solid waste facilities at a location specified by the Town
Manager, Public Works Director or their authorized agent.
§ 73-12. Hot loads.
Hot loads, as defined by ~ection 400.l(RR) of the Solid Waste
Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, may be disposed of at the solid
waste facilities at an appropriate location.
§ 73-13. Land clearing debris.
No land clearing debris, as defined by Section 400. l(VV) of the
Solid Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, shall be disposed of at the solid
waste facility.
§ 73-14. Sludge.
No sludge, as defined by Section 400.l(GGGG) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
73:9 05. 01. 2011
§ 73-14 MILLINOCKET CODE § 73-18
redefined from time to time, shall be disposed of at the solid
waste facility.
§ 73-15. White goods.
White goods, as defined by Section 400.1('.ITI'T) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, may be disposed of at the solid
wnste facility.
§ 73-16. Woodwastes.
Woodwastes, as defined by Section 400. l(UUUU) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, generated by normal household
activity, may be disposed of at the solid waste facility.
§ 73-17. Dredge spoils.
No dredge spoils, as defined by Section 400.l(DD) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, shall be disposed of at the solid
waste facility.
§ 73-18. Liquid waste.
No liquid waste, as defined by Section 4001.(CCC) of the Solid
Waste Management Regulations adopted by the Board of
Environmental Protection, as the same may be amended or
redefined from time to time, may be disposed of at the solid
waste facility.
73:10 05 . 01·2011 -
r<)· I •
·· ..
()
(·' -3··•.J- ·' -
(.. ;~.;
(---..,
\ .. _./
§ 73-19 SOLID WASTE § 73~21
§ 73-19. Tires.
Discarded tires may be disposed of at the solid waste facility
§ 73-20. Limitation on disposal.
The Town Manager and Public Works Director or their
authorized agent may refuse to accept unusually large amounts
of the waste specified in§§ 73-9, 73-11, 73-12, 73-15, 73-16 and
73-19. The person depositing any such material shall be
required to reimburse the town, in advance, for the actual cost
to the town of transporting and disposing of such material at an
appropriately licensed facility, pursuant to the fee schedule
specified h·erein. It shall be a violation of this chapter to deposit
any such material at the town's solid waste facility if the
material \Y~S generated at a location outside of the Town of
Millinocket. The Town Manager, Public Works Director or their
authorized agent may rl:!fuse to accept any such material if
space is not available.
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions.
§ 73-21. Deposit of noxious materials 011: streets
prohibited; notice to remove; removal by town.
A. No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or
deposited in any street, gutter, cesspool, alley or any public
place, other than as specified in this chapter, any septic
tank sludge, dredge spoils, liquid waste, agricultural waste
or solid waste as defined by Section 400.l(HHHH) of the
8olid Waste Management Regulations adupled by the
Board of Environmental Protection, as the same may be
amended or redefined from time to time.
B. Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any
substance in violation of Subsection A shall remove the
same or cause it to be removed within two hours after
73:11 05. 01. 2011
@ .
..
0
(.~.y.·· ·_: :":
...
Chapter 75
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
[The current General Assistance Ordinance of the Town
of Millinocket and any amendments are on file in the
Town offices.)
7501 07 - 01 2006
I'
\
0
()
§ 78-1 JUNK DEALERS § 78-
Chapter.78
JUNK DEALERS
§ 78-1. License req~ired; records.
§ 78-2. Definitions.
§ 78-3. Application for license.
§ 78-4. Fee.
§ 78-5. Duration of license.
§ 78-6. Restrictions on license.
§ 78-7. Display of license.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town o1
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Art. I of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket Code
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFEREXCES
Vlolatlona and penaltiea - See Ch. l, Art. I.
§ 78-1. License required; records.
Any junk purchaser, whether a principal or agent, purchasing or
offering to purchase any junk or going about from place t.o place
within this town for the purpose of purchasing junk shall first obt.ain
from the municipal officers a license to do so and shall keep a record
of the name of every person selling such junk to said dealer and
description of same, as well as records required by 30 M.R.S.A.
§ 3051. These records shall be open for inspection t.o any officer of the
law as herein provided.
7801
I 78-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § 78-4
I 78-2. l>eftnitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK - Old iron, chains. brass, copper, tin, Jead or other
base metals, old . rope, old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper
clippings. scraps of woolens, clips. bagging, rubber and glass,
empty bottles of different kinds when less than one (1) gross
and all articles discarded or no longer ·used as a manufactured
article, composed of one ( 1) or more of the materials
mentioned.
§ 78-3. Application for license.
A. Application for such license shall be made tD the Chief of
Police on a form t.o be prescribed by the municipal officers and
shall show:
(1) The name of the applicant and of all persons associat.ed
with him in his business.
(2) The length of time for which said license is desired.
(3) The place of residence of the applicant for the past five (5)
years.
B. Before the license is issued, the applicant shall pay the proper
fee t.o the Town Treasurer, and the certificate of license, which
shal1 be of a form prescribed by the municipal officers, shall
be signed by the Chairman of the Town Council or by a
member of the Council acting as Chairman.
C. No such license shall be issued until it has been approved by
the municipal officers.
I 78-4. Fee.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.).
7802
()
§ 78-5 JUNK DEALERS § 78-7
§ 78-6. Duration of license.
Each license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid only for the period specified therein. and no license shall extend
beyond the 31st day of December of each year.
() · § 78-6. Restrictions on license.
I, '.£ ·~·.) . ,
~. . ' .
i'~
lJ
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable. No
refunds shall be made on unused portions of a license. Each person,
whether principal or agent. engaged in purchasing junk covered by
this chapter must secure a separate license. No purchaser shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter by associating himself with
any local dealer, trader or merchant
· § 78-7. Display of license.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be carried by the
licensee or conspicuously posted in or on the vehicle, if any, used in the
business; and such licensee shall, whenever requested, show said
license t.o any officer or citizen of the town who demands to see the
same.
7803
() ~-- 7-'
' '
(" .. ")
~ ... '. _ _.,
i· .P •..."J.
~~~ .
MOBILE HM. PKS.; MANf'CTED. HSNG.
Chapter 83
MOBILE HOME PARKS; MANUFACTURED HOUSING
§ 83-1.
§ 83-2.
§ 83-3.
§ 83-4.
§ 83-5.
§ 83-6.
§ 83-7.
§ 83-8.
§ 83-9.
§ 83-10.
§ 83-11.
§ 83-12.
Purpose.
Definitions.
ARTICLE I
Mobile Home Parks
Occupied trailers prohibited; mobile homes restricted.
Permit required; issuance and renewal.
Location requirements.
Area requirements.
Mobile home space requirements.
Access to public street required.
Road requirements.
Sanitation requirements.
Registration of occupants.
Electricity.
§ 83-13. Additions to and skirting on mobile homes.
§ 83-14. Inspections.
§ 83-15. Nonconforming uses.
§ 83-16. Appeals.
§ 83-17. Higher standards to prevail.
§ 83-18. Violations and penalties .
8301
MIWNOCKET CODE
ARTICLE II
Manufaetund Housln1r
I 83-19. Purpoee.
I 83-20. Statutory authority.
I 83-21. Applleablllty.
I 83-22. Definitions.
§ 83-23. Permit required.
I 83-24. Loeation of substandard houslns restricted.
I 83-25. Noneonformins structures.
I 83-26. Housing standards.
§ 83-27. Appeals.
§ 83-28. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 83-29. Amendmenu.
§ 83-30. Conflict with other ordinances.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket Art. I, 7-21-81asCh.10 of the Milllnocket Code: Art.
II, 1·17-85 as Ord. No. 8-84. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCE..~
Board of Appeals - See Ch. 5.
Buildin• conscrurtlon - See Ch. 48.
•wen - See Ch. IN.
Zonln1 - See Ch. 125.
8302
1' , .. . )
\ .
()
() " .,.;
MOBILE HM. PKS.: MANFCTED. HSNG.
ARTICLE I
Mobile Home Parks
[Adopted 7-21-81 as Ch. 10 of the Millinocket Code]
§ 83-1. Purpose.
§ 8.1-2
The purposes of this Article are to: define and regulate mobile home
parks: establish minimum standards governing the construction and
maintenance of mobile home parks; establish minimum standards
governing the provided utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions to make mobile home parks safe, sanitary and
fit for human habitation; fix the responsibilities and duties of owners
and operators of mobile home parks; authorize the inspection of
mobile homes and mobile home parks: and fix penalties for violation.
§ 83-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MOBILE HOME - Any vehicle used or so constructed as to
permit its being used as a conveyance on the public streets and
highways and duly licensed as such, and constructed in such a
manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or
sleeping space for one (1) or more persons and provided with a
toilet and a bathtub or shower.
MOBILE HOME PARK - A plot of ground on which two (2)
or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes are locat.ed.
MOBILE HOME SPACE - A plot of ground within a mobile
home park designated for the accommodation of one (1) mobile
home.
PERMIT - A written permit issued by the Building
Inspector permitting the mobile home park t:o operate under
this Article.
TRAILER - A vehicle as described above which does not
have a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
830:1
MILLINOCKET CODE § 83-5
I 83.:J. Oceupled. trallen prohibited; mobile homes restricted.
A. Occupied trailer. No occupied trailer shall be permitted in the
Town of Millinocket
B. Mobile homes. All mobile homes shall be located in a mobile
home park except mobile homes held for sale by a bona fide
dealer.
§ 83-4. Permit required; Issuance and renewal.
A. Permit requfred. It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, maintain, operate or ent.er any mobile home park
within the limits of the Town of Millinocket unless he or she or
any firm holds a valid permit issued annually, on or before the
first day of May. by the Building Inspector. The annual cost of
this permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.) per mobile home
park plus two·, dollars ($2.) per mobile home situated in the
mobile home park. All initial applications for permits shall be
made to the Building Inspector. Issuance of the permit by the
Building Inspector shall be contingent upon compliance with
provisions of this Article and the laws of the State of Maine.
B. Renewal. The Building Inspector shall annually. on the first
Monday in May, renew such permit contingent upon compliance
with all regulations in this Article.
§ 83-5. Location requirements.
The following location requirements shall apply:
A. Drainage. The mobile home park shall be located on a welldrained
lot properly graded to . ensure rapid drainage of
surface and subsurface wat.er and freedom from stagnant
pools of water.
B. Proximity to dumps, swamps. The mobile home park shall not
be located near swamps, dumps or other potential breeding
places for insects and rodents.
8304
()
(v~ ~
§ 83-5 MOBILE HM. PKS.; MANFCTED. HSNti. § 83-
C. Noise; odor. The mobile home park shall not be located on Ian,
which is exposed to chronic nuisance such as smoke, nois.
fumes and odors.
§ 83-6. Area requirements.
The following area requirements shall apply:
A. Minimum area. The area of the mobile home park shall b
large enough to accommodate the designated number ani
setback requirements.
B. Open space. At least ten percent (10%) of the mobile horn
park area shall be reserved exclusively for playground and/o
park use. Such space shall be protected from streets am
parking areas.
C. Buffer strips. The mobile home park area shall be protecte.
from adjoining property or public streets, except streets tha
are an integral part of the mobile home park, by a tree belt a
least twenty (20) feet wide or an open space at least eighty (8C
feet wide. These setback requirements cannot be used a
playground or park spaces as defined in Subsection B.
§ 83-7. Mobile home space requirements.
The following mobile home space requirements shall apply:
A. Individual spaces. Each mobile home space shall be at leas
fifty (50) feet in width and shall contain at least five thousanc
(5,000) square feet unless the park is subject to shorelam
zoning,1 in which case it shall contain a minimum of tel
thousand (10,000) square feet for each pad, exclusive of roads
B. Space boundaries. The boundaries of a mobile home spac•
shall be clearly defined.
C. Side setback. Mobile homes shall be so located that :
minimum of ten (10) feet of clearance exists between any par
of a mobile home or built-on addition, if permitted, and the lo
lines of the mobile home space. ----- 1 Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Zoning.
8305
I 83-7 MILIJNOCKET CODE § 83-9
D. Density. Only one (1) mobile home may be located on each
designated mobile home space.
E. Space required. It shall be illegal to allow any mobile home to
remain in a mobile home park unless a mobile home space is
available.
F. Single-family use. All mobile homes shall be for single-family
occupancy only.
G. Parking space. Each individual mobile home space shall
contain no Jess than two hundred forty (240) square feet of
parking surface: such surface shall be well drained and
stabilized or paved and maintained in good repair.
H. Drainage. All mobile home spaces must be graded for
adequate drainage.
§ 83-8. Access to public street required.
Each mobile home space shall abut on a roadway with unobstruct.ed
access to a public street
§ 83-9. Road requirements.
The following road requirements shall apply:
A. Access to public street. For fire prevention and protection,
every mobile home park shall have access to a public street
either by directly abutting thereon or by means of a private
hard-surfaced roadway not less than thirty (30) feet wide.
B. Surface material. Roadways in aU mobile home parks shall be
well drained, adequately graveled, hard-surfaced or paved and
shall be maintained in good condition.
C. Lighting. All roadways shall be lighted at night and shall have
a light intensity at the center of the roadway of no Jess than
two-tenths (0.2) foot.candle.
8306
()
()
0
()
§ 8!l-9 MOBILE HM. PKS.: MANFCTED. HSNG. § 83-11
D. Abutting spaces. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a
roadway thirty (30) feet or more in width, ten (10) feet
provided on each side of the roadway for sidewalk and tree
belt.
§ 83-10. Sanitation requirements.
The following sanitation requirements shall apply:
A. Water supply. An accessible, adequate. safe and potable
supply of water meeting the standards of the State Department
of Human Services shall be provided in each mobile
home park.
B. Plumbing. All plumbing in the mobile home park shall
comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations
and shall be maintained in good operating condition.
C. Sewage disposal. Mobile home parks shall be served by a
public sewerage system or by a private disposal system which
meets with the approval of the State Departments of Human
Services and Environmental Protection. Each mobile home
space shall be provided with a satisfactory sewer connection.
D. Refuse and garbage disposal. The storage, collection and
disposal of refuse in the park shaII not create health hazards,
rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident hazards or
air pollution. All refuse and garbage shall be stored in flytight,
rodentproof containers, which shall be provided in sufficient
number and capacity to prevent any refuse from overflowing.
Satisfactory container holders shall be provided by the mobile
home owner and shall be suitably enclosed so as not to present
any unsightly condition.
§ 83-11. Registration of occupants.
Every mobile home park operator shall maintain a register
containing a record of all mobile home occupants using the mobile
home park. Such register shall be available to any authorized state or
local official inspecting the park and shall be preserved for a period of
8307
§ 83-11 MILLINOCKET CODE § 83-14
at least one (I) year. Such register shall contain the names and
addres.9e& of all occupants of the mobile home park.
I 83-12. EJeetriclty.
An electrical outlet supplying at least two hundred twenty (220)
volts shall be provided for each mobile home space, The installation
shall comply with all state and local electrical codes and articles. Such
electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. No power line shall be
permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than twelve (12)
feet above the ground.
I 83-13. Additions to and skirting on mobile homes.
A. Alterations and additions. Built-on additions to mobile homes
are prohibited for entryways and canopies. These additions
must be of finished appearance, complementary to the mobile
home.
B. Skirting. It is mandatory that a mobile home skirt be installed
within three (3) months of the time the mobile home is placed
upon the mobile home space. This skirt shall be of finished
appearance, complementary to the mobile home. Exposed
materials such as tar paper are forbidden.
§ 83-14. Inspections.
The Building Inspector or duly authorized representative is hereby
authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the
conditions of mobile home parks located within the Town of
Millinocket in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of occupants of mobile home parks and of the
general public. The Building Inspector or his dulr authorized
representative shall be given free access at reasonable hours to any
private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this Article.
8308
(<~J
(.,"J?
()
0
§ 8.1-15 MOBILE HM. PKS.: MANFCTED. HSXG.
§ 83-15. Nonconforming uses.
A. Existing: discontinued. Any lawful mobile home park or the
otherwise lawful location of any mobile home on a space not
within a mobile home park. existing at the time this Article or
any amendment thereto is adopted. may be continued although
such use does not conform to the provisions of this Article.
except that any nonconforming use that has been or is
discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days or more _shall not
be reestablished except in conformity with this Article.
B. Expansions; changes. Any expansions of. additions to or
changes in nonconforming mobile home parks shall be in
conformity with this Article.
C. Individual buyers. This Article shall not prevent the acquiring
and occupancy of mobile home spaces by individual buyers,
provided that said acquiring and occupancy meet the following
conditions:
(1) The lot must have been in a mobile home park which met
all the conditions required of this Article at the time of
purchase.
(2) Such conditions must be complied with after the purchase
of said lot.
§ 83-16. Appeals.
Appeal shall lie from the enforcement of this Article to the Board of
Appeals, and from the decision of said Board of Appeals in accordance
with 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411.
§ 83-17. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where a provision of this Article is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire. safety or health
ordinance. article or code of the Town of Millinocket or with any
provision of the laws of the State of Maine existing on the effective
date of this Article, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall prevail.
8309
§ 83-18 MILIJNOCKET CODE § 83-21
I 83-18. Violations and penahie&.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be
deemed guilty of a civil violation and shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.) and no more than one hundred dollars
($100.). recoverable for the use of the town. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separat.e offense.
ARTICLE II
Manufactured Housing
[Adopted 1-17-85 as Ord. No. 8-84)
§ 83-19. Purpose.
The purposes of this Article are to establish minimum standards for
the placement of manufactured housing in accordance with the
provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. § 4965, Regulation of Manufactured
Housing; t.o restrict the location of older mobile homes and trailers; to
require that manufactured housing (the newer mobile homes and
single-wide modulars) be compatible with site-built homes; and to
provide opportunities for the location of affordable and safe housing
within the community.
§ 83-20. Statutory authority.
This Article is adopt.ed pursuant to the home rule powers provided
for in Article VIII of the Maine Constitution and 30 M.R.S.A. § 1917,
and 30 M.R.S.A. § 4965, Regulation of Manufactured Housing.
§ 83-21. Applicability.
This Article shall apply t.o all of the land area within the Town of
Millinocket, and it shall apply to all factory-built housing to be located
in the town or moved from one part of the community to another.
8310
() ·-
()
()
§ 83-22 MOBILE HM. PKS.; MANFCTED. HSNG. § 83-2:
§ 83-22. Definitions.
A. Terms not defined herein shall have their customan
dictionary meaning.
B. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have thf
meanings indicated:
MANUFACTURED HOUSING - A structural unit or unib
designed for occupancy and constructed in a manufacturin~
facility and then transported to a building site by the use of iu
own chassis or by placing on an independent chassis. The term
includes any type of building which is constructed at a
manufacturing facility and then used as housing and may bE
purchased or sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes oj
this Article, two (2) types of "manufactured housing" are
included. They are:
(1) Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly
called "newer mobile homes," which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with the United
Stat.es Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards, meaning ~tructures, transportable in one (1)
or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, are
fourteen (14) body feet or more in width and are seven
hundred fifty (750) or more square feet, and which are
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as
dwellings, with or without permanent foundations. when
connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein; except that the term shall include any
structure which meets all the requirements of this
subsection except the size requirements and with respect
to which the manufacturer volunt.arily files a certification
required by the Secretary of the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development and complies
with the standards established under the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act of 1974, United Stat.es Code, Title 42, Section
5401 et seq.
sa11
MILLINOCKET CODE
(2) Those units commonly called "modular homes," which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance
with the state's Manufactured Housing Act and regulations,
meaning structures, transportable in one (1) or
more sections, which are designed to be used as dwellings
on foundations when connected to required utilities,
including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or
electrical systems contained therein.
MOBILE HOME PARK - A contiguous parcel of land
designed for the location of two (2) or more older mobile
homes, trailers or manufactured homes which is licensed as a
mobile home park by the Maine Department of Business
Regulation.
OLDER MOBILE HOMES AND TRAILERS - May be
used interchangeably and shall mean any factory-built home
which fails to meet the definition of "manufactured housing"
above, and specifically, it shall mean any mobile home
constructed on or before June 15, 1976.
§ 83-23. Permit required.
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall locate a
manufactured home in the Town of Millinocket or move a manufac·
tured home from one lot or parcel of land to another without a permit
from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall issue the
permit within seven (7) days of receipt of a written application and
submission of proof that the manufactured home meets the
requirements of this Article and is in conformance with Chapt.er 48,
Building Construction, § 48-7, of the Code of the Town of Millinocket.
§ 83-24. Loeation of substandard housing restricted.
No person. firm, corporation or other legal entity shall locate or
move from one lot or parcel of land to another an older mobile home,
trailer or manufactured home which fails to meet the requirements of
§ 83-26 except in a mobile home park.
8312
C)
()-. ..
(.')·.
'· .
MOBILE HM. PKS.: MANFCTED. HSNG. § 83-27
§ 8:l·25. Nonconforming strueture!!I.
Manufactured homes which fail to meet the standards set forth in
§ 83·26, which were lawfully established prior to the effective date of
this Article, shall be considered nonconforming structures and may
continue and may be maintained, repaired, improved and expanded.
No nonconforming structure may be moved to another lot or parcel in
the Town of Millinocket. No nonconforming structure may be
replaced by a nonconforming structure but may be replaced by a
manufactured home that meets the requirements of this Article or a
"stick-built" house. A nonconforming structure may be moved to a
different location on the same lot or parcel of land.
§ 83-26. Housing standards.
All manufactured housing located in the Town of Millinocket shall
be at least fourteen (14) feet in width, shall contain at least seven
hundred fifty (750) feet of living space, shall have a pitched, shingled
roof and siding that is residential in appearance and shall have a
permanent foundation or pad. The foundation shall be a poured or
block frost wall, a reinforced concrete slab and rigid skirting material
or a full basement.
§ 83-27. Appeals.
A. Variance appeals. The Board of Appeals may, upon written
application of the affected landowner, grant a variance from
the strict application of the Article when the strict application
of the terms of this Article would result in undue hardship to
the applicant. The term "undue hardship" shall mean:
(1) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted;
(2) That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
(3) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality: and
831:\
§ B:J.27 MILLINOCKET CODE § 83-28
(4) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
B. Administrative appeals. The Board of Appeals may, upon
written application of an aggrieved party and after public
notice, hear appeals from determinations of the Building
Inspector in the administration of this Article. Such hearings
shall be held in accordance with 30 M.R.S.A. § 2411.
Following such hearing, the Board of Appeals may reverse the
decision of the Building Inspector only upon a finding that the
decision is clearly contrary to specific provisions of this
Article.
C. Appeal to Superior Court. Within thirty (30) days after any
decision is rendered by the Board of Appeals, an appeal may
be taken by any party to the Superior Court in accordance
with Rule SOB of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 83-28. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any violation of this Article shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this Article. If the Building Inspect.or shall find
that any provision of this Article is being violated, he shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use
of land. buildings, structures or work being done, removal of
illegal buildings or structures and abatement of nuisance
conditions. A copy of such notices shall be maintained as a
permanent record.
C. When the above action does not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the municipal
officers, upon notice from the Building Inspector, are hereby
authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may
be appropriate or necessary t.o enforce the provisions of this
Article in the name of the municipality.
8314
()
()
§ &1-28 MOBILE HM. PKS.; MANFCTED. HSNG. § sa-a
D. Any person who continues tn violate any provi~ion of th1
Article after receiving notice of such violation shall be guilty<
a civil violation subject tD a minimum fine of one hundre
dollars ($100.) and a maximum fine of two thousand fiv
hundred dollars ($2,500.) for each violation. Each day such
violation is continued is a separate offense.
§ 83-29. Amendments.
This Article may be amended by majority vote of the legislatiV:
body upon a recommendation of the Planning Board.
§ 83-30. Conflict with other ordinances.
Where the provisions of this Article conflict with the provisions o
other ordinances, the provisions of this Article shall prevail.
8315
1
,.
ORDINANCE #2 - 2012
PROVIDING FOR: Amendments to Chapter 86, Outdoor Wood Boller Ordinance
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF MILLINOCKET, IN COUNCIL
ASSEMBLED, that Chapter 86, Outdoor Wood Boiler Ordinance, for the Town of Millinocket, is
amended, as attached.
First Reading:
Second Readfns:
Passed by the Council:
Effective Date:
MiY 24. 2012
Iv- le./ -J()/ :;._
. l?-tL/-J. .o /:;l_
7-1<-/-:}f) /~
.\11LU~OCKET CODE, PROPOSED CHAPTER ~6
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILERS
DRAFT .. \~IEND~IENT
86-01. TITLE. This ordinance shall be known as the Outdoor Wood Boil~rs Ordinance.
86-0Z. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The purposes of this ordinance are to ensure
that outdoor wood boilers are operated in a manner that limit particulate
discharges. create no nuisance to neighbors, and protect members of the
community from harmful levels of smoke and other emissions.
86-0J. LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND FINDINGS.
A Outdoor wood boilers are alternative sources for heat and hot water
production and when operated improperly create significant amounts of
particulate and smoke discharges that threaten public health, welfare, and
safety.
B. Outdoor wood boilers are becoming more common, but government at the
federal and state levels has not yet addressed their emissions issues in a
satisfactory manner.
C. Most people in Millinocket live within a tight compact area where significant
emissions from outdoor wood boilers have very negative effects or potential
effects on the personal health and enjoyment of property of residents.
D. It is the intent of this c;hapter to serve the Town's compelling interest to
promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
Millinocket by regutating outdoor wood boilers within its borders.
E. Authority for this Ordinance is found in Article s. Part 2, §I of the State of
Maine Constitution., also known as the "Home Rule" provision, and the
Millinocket Town Charter.
86-04. PE'Rl\IIT REQUIRED. No person shall install, use, or maintain an outdoor
wood boiler within the Town of Millinocket without first having obtained a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Application for such permit shall be
made to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided. Fees collected with
regard to these pennits shall be set by Order of the Town rnuncil.
86-05. EXISTING OUTDOOR \VOOD BOILERS. Any outdoor wood boiler in
e:<istence. installed, and operating/operable on the effective date of this ordinance
shall be allowed to remain provided that the owner applies for and receives a
p~rmit from the Code Enforcement Otlicer within sixty ( 60) days of such
effective date, provided, however, that upon the effective date of this ordinance
all the provisions hereof. e.'<cept for those found in Section 86·06, Paragraph B
below, shall immediately apply to existing outdoor wood boilers. All of the
provisions of the ordinance shall continue to apply to e:<isting outdoor wood
boilers which receive permits, except in Section 86-06, Paragraph 8 . [f the owner
nt'.m outdoor wood boiler does not receive a permit within sixty (oO) days L>f 1he
l!ffective date of this ordinance, the outdoor wood boiler shall be removed by the
owner at the owner's expense. "Existing" or "in existence" means that the
outdoor \~ood boiler is in place on site.
86-06. SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
A Permitted Fuel. Only seasoned firewood and untreated lumber are permitted
to be burned in an outdoor wood boiler. Burning of any and all other
materials in an outdoor wood boiler is expressly prohibited.
B. Distance Requirement No outdoor wood boiler shall be installed less than 50
feet from a neighboring residence. On lots of three (J) or more acres. a
property owner shall install a boiler no less than I 00 feet from any lot line.
C. Emissions maximum. Particulate discharges shall be less t~an 24 grams
(0.053 pounds) per l00,000 British Thermal Units (BTU) per.hour, as rated by
a certified testing laboratory for the outdoor wood boiler unit. Should the U.
S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection adopt a stricter emissions standard. that stricter
standard shall be automatically considered as adopted by this Chapter. The
outdoor boiler shall be required to display a listing plate on the unit that
certifies that the unit is in compliance with the appropriate emissions standard.
as detennined by a qualified testing facility using appropriate and applicable
Underwriter laboratories standards.
0 . Certification. Any outdoor wood boiler located in Millinocket shall be
certified to Standard 391 of Underwriters Laboratories (UL).
E. Stack Height. The stack height of an outdoor wood boiler will be at least the
height of the highest roof of any residences abutting the property where the ·
boiler is installed. On lots of three (J) or more acres, a property owner shall
install a stack of no less than twelve ( 12) feet high.
F Months of Operation. Outdoor wood boilers may be operated only between
October l S and April 15 of each year. With written permission of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the owner of an outdoor wood boiler may continue to
operate the device until May 1 if. in the opinion of the CEO, weather
conditions are unusually cold and/or inclement. If wuther conditions
continue to be unusually cold and/or inclement. the CEO may approve in
writina a 5etond extension to operate the device from May I to May 15.
G. Replacements. If an outdoor wood boiler is replaced or upgraded, a pennit
shall be required pursuant to Section 86-04 above and shall comply with all
Sections of this ordinance.
86-07. SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to this ordinance may
be suspended as the Code Enforcement Ot1icer deems necessary to prot~t the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town of MiJlinocket if
any of the following conditions occur:
A. Malodorous air contaminants from the outdoor wood boiler are detectable
outdoor the property of the person whose land the boiler is located.
B fhe emissions of the outdoor wood bl1iler inter fore v•ith the reasonable
l!njoyment of life or proper1y.
C. The emissions from the outdoor wood boiler cause damage to vt!getation or
property.
D. The emissions from the outdoor wood boiler are or may be harmt'i.JI to human
or animal health.
,.\ suspended permit may be reinstated once the condition that caused the
suspension is remedied and reasonable assurances are given that such condition
will not recur. Recurrence of a condition, which has previously resulted in
suspension of a permit, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and be
subject to the penalties provided in Section 86-09 below.
86-08. APPEALS AND WAIVERS.
A. Appeals. An outdoor wood boiler owner may appeal, in writing, the Code
Enforcement Officer's denial or suspension of a permit to the Millinocket
Town Council. The Council will consider such appeals in open session and
may include, at its discretion, testimony by the property owner, testimony by
the Code Enforcement Officer, witnesses, and members of the general public.
Any appeals upheld by the Council must tind, at a minimum, that the Code
Enforcement Officer substantially deviated from the conditions detailed in this
chapter and state specifically what those deviations were as part of its
decision. If the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer is upheld, the
suspension of the pennit will continue until such time as the boiler is brought
into compliance with this chapter or discontinued from use. During the appeal
prcces~ however, the outdoor wood boiler shall not be used in order to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood.
B. Waivers. The Town Council shall retain the authority to grant waivers under
this chapter due to extraordinary and undue hardship, upon written request of
an affected property owner to the Council. The Council shall consider the
waiver request in open session and may include, at its discretion, testimony of
the property owner, the Code Enforcement Officer, and members of the
general public. Any waiver granted shall not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purposes of this chapter and the Council may impose such
conditions and requirements as it deems reasonable and prudent. If the
Council denies the waiver request. the outdoor wood boiler in question must
be brought into full compliance with this chapter or its use be discontinued
immediarely and be removed by the owner within thirty (30) days of the
Council's decision.
86.09. PENALTIES. Violations of this chapter shall be deemed a civil infraction and
violators m:iy be summonsed by the Code Enforcement Officer to Maine District
Court or other court of competent jurisdiction. For a first or second conviction,
the owner of an otTendjng outdoor wood boiler shall be assessed a penalty of
SS00 .00. For a third or subsequent violation, a penalty of $1,000.00 shall be
imposed and the property owner's permit shall be revoked. The owner shall not
be eligible for another permit. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
s\!parate offense that may result in an additional summons . .-\ny tine irnpllsed
hereunder shall ~onstitute a lien upon the real property where the outdoor wood
boiler is located until paid in tull.
86. lO. DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them hereunder, e:<cept where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FIRE\VOOD means trunks and branches of trees and bushes. but does not
include leaves, needles, or vines.
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER means any equipment, device, or apparatus, or
any part thereof, that is installed, affixed, or situated outdoors for the purpose of
combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating
system providing heat for any swimming pool, Jacuzzi, or interior space.
SEASONED FIREWOOD means wood of any species that has been sufficiently
dried so as to contain 25% or fess moisture by weight.
UNTREATED LUMBER means dry wood that has been milled and dried, but
has not been treated or combined with any petroleum product, chemical.
preservative, glue, adhesive, stain, paint, or other substance. It may not contain
nails, screws, or other similar attachments that, when burned, could create a threat
to public health, safety, or welfare.
86-11. SEVERABILITY. Should any section, sub·section, paragraph, or other
provision of this chapter be held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole,
or of any part thereat: other than the part held to be invalid.
This Ordinance was adopted by the Millinocket Town Council on October 27, 2006 and
became effective on November 27, 2006.
First amended June 201 1.
. ~iI.)
\.. .- ...:
§ !JO·l PAWNBROKERS § 90-1
Chapter 90
PAWNBROKfc~RS
§ 90-l. Definitions.
§ 90-2. License required; fee.
§ 90-3. Application; investigation.
§ 90-4. Display and nontransferability of license.
§ 90-5. Receipt of articles from certain persons prohibited.
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 90-7. Revocation or suspension of license.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Art. II of Ch. 9 of the Millinocket Code.
Section 90-1 added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Arl I. Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GESERAL REFERESCES
Peddlln1r and solleltinac - See Ch. 97.
§ 90· l. Definitions.1
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER - Includes any person who loans money on
deposit or pledge of personal property. other than securities or
printed evidences of indebtedness. or who purchases personal
propert~· on condition of reselling the same back to a person at
a stipulated price or who, doing business as a furniture
warehouseman, Joans and ad\·anees money upon goods .,..-----
1 Editor's :'\ott': ..\ddt1tl at time of ado1,tinn of ('ode: !!t>t• C'h. I. General PrO\Mons. Art. J.
9001
§ 90-1 MILLINOCKET CODE
deposited with or pledged to him as collateral security
therefor.
I 90·2. License required; fee.
No person. firm or corporation shall engage in busines.~ as a
pawnbroker in the Town of Millinocket except under written license
granted by the municipal officers and issued by the Town Clerk and
upon payment to the Town Treasurer of Millinocket of an annual
license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.). Such licenses shall continue in
force until the first Monday in May next following. unless sooner
revoked or suspended by the municipal officers.
§ 90-3. Application; investigation.
Application for a pawnbroker's license shall be made to the Town
Clerk on forms provided and shall give the name of the applicant, the
name under which the business is to be conducted and the location
where the business will be carried on. Applications shall be
investigated by the Chief of Police to determine if the applicant is of
good moral character and to secure information regarding the
location and conditions under which the business will be conducted.
The Chief of Police shall make a report of his findings and
recommendations, which shall be submitted to the municipal officers
with the application.
§ 90-4. Display and nontransferabiJity of license.
Licenses must be displayed in a conspicuous location in the
licensee's place of business. Licenses are not transferable.
§ 90·5. Receipt of articles from certain persons prohibited.
No licensee shall purchase or receive any article from any person
under the age of seventeen (17) years without the written consent of
the parent or guardian or from any person known or suspected to be
a thief or receiver of stolen property.
9002
()
§ 90-6 PAWNBROKERS § 90-7
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties.
Violation of an)· of the provisions of this chapter or any of the
provisions of a pawnbroker license issued by the Town of Millinocket
shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50.) for each separate offense, recoverable for
the use of the Town. Each day's violation of any provisions hereunder
shaJl be deemed a separate offense. Notwithstanding the· foregoing,
the maximum fine for operating without a pawnbroker's license shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.).
§ 90-7. Revocation or suspension of license.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the
provisions of the state laws relating to pawnbrokers or evidence that
the licensee is not a person of good moral character shall be cause for
the revocation or suspension by the municipal officers of any license
issued under this chapter.
()
(,)
(,,~J
§ 94-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
Chapter 9·1
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
ARTICLE I
Throwing of Objects
§ 94-1. Prohibited activity.
§ 94-2. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket Art. I, 2-8-83 as Art. III of Ch. 11 of the Millinocket
Code. Amendments noted where applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Throwing of Objects
[Adopted 2-8-83 as Art. III of Ch. 11 of the Millinocket Code]
§ 94-1. Prohibited activity.
It shall be a violation of this Article for anyone to throw or propel
or cause to be thrown or propelled, by any means whatsoever, a rock,
stone, snowball, ice ball or any other object or substance at any person
or animal, at any form of public or private conveyance or any building
or other property, public or private, the natural and probable
consequences of which throwing is to:
A. Place a person in reasonable apprehension of being struck by
such rock, stone, snowball, ice ball or other object or substance,
whether or not such contact occurs: or
B. Place the owner, operator or custodian of such conveyance,
building. animal or other property in reasonable apprehension
of injury to or unauthorized contact of such property. whether
or not such injury or contact occurs.
9.101
§ 94-2 MIIiINOCKET CODE § 94-2
§ 94-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this Article shall be fined not less than twenty-five
doJlars ($25.) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for each
offense.
9402

()
........._
§ 97-1.
§ 97-2.
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Chapter 97
PEDDLING AND SOLICmNG
Purpose and intent.
License required.
§ 97-3. Granting of license by Town Clerk; classes of
license.
§ 97-4. Application for license.
§ 97-5. Information in license.
§ 97-6. Fee.
§ 97-7. Revocation and suspension of license.
§ 97-8. Ineligibility for license.
§ 97-9. Display of license .
\ J § 97-10. Violations and penalties . . _./
§ 97-11. Retained authority over public property.
§ 97-12.
§ 97-13.
§ 97-14.
§ 97-15.
Size of operation limited.
Nonapplicability.
Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
to be limited.
Licensee responsibilities.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
':7'\ Millinocket 7-21-1981 as Art. III of Ch. 9 of the ("jg Millinocket Code; amended in its entirety 6-22·1995 by
Ord. No. 2-95. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
PawnbrokeN - See Ch. 90.
9701
§ 97-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 97-3
§ 97-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to allow limited and controlled
use of public ways and public lands for small-scale sales
activities traditionally conducted in public places such as
farmers' markets and craft fairs, and through licensing to
prevent nuisance conditions and threats to the public health,
safety and welfare which could otherwise result if public ways
and public lands were opened to unlimited retail sales
activities. The intent of this chapter is to allow appropriate
public places to be used for the sale of goods and products
customarily produced in home businesses or sold at roadside
farm stands or dockside locations; typically, such goods and
products are made, grown, caught, gathered, prepared, baked,
cooked or canned/preserved by the seller.
§ 97-2. License required.
No person shall expose for sale or sell upon the public streets
of the town, nor within a public right-of-way, nor upon any
property owned or controlled by the town, nor go from place to
place in the town exposing for sale or selling goods, wares or
merchandise at retail, without first having secured a license to
do so as hereinafter provided.
§ 97-3. Granting of license by Town Clerk; classes of
license.
The Town Clerk may grant a license to expose for sale or sell
upon the public streets of the town, upon a public right-of-way
or upon any public lands owned or controlled by the town, or to
go from place to place in the town exposing for sale a..11d selling
goods, wares or merchandise at retail. There shall be two (2)
classes of licenses: three-day licenses and ninety-day licenses.
9702 2-211-96
·I1,
'<
j
t.). ·-
~) ............
§ 97-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-7
§ 97-4. Application for license.
A. Application for a license shall be in writing on forms
provided by the town. It is a violation of this chapter to
provide inaccurate information on a license application
or to conduct the licensed activity in a manner different
from the information provided on the application.
B. No license shall be issued unless the applicant shall
provide to the town a copy of the seller's certificate of
registration with the Maine Sales Tax Assessor; a federal
tax identification number, if required; and a proper scale
registration if goods are to be sold by weight.
§ 97-5. Information in license.
Every license issued under this chapter shall incluqe upon it
the name and address of the person to whom such license has
been issued, the licensee's federal tax number, if required, the
licensee's state sales tax number, the time period covered by the
license, the date of expiration thereof and the amount paid as a
license fee therefor .
§ 97-6. Fee.
Each applicant granted a license hereunder shall pay to the
town a license fee as follows:
A. For a three-day license: five dollars ($5.).
B. For a ninety-day license: fifteen dollars ($15.).
§ 97-7. Revocation and suspension of license.
The Clerk may revoke a license issued under this chapter
upon finding that the licensee has violated any provision of the
chapter. The Clerk shall first give the licensee notice of the
grounds for the proposed revocation and an opportunity to be
heard. In an emergency affecting the public health, safety or
welfare, the Clerk may suspend the license pending hearing.
9703 2-25-86
§ 97-8 l\IIILLINOCKET CODE § 97-10
§ 97-8. Ineligibility for license.
The Clerk may decline to issue a license to an applicant who
was previously licensed under this chapter and during the term
of the most recent license held by that applicant violated any
provision of this chapter, if the Clerk finds that such violation
was intentional and material or if the Clerk finds that the
applicant violated the same provision more than once. An
applicant who is denied a license under this section. is not
permitted to reapply for three (3) days after the denial if the
application was for a three-day license, and ninety (90) days
after the denial if the application was for a ninety-day license.
§ 97-9. Display of license.
A. Every person to whom a license is issued hereunder shall
display such license, so as to be clearly visible to public
view at all times, when exposing for sale or selling any
goods, wares or merchandise at retail upon the public
streets of the town, upon a public right-of-way, or upon
any public lands owned or controlled by the town.
B. Every person to whom a license is issued hereunder,
whenever demanded by a constable or police officer of the
town, shall provide such license to the person demanding
the same. Any person who neglects or refuses to do so
shall be subject to the provisions of§ 97-7 of this chapter,
and such license shall be revoked.
§ 97-10. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever shall expose for sale or sell upon the public
streets of the town or upon a public right-of:.way, or upon
any property owned or controlled by the town or go from
place to place in the town exposing for sale or selling
goods, wares or merchandise in violation of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.), with each day to be considered a separate
9704 2-215-96
§ 97-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-13
violation, to be recovered on complaint for the use of the
town.
B. The town reserves the right to revoke any license
granted and the right to withhold the granting of future
licenses to serious and/or repeat violators of this chapter.
§ 97-11. Retained authority over public property.
This chapter does not limit the authority of the Town Council
to control public property. Whenever it deems it appropriate or
necessary to do so, the Council may designate locations where
the activities licensed under this chapter are allowed,
prohibited or allowed subject to limitations and conditions or
may designate specific locations for particular persons or types
of activities licensed under this chapter. The Council may
exercise this power by order, without amending this chapter,
but shall first give notice and the opportunity to be heard to any
existing licensee who would be affected by the Council's
proposed action.
§ 97-12. Size of operation limited.
Unless otherwise allowed by the Town Council under§ 97-11,
no person licensed to use a public street, right-of-way or public
lands under this chapter shall utilize or occupy more than four
hundred (400) square feet.
§ 97-13. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to commercial
agents or other persons selling, by samples, lists, catalogs or
otherwise, goods, wares or merchandise for future delivery or to
persons selling newspapers or religious literature door to door;
nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to periodic sales
conducted by local nonprofit, educational, cultural, religious,
philanthropic, social or fraternal organizations or periodic
9705 t-211-98
§ 97-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 97-15
sidewalk sales by local tax-paying businesses immediately
adjacent to their premises.
§ 97-14. Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale
to be limited.
Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale upon the
public streets of the town, upon a public right-of-way or upon
any public lands owned or controlled by the town shall be
limited to the following categories:
A. Fresh fruit and vegetables.
B. Seedlings and flowers.
c. Fresh and frozen meats.
D. Fresh eggs and dairy products.
E. Fish, lobsters and other ocean products.
F. Baked and canned goods.
G. Cider, syrup, honey, jams and jellies.
H. Herbs and organic products.
I. Fiddleheads and wild berries.
J. Wreaths and Christmas trees.
K. Home-made furniture and cabinetwork.
L. Home-made arts and crafts.
M. Mobile push carts and lunch wagons serving
nonalcoholic beverages and fried, grilled or fresh
sandwiches and incidentals.
§ 97-15. Licensee responsibilities.
It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to ensure that
the area where he/she establishes his/her sales is ·kept clean
and that no merchandise, trash, litter or other materials are
left in such area at the end of each day. Violations of this
9706 2-25-98
~
(]
c \ .
..0 .
0
(_)
§ 97-15 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-15
provision may result in the license revocation and punishment
under§ 97-7.
9707
('°'\
l.:J
()
r. -~
'<; ... ,J
(.. )-.
§ 104-1.
§ 104-2.
Purpose.
SE\VERS
Chapter 104
SEWERS
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
Definitions and word usage.
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 104-3. Unsanitary disposal methods prohibited.
§ 104-4. Unlawful discharge prohibited.
§ 104-5. Private disposal systems prohibited.
§ 104-6. Connection to public sewer required.
ARTICLE III
Private Se,vage Disposal
§ 104-7. When private facilities allowed.
§ 104-8. Permit required.
§ 104-9. Inspection required.
§ 104-10. Connection to public sewer when available.
§ 104-11. Responsibility of owner for operation an
maintenance.
§ 104-12. Additional requirements.
10-101
MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 104-13. Permit required.
§ 104-14. Classes of permits; application; fee.
§ 104-15. Re~ponsibllities of owner; right to levy sewer use
charge.
§ 104-16. Right of town to make assessments.
§ 104-17. Separate sewers required.
§ 104-18. Use of old sewers restricted.
§ 104-19. Size and slope.
§ 104-20. Location of building sewer.
§ 104-21. Lifting of sewage to discharge to building sewer.
§ 104-22. Excavations; pipe laying and backfill.
§ 104-23. Construction materials.
§ 104-24. Jointing methods and materials.
§ 104-25. Connection of building sewer to public sewer.
§ 104-26. Inspection notice required.
§ 104-27. Excavation protection; restoration of property.
§ 104-28. Community disposal system required for future
developments.
§ 104-29. Construction of community disposal system.
ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 104-30. Disposal of unpolluted waters prohibited.
§ 104-31. Subsoil drains.
§ 104-32. Discharge of unpolluted drainage.
§ 104-33. Prohibited wastes.
10402
t') - ... '·· . .
f; '.). \. '
(,)
§
§
§
§
§
§
§
§
SEWERS
l04-:J4. Grease. oil and Hand intereepton;.
104-35. Notification of discharge change or new discharge.
104-36. Town control over discharges.
104-37. Maintenance of pretreatment facility.
104-!18. Monitoring and control manhole required.
104-39. Measurement, test and analysis standards.
104-40. Applicant agreement required.
104-41. Annual report by industrial user.
§ 104-42. Special agreements.
ARTICLE VI
Sewer System Use Charges
§ 104-43. Basis for rates; surcharges.
§ 104-44. Factors not to be included in rates.
§ 104-45. Rebate of surplus.
§ 104-46. Billing; failure to pay.
§ 104-47. Collection.
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 104-48. :Measurements and analyses of industrial wastes.
§ 104-49. Damage to facilities prohibited.
§ 104-50. Plan of sewers.
§ 104-51. Right of entry for inspections.
§ 104-52. Obser\·ance of company safety rules; indemnifieatio1
by town.
§ 104-53. Easement access required.
10403
§ 104-1 MILLlNOCKET CODE
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 104-54. Federal penalties.
§ 104-55. Written notice of violation.
§ 104-56. Violations and penalties.
§ 104-57. Liability for damage.
§ 104-2
(HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7-21-81 as Ch. 13 of the Millinocket Code. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GE:SERAL REFERENCES
BuHdlns corutructlon - See Ch . .as.
Zoninl' - See Ch. 125.
§ 104-1. Purpose.
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
The purpose of this chapter is to promot.e the general welfare, to
prevent disease and t.o promote health and to provide for the public
safety by regulating the use of public and private sewers and drains,
private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of
building sewers and the discharge of waters and wastes int.o the
public sewer system, including the wast.ewater treatment plant, and
providing penalties for violations thereof, in the Town of Millinocket,
County of Penobscot, State of Maine.
§ 104-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of t.erms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
10404
(' ·~).
,.· ··) '
(·~)
§ 104-2 SEWERS § 104-2
ACT - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (3:J U.S.C.
§ 1251 ct seq.), as amended by the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500 and Pub. L.
9:J-243).
APPLICANT or OWNER - Any person requesting approval
to discharge industrial or domestic wastewaters into facilities
of the town .
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") - The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of the
wastewater under standard laboratory procedure in five (5)
days at twenty degrees Celsius (20° C. ). expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN - That part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil. waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning eight
(8) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER - The extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
DOMESTIC SEWER or SANITARY SEWER - A sewer
which carries domestic wastewater and to which storm- ,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER - The wastewater derived
principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions and
the like. It may or may not contain groundwater. surface
water or stormwater.
EPA - The Environmental Protection Agency of the United
States Government.
EXCESSIVE - Amounts or concentrations of a constituent
of a wastewater which in the judgment of the town will cause
damage to any sewerage facility, which will be harmful to a
wastewater treatment process, which cannot be removed in
the wastewater treatment works of the town t.o the degree
requi1·ed to meet the limiting stream classification standards
of the Millinocket Stream, which can otherwise endanger life.
10.to:;
§ 104-2 MILLJNOCKET CODE § 104-2
limb or public property and/or which can constitute a
nuisance.
FACILITIES - Includes structures and conduits for the
purpose of collecting, treating, neutralizing. stabilizing or
disposal of domestic wastewater and/or industrial waters or
other. wastewaters as are disposed of by means of such
structures and conduits. including treatment and disposal
works. necessary intercepting, outfaJI and outlet sewers and
pumping stations integral to such facilities, with sewers,
equipment, furnishings thereof and other appurtenances
connected therewith.
GARBAGE - The animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of food. It
is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and it.s
natural moisture content.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT - Any pollutant, other
than biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids. pH,
coliform bacteria or additional pollutants identified in the
permit, which the treatment works is not designat.ed to treat
and does not remove to a substantial degree.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER - The wastewater in which
the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing process,
laboratory, trade or business predominate as distinct from
domestic wastewater.
INDUSTRY - An establishment with facilities for mechanical.
testing, trade or manufacturing purposes.
INVERT - The bottom inside of the sewer pipe.
PERSON - Any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation, group, trust or government authority who
discharges wastewater t.o the facilities of the town.
pH - The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen
concentration in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE - Garbage that has
been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers. with no particle greater than one-half(~) inch
10406
,,· ·) (-.. .
\· .. ' "(. ,_ >. ' <
§ 104-2 SEWERS § 104-2
[one and twenty-seven hundredths (1.27) centimeters] in
any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER- A sewer in which all owners of
abutting properties have equal rights and which is
controlled by public authority.
RECEMNG WATERS- Any watercourse, river, pond,
ditch, lake, aquifer or other body of surface or ground
water receiving discharge of wastewaters.
SEWER - A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
SLUG-Any discharge of water or wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of
flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15
minutes more than five times the average twenty-fourhour
concentration or fl.ow during normal operation.
SPILL - The release, accidental or otherwise, of any
material not normally released to the facilities, which, by
virtue of its volume, concentration or physical or
chemical characteristics, creates a hazard to the
facilities, their operation or their personnel. Such
characteristics shall include but are not limited to
volatile, explosive, toxic or otherwise unacceptable
materials.
STATE PLUMBING CODE - The existing State of
Maine Plumbing Code.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER - A pipe or conduit
for conveying rainwater, groundwater, subsurface water,
condensate, cooling water or other similar discharge, but
excludes wastewater and polluted industrial wastes.
SUPERINTENDENT - The licensed wastewater plant
operator or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
[Amended 7-22-1999 by Ord. No. 3-99)
SUSPENDED SOLIDS - Solids that either float on the
surface of or are in suspension in water, wastewater or
other liquids and which are removed by laboratory
10407 4-1-2000
§ 104-2 l\HLLINOCKET CODE § 104-4
filtering and are referred to as nonfilterable residue in
the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOWN - The Town of Millinocket.
WASTES - Substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form
that can be carried in water.
WASTEWATER- The spent water of a community,
which may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and/or storm.water that may
be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT - Any
arrangement of devices and structures used for treating
wastewater.
WASTEWATER WORKS - All structures, equipment
and processes for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of wastewater.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 104-3. Unsanitary disposal methods prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit
to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the Town of Millinocket or in any area under
the jurisdiction of said town any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 104-4. Unlawful discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the Town of Millinocket or in any area under the jurisdiction of
10408 4-1-2000
( ; .··)
\ .
(_)
(. _,. .o. ;. '· . :·. ... .. . , .
~·)
{ .. ~· :.
. . ...
~ .:
§ 104-4 SEWERS § 104-4
said town any sanitary wastewater, industrial wastes or other
polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
chapter. It is not intended by this section to prohibit the
discharge of any sanitary wastewater into an existing sewer
which discharges its sanitary wastewater into any natural
outlet within the Town of Millinocket if such discharge is
allowed by the State of Maine regulatory agencies.
(Cont'd on page 10409)
10408.1 4-1-2000
§ 104-5 SEWERS § 104-8
§ 104-5. Private disposal systems 1>rohihited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful t.o construct or
maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
() § 104-6. Connection to public sewer required.
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose for which toilet
facilities are required, situated within the town and abutting on any
street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the town, are hereby
required at their expense to install toilet facilities therein conforming
to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sew~r in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days after the date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within two
hundred (200) feet of the property line and the street sewers can be
'·.. ..'" J'-. entered by gravity flow. Otherwise, the owner must connect any facility located within three hundred (300) feet of the sewer.
0
ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 104-7. When private facilities allowed.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions
of Article II. § 104-6, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private wastewat.er disposal system complying with the provisions of
this Article and the State Plumbing Code· and with the regulations
and recommendations of the Maine Department of Human Services,
Bureau of Health.
§ 104-8. Permit required.
Before commencement of construction of a private ·wastewater
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed
by the Supel'intendent. The application for such permit shall be made
10409
§ 104-8 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-12
on a form furnished by the town, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed
necessary by the Superintendent.
§ 104-9. Inspection required.
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction, and in any event the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by
the Superintendent.
§ 104-10. Connection to public sewer when available.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to
property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided
in Art. II, § 104-6, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools
and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned
and filled with suitable material.
§ 104-11. Responsibility of owner for operation and
maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to
the town.
§ 104-12. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the Health Officer of the Town of :\1illinocket.
10410
()
·-'
\ l ..... _,,/
(.. J; ~
()
§ 104-13 SEWERS § 104-15
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 104-13. Permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
After the applicant has complied with the requirements set forth
herein, the permit shall be issued to the applicant by the
Superintendent.
§ 104-14. Classes of permits; application; fee.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: one for
residential and commercial service and one for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the town.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee
established by the Council shall be paid to the Town Treasurer at the
time the application is filed. Each person will be responsible, at his
own expense, to collect and discharge his wastewater from his
property into the facilities provided by the town, all in an acceptable
manner and with prior approval of the town.
§ 104·15. Responsibilities of owner; right to levy sewer use
charge.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the town for any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. All
persons agree to abide by all rules and regulations . set forth in this
chapter. The town retains the right to levy a sewer use charge to
provide the re\·enue for operation and administration of the facilities.
10411
§ 104-16 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-20
§ 104-16. Right of. town to make asses..~ments.
The town retains the right to make assessments for all sewers and
storm drains constructed or reconstructed by the town, the expenses
of which have not already been assessed and collected. and for all
sewers and storm drains which may be constructed. Industries served
by town sewer and storm drain facilities may be assessed for incurred
expenses in proportion to their use of said facilities. The town
expressly adopts the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. §§ 4401 and 4451
through 4455.
§ 104-17. Separate sewers required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear- building and the whole considered as one (1)
building sewer.
§ 104-18. Use of old sewers restricted.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and t.est by the Superinten~
dent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 104-19. Size and s"lope.
The size and sfope of the building sewer shall be subject to the
approval of the Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be
less than four (4) inches. The slope of a four-inch pipe shall not be less
than one-fourth(~) inch per foot. The slope of a six-inch pipe shall not
be less than one-eighth (Ys) inch per foot.
§ 104-20. Location of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the sanitary sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building
sanitary sewer shall. be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any
10412
()
,,..) I. . . ;
( """'.
.. ·-rl'
()
SEWERS § 104-2a
bearing wall except for purposes of crossing a bearing wall. The depth
shall be sufficient to afford protection from frosl The sanitary sewer
shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as
possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe fittings or manholes.
§ 104-21. Lifting of sewage to discharge to building sewer.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to
the building sewer.
§ 104-22. Excavations; pipe laying and backfill.
All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trenchwork unless otherwise approved by the
Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM Specification c12-72, except that no backfill
shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
§ 104-23. Construction materials.
The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe, vitrified clay sewer
pipe or other suitable material approved by the Superintendent. The
quality and weight of materials should conform to the specifications of
the State Plumbing Code. All joints shall be tight and waterproof.
Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten (10) feet of
the water service pipe shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with
leaded joints or other approved materials. Cast-iron pipe with leaded
joints or other approved materials may be required by the
Superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by
tree roots. If installed in fill or unstable ground, the building sewer
shall be of cast-iron soil pipe. except that nonmetallic material may be
accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by
the Superintendent.
Hl . .na
§ 104-24 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-25
§ 104·24. Jointing methods and materials.
A. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Cast-iron pipe joint.s shall be firmly packed with
oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead, Federal
Specification QQC-40, not less than one (1) inch deep. Lead
shall be run in one (1) pouring and caulked tight. No paint,
varnish or· other coatings shall be permitted on the jointing
material until after the joint has been tested and approved.
B. All joints in vitrified clay pipe or between such pipe and
metals shall. be made with approved hot-poured jointing
material as specified below.
C. Material for hot-poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to
destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to a
temperature of one hundred sixty degrees Fahrenheit (160° F.)
nor be soluable in any of the wastes carried by the drainage
system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp
or similar approved material.
D. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by
approval of the Superintendent.
§ 104-25. Connection of building sewer to public sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be
made at the Y-branch if such branch is available at a suitable location.
When connecting a four-inch-diameter building sewer to any public
sewer eight (8) inches in diameter or less, a Y-branch must be
installed. When connecting a six-inch-diameter building sewer into
any public sewer twelve (12) inches in diameter or less, a Y-branch
must be installed. Such Y-branches shall be installed at the owner's
expense and at the location specified by the Superintendent. Where
the public sewer is greater than the maximum diameter for
installation of a Y-branch as specified above and no properly located
Y-branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the upper quadrant
of the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the
downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five degrees (45°). A
properly sized Y-saddle is to be inserted in the hole so as not to extend
past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building
sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same elevation as or at
10414
()
()
··~ '<)
0
§ 104-25 SEWERS § 104-29
a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat
joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight by
encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the
connection only when approved by the Superintendent.
§ 104-26. Inspection notice required.
A. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer.
B. No public sewer shall be disturbed or broken into or
connection made except under the supervision of the
Superintendent.
C. The Superintendent shall be available to supervise and inspect
the connection within forty-eight (48) hours of notification of
readiness.
§ 104-27. Excavation protection; restoration of property.
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as t.o protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks. parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be rest.ored in a manner
satisfactory to the town.
§ 104-28. Community disposal system required for future
developments.
Any subdivision or development of five (5) or more lots immediately
or in the distant future and having no access t.o a public sewer shall
provide for a community wastewater disposal system.
§ 104-29. Construction of community disposal system.
Any wastewater disposal system not connected to a public or townowned
wastewater disposal system serving more than one (1)
independent connection shall be considered a community wastewater
10415
§ 104-29 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-32
disposal system and shall be constructed of such materials and in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Superintendent. If such a system
is intended t.o become or t.o be connected to a public or town sewer
system. it shall be constructed according to the requirements of and
under the supervision of the Superintendenl
ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 104-30. Disposal of unpolluted waters prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater. surface water, groundwater. roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.
§ 104-31. Subsoil drains.
Where subsoil drains are placed under the cellar floor or used to
encircle the outer walls of a building, the same shall be made of openjointed
drain tile or·earthenware pipe not less than four (4) inches in
diameter and shall be properly trapped and protected against back
pressure by an automatic back-pressure valve accessibly located
before entering the house sewer or drain. Such drains may be
discharged only to a storm drain and only with written approval of
the Superintendent.
§ 104-32. Discharge of unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and· all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved in writing by the Superintendent. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon
written approval of the Superintendent. to a sto1·m sewer or natural
outlet.
10416 (
(" E"'-~_:-.-_-- -1~ ..
..... .. . ~
(~>' .. !..)
(·~ y
§ 104-33 SE\VERS * 104-33
§ 104-33. Prohibited wastes.
A. No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be
discharged into any sewer under the control of the Town
the following-described substances, materials, waters or
wastes if, in the opinion of the Superintendent, such
substances, materials, waters or wastes are in excessive
amounts of concentrations.
B. Persons who desire to discharge industrial wastewaters
into facilities of the Town shall make their formal
application to the Town. In forming an opinion as to the
limitations on acceptability of any wastes, the Town will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant~ degree of treatability of
wastes in the wastewater treatment plant, the
wastewater treatment plant's discharge permit and
other pertinent factors.
C. Any person discharging industrial wastewaters directly
or indirectly into facilities of the Town that do not
comply with this chapter may be subject to action by the
Town, which action shall include but not be limited to
the withdrawal of permission to discharge wastewaters
into facilities of the Town.
D. Any spill, as defined in Article I, § 104-2, shall be
reported immediately to the Superintendent.
E. Any damages experienced by the Town as the result of a
spill are considered a violation of this chapter, and costs
for repair, replacement or other associated costs are
recoverable under Article VIII, § 104-57, of this chapter.
F . Wastewaters and wastes considered to contain excessive
constituents or characteristics as determined by the
Town and therefore prohibited include:
10417 03-30-2005
§ 104-33 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-33
( 1) Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous
liquids, gases or solids in excessive quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes. Said toxic
pollutants are defined in standards issued from time
to time under Section 307 a of the Act.
(2) Any incompatible pollutant contributed by an
I
industry in an amount or concentration in excess of
1
:·.1
that allowed under standards or guidelines issued I
from time to time pursuant to Sections 304, 306
and/or 307 of the Act.
(3) Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a
temperature higher than 150 F.
(4) Any wastewaters containing caustic alkalinity,
calculated as CaC03 (calcium carbonate), in excess
of 75 parts per million by weight or in volumes
which may be excessive.
(5) Any wastewaters having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to
sewers, structures, equipment, process or personnel
at the wastewater works.
(6) Any wastewaters containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 50
milligrams per liter or containing substances which
may solidify, or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F. [Amended 1·23·2003 by
Ord. No. 1·2003)
(7) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
.~
(;
•
(8) Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or ~
of such size as to be capable of causing obstruction
to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater works, such as
but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch
10418 03-30-2003
( ''-.J; _l )
I ., ·.·
-·a t " ~ ..
··-
§ 104-33 SE\VERS § 104-33
manure, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
( 9) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded,
as defined in § 104-2.
<Cont'd on page 10419)
10418.1 03-30-2006
c~.-· · ·~.J
()
( •.•.' :'.I')
~ •' ,.
0
§ 104-33 SEWERS
(10) Any wastewaters containing excessive amount.~ of iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, mercury, mineral acid and
5imilar objectionable or toxic substances.
(11) Any wastewaters containing phenols or other taste- or
odor-producing substances in excessive amounts.
(12) Any radioactive wastes or isot.opes in excessive amounts
or such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established in applicable state or federal regulations or by
the town.
(13) Any obnoxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.
(14) Any wastewaters containing:
(a) An average concentration of suspended solids in
excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter
(mg/l) or excessive dissolved solids, such as but not
limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
(b) Materials which cause excessive discoloration, such
as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
An average concentration of BOD in excess of two
hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter (mg/l) or
material which causes unusual chemical oxygen
demand or chlorine requirements.
Materials in such concentration as to constitute
slugs, as defined herein.
Materials which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed. or are amenable to treatment only to such
a limited degree that the wastewater treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies ha\1ng jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving wateri::..
Septic tank solids that are not diluted sufficiently to
assure that all particles will be carried freely under
all flow conditiun:' in facilities of the town.
Jll-ll9
§ 104-:l4 MILLINOCKf~~T CODE § 104-35
§ 104-!14. Grease, oil .and sand intercepton4.
A. Grease, oi] and sand interceptors sha11 be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other
harmful ingreciients, except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be so located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction. watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers which, when bolt.ed in place, shall be gastight and
watertight.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
§ 104-35. Notification of discharge change or new discharge.
The Superintendent must be notified forty-five (45) days in advance
by any person or persons involved in:
A. Proposed substantial change in volume or character of
pollutants over that being discharged into the treatment works
at the time of issuance of his permit.
B. Proposed new discharge into the treatment works of pollutants
from any source which would be a new source as defined in
Section 306 of the Act if such source were discharging
pollutants.
C. Proposed new discharge into the treatment works of pollutants
from any source which would be subject to Section 301 of the
Act if it were discharging such pollutants.
10420
()
()
()
()
§ 104-36 SEWERS § 104-38
§ 104-36. Town control over discharges.
A. If any wastewaters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to
be discharged to the public sewers containing excessive
substances or possessing excessive characteristics, the town
may:
( 1) Reject the wastewaters or the wastes;
(2) Require that pretreatment of wastewaters or wastes be
provided to modify them to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers; and/or
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge
of the wastewaters or the wastes; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes.
B. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants
and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Superintendent and subject ·to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, laws and the municipal discharge
permit. Further, such pretreatment installations must
be consistent with the requirements of any state pretreatment
permit issued to the industry.
§ 104-37. Maintenance of pretreatment facility.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 104-38. Monitoring and control manhole required.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent and/or other
duly authorized representative of the town may reasonably require,
including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent. Such records shall be made available upon request by
10.121
§ 104-:18 MILLINOCKET coog § 104-40
the Superintendent to other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters. When required by the Superint.endent,
the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation. sampling and measurement
and monitoring of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 104-39. Measurement, test and analysis standards.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in §§ 104-33 and 104-
35 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, 1971 (13th
Edition), and shalr be determined at the control manhole provided for
in§ 104-38 or upon1suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 104-40. Applicant agreement required.
All applications to discharge any industrial wastewater, drainage,
substances or wastes directly into any sewer under the control of the
town or tributary thereto shall be accompanied by an agreement
stating that the applicant agrees to abide by all ordinances and rules
and regulations of the town; that the applicant will provide such works
for the preliminary treatment of the wastewater, drainage. substances
or wastes as may be required by the town; and that the applicant will
permit duly authorized representatives of the town to enter the
premises of the industry to· sample and measure wastewaters. as
needed to check characteristics of the wastewaters, when so directed
by the town. Applications are to be accompanied by a plan showing
essential characteristics of all wastewater outlets. analyses of existing
wastewater and statements as to existing and expected average and
10422
( · .~.· ~ ·~7
1<)· \. - . .
( -:-,
' -. . ,''
§ 104-40 SEWERS § 104-43
maximum wastewater flows and must be submitt<..'<l to and approved
by the town prior to initiating discharge into facilities of the town.
Required wastewater analyses are listed in § 104-48.
§ 104-41. Annual report by industrial user.
Each industrial user may be required to submit an annual report to
the town on the first of July each year or such other time as
designated by the town, containing information as to the minimum,
average and peak flows of industrial wastewater discharged during
the previous year and at time or times designated by the town,
accompanied by designated analyses of wastewater samplings taken
in an acceptable _manner at approved times during the flowmeasuring
periods.
§ 104-42. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town
and "any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided that
such agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing
federal laws and are compatible _with any user charge and industrial
cost recovery system in effect.
ARTICLE VI
Sewer System Use Charg~s
§ 104-43. Basis for rates; surcharges.
Each user connected to the wastewater system shall pay a sewer
user charge (sewer rental charge). From time to time the Council,
upon recommendation of the Town Manager, shall establish by resolve
a schedule of rates for the sewerage system use charges, together with
any surcharges which may be applicable. The normal sewer user
charges shall be based on water use wherever possible, but may
include a minimum rate. (f n\rol'ds of metered use are not available or
do not properly reflect the quantity of waste discharged, the sewer
§ 104-43 MILLINOCKET CODE § 104-46
user charge shall be based upon estimated water use or an actual
measurement of the volume of waste discharged into the sewerage
system. Surcharges may be levied to users whose waste characteristics
are above normal strength, the formula or other method for levying
such surcharges to be established by resolve of the Council in the same
manner as sewer user charges. In addition, the Council, by resolve, is
also authorized to establish an interest charge for all sewer user
charges or surcharges which have not been paid within thirty (30)
days of the date of billing, said interest rate to be set from time to time
by resolution of the Council.
§ 104-44. Factors not to be included in rates.
The sewer user charge shall be calculated so that the total of such
charges will not be greater than the actual cost to the town of the
administration, debt service, operation and maintenance, including
replacement, of the wastewater collection system and the wastewater
treatment plant. No portion of the rate shall be calculated to include,
nor shall funds raised through the sewer use charge be used to
separate the wastewater system of the town from the stormwater
system, nor to maintain; repair or replace the storm drain system of
the town.
§ 104-45. Rebate of' surplus.
In the event that the revenues received from the sewer user charge
exceed the actual cost to the town of the operation and maintenance,
including the replacement, of the wastewater collection system and
wastewater treatment plant. then any such surplus shall be rebated to
the user in such manner as the Council, upon recommendation of the
Town Manager, shall require by resolve. The amount of such surplus
is to be determined by the Town Manager and is not to includt!, under
any circumstances, any moneys included in the budget as a rate
stabilization amount.
§ 104-46. Billing; failure to pay.
Sewerage system use charges shall be billed periodically as
determined by the Council by resolve, upon the recommendation of
the Town Manager. Where sewerage sysem rates, fees or use charges
10424
(.. _)• :
()
<~)
'~
C.)
()
§ 104-4() SEWERS ~ 104-48
provided for herein arc not paid within ninety (90) days. these rates.
fees or charges shall be collected in accordance with 30 M.R.S.A.
§ 4355.
§ 104-47. Collection.
The sewerage system use charges herein established shall be
collected from the owners, occupants and users of premises within the
town from and after the effective date of this Article. The ultimate
responsibility for payment of such charges is upon the owner of such
premises.
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 104-48. Measurements and analyses of industrial wastes.
Measurements and analyses of industrial wastes are to include the
following list where applicable. The analyses are to be conducted in
accordance with the methods prescribed in the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published by the American Public Health Association, 1971 (13th
Edition). If any item is not applicable, it shall be so stated on the
report of the measurements and the reason for deletion stated.
A. Physical parameters.
(1) Flow.
(2} pH.
(3) Temperature.
(4) Color.
(5) Specific conductance.
B. Chemical and biological parameters.
(1) Total solids.
(2) Total volatile solids.
(3) Total suspended 8olids.
1042!)
§ 104-48 MILLINOCKl'~T CODE
(4) Total dissolv<.l(f solid~.
(5) Acidity.
(6) Alkalinity.
(7) Five-day BOD.
(8) COD.
(9) Oil and grease.
(10) Chloride.
(11) Sulfate.
(12) Sulfide.
( 13) Phenols.
(14) NH3 (as N).
(15) N03 (as N).
(16) N02 (as N).
(17) Kjeldahl organic nitrogen (as N).
(18) Orthophosphorus (as P).
(19) Total phosphorus (as P).
(20) Cr. Cu, Fe. Cd, Pb, Mn, Zn, F, As, Hg.
§ 104-49. Damage to facilities prohibited.
§ 104-50
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
4estroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance
or equipment which is a part of the municipal wastewater works.
§ 104-50. Plan of sewers.
The Superintendent shall make and/or maintain accurate plans for
all sanitary sewers. showing their location, depth and the materials of
which they are made and their size, shape, thickness, in\·ert
elevations, slope and manner of construction; also all existing
connections with said sewers and all future connections as they are
made.
10426
f_·)
(.:::.0;;
(. '")
. ../
()
()
SEWERS § 104-53
§ 104-51. Right of entry for inspections.
The Superintendent and his/her authorized agents for the town
bearing proper credentials and identification 8hall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation.
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The Superintendent or his/her representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes. including metallurgical.
chemical. oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond
that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
t.o the sewers or waterways or facilities for treatment.
§ 104-52. Observance of company safety rules; indemnification
by town.
While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in § 104-51 above. the Superintendent and/ or dμly
authorized employees of the town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the town
employees. The town shall indemnify the employees for liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Article V.
§ 104-38.
§ 104-53. Easement access required.
The Superintendent and/or other duly authorized employees of the
town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement to the
private property involved.
10427
§ 104-54 MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 104-54. Federal penalties.
§ 104-57
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other
document filed or required to be maintained under the federal Public
Law 92-500 Section 309 (c)(2). as amended. and this chapter or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
ten thousand dollars ($10.000.) or by imprisonment for not more than
six (6) months, or" both, as expressly authorized by that federal law.
§ 104-55. Written notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter,
except § 104-49. shall be served by the town with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall. within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.
§ 104-56. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
proYided for in § 104-55 shall be guilty of a chil violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.) for each violation. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Such fines shall be
recoverable, on complaint. for the use of the town.
§ 104-57. Liability for damage.
Any person violating any of the proVIstons of this chapter shall
become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the tO\vn by reason of such violation. The expense. loss or damage shall
be taken to be the extent determined by a competent registered
professional engineer particularly skilled in the operation and
maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment works.
10428
.. ~) ~- . t •
~
/~
l' \ ! ., I
~ .. ./
(:~ ~ :j
§ 108-1
§ 108-1.
§ 108-2.
§ 108-3.
§ 108-4.
STREETS AND SIDEvVALKS
Chapter 108
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I
Snow Removal
Deposit of snow after plowing.
§ 108-2
Storage of snow removed from driveways.
Fire hydrants and fire call boxes.
Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted \vhere applicable.]
ARTICLE I
Snow Removal
[Adopted 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. 3-83]
§ 108-1. Deposit of snow after plowing.
In all cases after a street area has been plowed or cleared of
snow. no snow shall be placed therein beyond the windrowed
accumulation along the curbline and in those areas where snow
is removed by the Town; no snow shall be deposited within the
street or sidewalk area after completion of removal operations
by the Town.
§ 108-2. Storage of snow removed from driveways.
Snow removed from driveways shall be stored within the
boundaries of the premises from which it is removed and shall
not be· plowed into or deposited in the area reserved for street or
10801 03-30-2005
§ 108-2 :MILLINOCKET CODE ~ 108-4
sidewalk purposes. Where there is no room on the premises for
such storage, snow plowed or removed therefrom may be spread
in the street area along the curb frontage of the premises from
which it is plowed or removed, provided that such storage is
done before the Town has plowed or cleared the street. Such
snow must be spread along the curb outside of the sidewalk
area in such a manner as not to impede traffic and must not be
pushed or moved into or across the street to the opposite curb. ~
~ 108-3. Fire hydrants and fire call boxes. [Added
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003]
Snow removed from the property of individuals or businesses
shall not be removed or plowed into, onto, or over a fire hydrant
located on their property or the property of another, including
Town-owned property, so as to impede its use in emergency
situations. Snow removed from the property of individuals or
businesses shall not be removed or plowed in such a way as to
cover, partially cover, or otherwise interfere with the access to
or use of fire call boxes. For the purposes of this section, the
person plowing or otherwise removing the snow in such a way
as to violate this section, if determinable, or the owner of the
property from where such snow was plow.ed or removed shall be
responsible and may be summonsed. This section shall not
apply to the plowing or removal of snow from public ways by
authorized personnel or contracted services of the Millinocket
Public Works Department.
§ 108-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11~2003
by Ord. No. 4-2003]
Offenses under this article will be punishable by it fine of not i.J·
less than $50 nor more than $100, recoverable on complaint for
the use of the Town.
10802 03 - 30 - 20015
(~-')
·~_,,,/
·)·.· .. · ..
I ., ,
\ ~·' .
•-....
(-)
§ 110-1.
§ 110-2.
§ 110-3.
§ 110-4.
§ 110-5.
§ 110-6.
§ 110-7.
§ 110-8.
§ 110-9.
STREET AND ROAD ADDRESSING
Chapter 110
STREET AND ROAD ADDRESSING
ARTICLE I
Administration and Design Guidelines
Title.
Purpose.
Legislative authority.
Naming authority.
Administration.
Naming system.
Numbering system.
Display of numbers.
Violations and penalties.
[ffiSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board - See Ch. 23.
Streets and sidewalks - See Ch. 108.
Vehicles and traffic - See Ch. 115.
Zoning - See Ch. 125.
11001 4-1-2000
§ 110-1 MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE I
Administration and Design Guidelines
[Adopted 12-16-1999 by Ord. No. 9-99]
§ 110-1. Title.
§ 110-4
This article shall be known as the "Addressing Ordinance."
§ 110-2. Purpose ..
The purpose of this article is to enhance the easy and rapid
location of structures by law enforcement, fire, rescue and
emergency medical services personnel in the Town of
Millinocket.
§ 110-3. Legislative authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to and consistent with
Municipal Home Rule powers as provided for in Article VIII,
Part 2, Section 1, of the Constitution of the State of Maine and
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 110-4 .. Naming authority.
A. The Millinocket Town Council shall be responsible for
naming all streets and roads in the Town of Millinocket.
B. The Council may establish any necessary procedures it
deems appropriate to accomplish this work.
C. The Council may name an Addressing Committee to
develop a uniform naming of streets and roads as well as
an address numbering system that is consistent with
state guidelines.
D. Upon completion of the Committee's work (should the
Council establish such a committee), the Committee
shall present its findings and recommendations to the
Council for consideration and implementation.
11002 4-1-2000
(·:)··.:.~·. ,• ;.
~. - . ' -·
- ~·
'(. _.,,,,,,)
(·"~·J.......· .. ~ ..
' ..
§ 110-4 STREET AND ROAD ADDRESSING § 110-6
E. Implementation shall be by ordinance titled "Article II,
Street and Road Names Ordinance" which shall be
incorporated into this Chapter 110 of the Millinocket
Code.
§ 110-5. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the Tax Assessor who is
authorized to and shall assign road and street numbers to all
properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance
with the criteria in §§ 110-6 and 110-7 below after the initial
assigning of names and numbers by the Town Council in
accordance with § 110-4 above. The Tax Assessor shall also be
known as the town's "Addressing Officer" and will be
responsible for and authorized to provide all required
addressing and database information to the state agency
responsible for implementation of enhanced 911 service. (S)He
shall also work with the Town Council in the naming of new
streets or roads constructed after its initial naming is
completed per this article. The Tax Assessor shall be
responsible for maintaining the following official records of this
article:
A. Municipal map(s) for official use showing road/street
names and numbers.
B. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified
by current tax records, by last name, showing the
assigned numbers.
C. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners
listed in order of their assigned numbers.
§ 110-6. Naming system.
All roads that serve two or more structures shall be named
regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. A
"road" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private
way or similar paved, gravel or dirt thoroughfare. A road name
11003 4-1-2000
§ 110-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 110-7
assigned by the town shall not constitute or imply acceptance of
the road as a public way.
A. The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
(1) No two roads shall be given the same name (ex.,
Pine Road and Pine Lane).
(2) No two roads shall have similar-sounding names
(ex., Beech Lane and Peach Lane).
(3) Each road shall have the same name throughout its
entire length.
B. The Planning Board shall consider new subdivisions and
developments. As part of that process, the Board shall
not consider an application complete until all roads are
given names and all lots are assigned numbers
consistent with this article.
§ 110-7. Numbering system.
The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
A. Numbers shall be assigned every 50 feet along both sides
of the road, with even numbers appearing on the left side
of the road and odd numbers appearing on the right side
of the road, as the numbers ascend. A twenty-five-foot
interval may be applied in more densely structured
areas, if deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Committee.
B. All number origins shall begin from the entrance of
Great Northern Paper, Inc., at the end of Katahdin
Avenue. For dead-end roads, numbering shall originate
at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at
the dead end.
C. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of
the numbered interval falling clo~est to the front door or
the driveway of said structure if the front door cannot be
seen from the main road.
11004 4-1-2000
§ 110-7 STREET AND ROAD ADDRESSING § 110-8
D. Every structure with more than one principle use or
occupancy shall have a separate number for each use or
occupancy (i.e., duplexes will have two separate
numbers, apartments will have one road number with an
apartment number such as 235 Maple Road, Apt. 2).
( ) § 110-8. Display of numbers.
.... .. ~ (0
All owners of structures shall, on or before the effective date
of adoption of Article II of this chapter, display and maintain in
conspicuous place on said structure, the assigned number(s) in
the following manner:
A. Number on the structure or residence. Where the
residence or structure is under 50 feet from the edge of
the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be
displayed on the front of the residence in the vicinity of
the front door or entry.
B. Number at the street line. Where the residence or
structure is over 50 feet from the edge of the road rightof-
way, the assigned number shall be displayed on a
post, fence, wall, mailbox or some other structure on the
property line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the
residence or structure.
C. Size and color of number. Numbers shall be displayed in
a color and size approved for use by the Town Council
and shall be located as to be visible from the road and be
at least four inches in height.
D. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned
number shall remove any different numbers which might
be mistaken for, or confused with, the number in
conformance with this article.
E. Interior location. All residents and other occupants are
requested to post the assigned number and road name
adjacent to their telephone for emergency reference.
11005 4-1-2000
MILLINOCKET CODE § 110-9
§ 110M9. Violations and penalties.
Property owners who fail to comply with this article shall be
subject to a penalty of $25 for the first offense, $50 for a second
offense and $100 for any subsequent offenses. Offenses may be
assessed on a daily basis.
11006 4 - 1-2000
(7' ~~ .. J
§ 115-1.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 115
VEIDCLES AND TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I
Definitions
Terms defined.
ARTICLE II
Public Parking Lots
§ 115-2. Time limit parking established and indicated.
§ 115-3. Manner of parking.
§ 115-4. Snow removal.
c·-.,) § 115-5. Exiting.
' . ...../
§ 115-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 115-7.
§ 115-8.
ARTICLE III
Tnick Exclusions
Loaded pulp trucks.
Heavy truck traffic.
ARTICLE HT
Traffic Regulations
§ 115-9. Granite Street School driveway; recreation
areas.
§ 115-10. U-turns prohibited.
§ 115-11. Thoroughways.
11501 4-1-2000
MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 115-12. One-way streets; loading zones.
ARTICLEV
Parking
§ 115-13. General parking restrictions.
§ 115-14. Granite Street School driveway.
§ 115-15. Counseling center on Katahdin Avenue.
§ 115-16. No parking anytime.
§ 115-17. Time limit parking.
§ 115-18. No parking certain hours.
§ 115.19. Parking restricted certain months.
ARTICLE VI
Handicapped Parking
§ 115-20. Parking stalls designated.
§ 115-21. Special registration plate required.
§ 115-22. Violations; extended parking allowed.
§ 115-23. Agreements for policing.
ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 115-24. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE VIII
Jacob Engine Brakes
§ 115-25. Use prohibited.
11502 4-1-2000
f.. --· ..'.."...·.) :
' .
·~
{. . :3...' · / ):
' 'I~ '
c··~
VEHICLES AL~D TRAFFIC
[ffiSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 7~21~1981 as Ch. 14 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
(Cont'd on page 11503)
11502.1 4-1-2000
( .
(')·· \ .
- ..
()
c): '.(·
§ 115-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 115-1
§ 115-1. Te1·ms defined.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in this Article:
DRIVER - Includes the rider of a horse, the rider of wheels
and bicycles and the operator of motor vehicles.
PEDESTRIAN - Any person afoot.
PERSON - Every natural individual, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY - Every way or place in
private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner
and those having express or implied permission from the
owner, but not by other persons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY - The privilege of the immediate use of the
roadway.
ROADWAY - That portion of a street or highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK - That portion of a street between the curblines
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
STOP - When required, means complete cessation of
movement.
STREET or HIGH\VAY The entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purpose of
vehicular travel.
VEHICLE - Includes equestrian. horses hitched to vehicles.
led horses. motor vehicles of all kinds. bicycles, minibikes.
motorc,\'ele~. go-carts. snowmobiles and everything on wheels
and runners. except bab,\· l~arriage~ and tricycles.
115oa 2 - 25 - 89
§ llS.2 MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLE II
Public Parking Lots
§ 115-2
§ 115-2. Time limit parking established and indicated.
A. 'l\vo-hour limit. No vehicle shall be parked in any publicly
owned parking lot in the Town of Millinocket for a period
longer than two (2) hours between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 7:00 a.m., except on permit granted by the Police
Department. The Chief of Police and/or Town Manager shall
develop a permit application, which shall include regulations
for issuance of the permits, renewal of the permits and any
restrictions for the permit or use of the parking lots. The
general format of the permit application shall be submitted to
the Town Council for its advice and endorsement. This
regulation shall not apply to physicians or surgeons on
emergency or professional calls. [Amended 2-5-88 by Ord.
No. 1~88]
B. Four-hour limit. No vehicle shall be parked in such parking lot
at ariy other times for a period longer than four (4) hours
except as provided for in Subsection C of this section.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection B shall not apply on
public holidays and Sundays, nor on Thursday prior to 9:00
a.m. and after 9:00 p.m. nor on any other day prior to 9:00 a.m.
and after 6:00 p.m.
D. Time designations. The Town Council may divide public
parking lots into two (2) or more areas and designate the
length of time a vehicle may be parked in each area, except
that time designations of less than one (1) hour or more than
four (4) hours shall not be made for any areas so divided.
E. Time limits marked. The Town Council shall cause all areas
within the public parking lot to be clearly marked so as t.o
indicate the length of time a vehicle may be parked therein,
and if an area within such parking lot is not clearly marked,
it shall be presumed that vehicles may be parked therein for a
period not exceeding four (4) hours.
11504 2 . 25. 89
C)
()
<.... )
§ 115-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-3
§ 115-3. Manner of parking.
A. Any vehicle parking or standing in any visibb• marked space
shall be stationed within the lines marked and may occupy
such space during the parking time providt•d by this Article,
and where spaces are visibly marked. no person having charge
of a vehicle shall place same in any space not visibly marked.
(Cont'd on page 11505)
11504.1 2 - 25 . 89

()
(_)
()
§ 115-~ VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-U
B. No vehicle having an overall length of twenty (:!0) feet or more
shall stop, stand or park diagonally on the parking lot.
§ 115-4. Snow removal.
No vehicle shall be parked at any time in the public parking lot so
as to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from said parking
lot by the town plowing or loading and hauling. The Chief of Police
may cause any vehicle so parked in the public parking lot as to
interfere with or hinder the removal of snow by the town to be
removed from the parking lot and placed in a suitable parking space
out of the town, being liable for any damage that may be caused by
such removal. For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow, the
Chief of Police may cause to be placed properly marked signs in the
parking lot as he shall from time to time deem necessary. It shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter upon or stop or park
within the spaces indicated by such signs.
§ 115-5. Exiting.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a public lot shall stop such
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk. yielding the
right-of·way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision,
and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on said roadway.
§ 115-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person 'iolating any of the provisions of this Article shall
pay a penalty of ten dollars ($10.) for each of the first three (3)
such violations in any one (1) calendar year and for all
subsequent violations, in accordance with Subsection B.
Payments for all violations hereunder shall be made at the
office of the Town Manager. The violator shall be given a
receipt for every such payment. and a copy of such receipt
shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Town of Millinocket.
If. ho\,·eyer. such payment is not made at the office of the
Town :\lanager within forty-eight (48) hours afte1· the notice of
such 'iolation is served. by traffic ticket or otherwise. this
§ 115-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115.S
alternative method is not available or applicable and the
penalty provided by this Article shaJI be imposed.
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall
be guilty of a civil violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.), recoverable on complaint for the use of
the t.own. The provisions of Subsections A and B of this section
shall not be construed as being inconsistent one with another.
ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 115-7. Loaded pulp trucks.
A. Definition. As used in this Article, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
LOADED PULP TRUCK - A commercial vehicle with open
truck bed and three (3) or more axles, hauling four-foot pulp
or tree length logs.
B. Use of certain streets prohibited. Loaded pulp trucks shall not
be allowed to use:
( 1) Penobscot Avenue from Central Street to Birch Street.
(2) Somerset Street, Knox Street, Lincoln Street and Oxford
Street from Poplar Street to Spruce Street and from
Poplar Street to Elm Street.
§ 115-8. Heavy truck traffic. [Added 6-14-83 by Ord. No. 6-83]
A. Heavy truck traffic is prohibited on:
(1) Elm Street from April 1 t.o Oct.ober 31.
(2) Elm Street after exiting the Somerset Street gate.
B. The int;ent of this section is t.o restrict heavy truck use of Elm
Street during the summer months and t.o prohibit heavy
trucks exiting from the Somerset Street gate from using Elm
Street at any time.
11506
r· · ~
f . J . /
(_)
C)
§ 115-8 VEHICLES AN U TRAFJ.~IC § 115-11
C. During the months of April through October. truck8 could use
Poplar Street or Oak Street to enter the Somerset Street gate.
Trucks exiting the Somerset Street gate would have to use
Oak and Poplar Streets at any time.
§ 115-9.
ARTICLE IV
Traf fie Regulations
Granite Street School driveway; recreation areas.
A. No vehicle shall enter the horseshoe driveway of the Granite
Street School during the hours that the school buses are
loading or unloading schoolchildren, except for emergency
personnel when responding to an emergency. [Added 5-10-83
by Ord. No. 4-83]
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in designated
-recreation areas in the Town of Millinocket unless said motor
vehicle and operator are licensed in accordance with the laws
of the State of Maine and such operation is only in areas
designated as exits and entrances to public parking for
recreational functions. Any road within the Millinocket
Recreational Complex shall be designated as a ten-mile-perhour
zone.
§ 115-10. U-turns prohibited.
No vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to effect a onehundred-
eighty-degree change of direction (so-called-V-turn) on any
street or avenue in the town limits with the exception of dead-end
streets, and then only to the extreme end of the dead~nd street.
§ 115-11. Throughways.
A. Designated throughways. The following-described routes or
'"·ays are designated as throughways, and e\·ery vehicle
immediatelr before entering or crossing said throughway at
its point of intersection with another street or way shall first
come to a full stop, provided that whenever an officer is
11 :)()/
§ 115-11 MILLINOCKET CODE ~ 115-12
stationed at ~uch point, he shall have the right to regulate
traffic thereat. Such throughways are described as follows:
(1) No. 1: beginning at the bridge which crosses Millinocket
Stream and continuing thence along Central Street to a
point of intersection with Katahdin Avenue northerly to
Bates Street; thence along Bates Street to the railroad
underpass.
(2) No. 2: beginning at a point on Penobscot Avenue where
Central Street intersects Penobscot Avenue, in a southerly
direction to a point of its intersection with Katahdin
Avenue.
(3) No. 3: Aroostook Avenue Crom its point of intersection
with Central Street in a southerly direction tD Cherry
Street.
(4) No. 4: Katahdin Avenue from Central Street to the mill
gate.
(5) No. 5: Congress Street from Central Street to Cherry
Street
(6) No. 6: Poplar Street from Central Street t.o Katahdin
Avenue.
B. Warning signs. No such designation of a throughway as
referred to in Subsection A shall become effective as to
regulation of traffi~ at such point of intersection. until the
Town Council shall have caused suitable warning signs or
signals to be erected at or near such point. For the purpose of
this section, a \\1\V joining a throughway at an angle, whether
it crosses the same. shall be deemed to intersect it, and the
word "way.'' unless the context otherwise requires. shall
include a throughway or other way.
§ 115-12. One-way streets; loading zones.
A. The following streets are designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
11508
(')
.. _.,..,
§ 115-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-13
Name of Street
Bates Street
Colby Street
[Added
10-10-1996
by Ord. No.
2-96]
Penobscot Avenue
[Am.ended
5-27-1993 by Ord.
No. 2-93]
Direction
of Travel
East
East
South
Limits
From Katahdin Avenue to
Main Avenue
From Maine Avenue to
Highland Avenue Saturday
afternoon from 3:00 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m. and Sunday
morning from 7:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Central Street to
Poplar Street
Poplar Street [Added 5-27-1993 by Ord. No. 2-93; repealed
6-24-1999 by Ord. No. 2-99]
B. Loading zones on Penobscot Avenue. Vehicles shall park
parallel with left side to the curb on the east side of
Penobscot Avenue and diagonally on the west side of
Penobscot Avenue, in painted designated areas. Loading
zones shall be designated and the curb painted· red for
the purpose of trucks loading and unloading, and it shall
be unlawful for passenger cars to park in those loading
zones from 8:00 am. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
ARTICLEV
Parking
§ 115-13. General parking restrictions.
A. Curbs.
(1) No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb,
except on designated one-way streets.
11509 4-1-2000
§ 115-13 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115-13
(2) No vehicle shall remain backed up to the curb
except when actually loading or unloading, and then
only for a reasonable time.
(3) Unless in an emergency or to allow another vehicle
or pedestrian to cross its path or way, no vehicle
shall stop in any public street except close to the
curb.
B. Intersections; corners. No vehicle shall stop or stand
within the intersection of any streets nor within 20 feet
of any street comer. [Added 11-27-1985 by Ord. No.
7-85]
C. Obstruction of passage. No person having charge of any
vehicle shall place the same in any public street so as to
prevent the passing of other vehicles. No person in
charge of any vehicle shall place the same in such a
manner as to obstruct free passage into any public or
private driveway.
D. Snow removal. No person shall park or cause to be
parked any vehicle on any way so as to hinder the
removal of snow. An officer may cause any vehicle so
parked on any way as to hinder the removal of snow or
the normal movement of traffic to be removed from said
way and placed in a suitable place at the expense of the
owner of the vehicle. Neither the town nor the officer
shall be liable for any damage that may be caused by
such movement.
E. Sidewalk. No vehicle shall be driven on or allowed to
stand on any sidewalk except for the purpose of crossing
the same when necessary, and then only in the shortest
way from the street to the abutting estate.
F. Physician parking spaces. The Town Council may
designate, from time to time, certain parking spaces
within the Town of Millinocket for the exclusive use of
physicians. Such spaces shall be properly posted.
Vehicles . authorized to park therein shall display a
permit issued by the Chief of Police, and the owners of
11510 4-1-2000
( 1".). .
\.,"
(.., ~_.;
''') '
I ,
~ . :
( )· ,...,
§ 115-13 VEHICLES A..l\iD TRAFFIC § 115-14
such vehicles shall be permitted to park in such
designated areas.
G. Tree belt. No vehicles shall be allowed to stand for any
period of time on any tree belt within the Emits of the
town that has not been surfaced with bituminous
concrete.
H. Double-parking. There shall be no double-parking on any
street or avenue within the town limits.
I. Crosswalks. No vehicle shall be allowed to stand for any
period of time in such a manner that any p0rtion of the
vehicle extends across any portion of a cro:;swalk. For
purposes of this subsection, a "crosswalk,, i:; defined as
any area which is designated, by signage or by marking
on the pavement or both, as an area to be traversed by
pedestrians while crossing any t own way. [Added
1-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1-93]
J Fire hydrants. No vehicle shall be allowed to stand for
any period of time in such a manner that any portion of
the vehicle blocks or extends within five (5 feet of a:r!y
fire hydrant. [Added 1-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1-93]
K. Other prohibited· parking. The Town Council :;hall, from
time to time and as necessity requires, further prohibit
or restrict parking or municipal property and \\'ays. Such
prohibitions or restrictions shall be plainly posted at the
affected area in a manner calculated to proYide notice of
the prohibition or restriction to the public. [Added
1-21-1993 by Ord. No. 1-93]
§ 115-14. Granite Street School driveway.
No parking will be allowed in the so-called horseshoe
driveway of the Granite Street School between the h·:1urs of 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. except by
handicapped persons, school doctor or nurse. emergen~y
personnel such as police and fire when responding to c:;,n
emergency and delivery vehicles.
11510.l 12 - 25- 96

.r· ... ,
(' )
·-~'
(·.:. \. ).
' ·
()
§ 115-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-16
§ 115-15. Counseling center on Katahdin Avenue. [Added
12-6-1984 by Ord. No. 7-84]
Three parking stalls on Katahdin Avenue between School
Street and Colby Street shall be designated "For Counseling
Center Use Only." Said designation shall be assigned by the
Chief of Police.
§ 115-16. No parking any tiJDe.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the
following-described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Aroostook Avenue East From Central Street to
north driveway of
Millinocket Motors garage
Central Street Both From State Street to the
[Amended 9-10-1998 town line
by Ord. No. 4-98]
Central Street Both From Highland Avenue to
School Street
Central Street Both From Penobscot Avenue to
[Amended 9-10-1998 Aroostook Avenue
by Ord. No. 4-98]
Central Street South From Penobscot Avenue to
the driveway at west end
of the so-called corner
drugstore
Central Street [Repealed 9-10-1998 by Ord. No. 4-98]
Cherry Street Both From Katahdin Avenue to
Aroostook Avenue
Colby Street North From Katahdin Avenue to
Maine Avenue
Elm Street East Entire length
[Added 6-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 6-83]
11511 10-25-98
§ 115-16 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115-17
Name of Street
Katahdin Avenue
Penobscot Avenue
Penobscot Avenue
Poplar Street
[Added 6-14-1983 by
Ord. No. 6-83]
Spring Street
State Street
State Street
Summer Street [Added
12-12~85 by Ord. No.
5-85)
York Street
[Added 7 -26-1990 by
Ord. No. 2-90]
York Street
Side Location
East From Central Street to
Colby Street
East For a distance of 55 feet
northerly from Central
Street
West From Central Street to
driveways at Fuller's
Furniture Co.
Both From Oxford Street to
Katahdin Avenue
South From Penobscot Avenue
to Congress Street
East From State Street Bridge
north for 584 feet
West From State Street Bridge
north for 322 feet
South From Aroostook Avenue
to Congress Street
East From Hemlock Street to
Prospect Street
West From Hemlock Street to
the foot of so-called
"DiN ardo's Hill"
§ 115-17. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit
shown upon any of the following-described streets or parts of
streets:
11512 10-25-98
(
{., ·3 \· :.r.
()
§115-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-17
Name of Street Side
Aroostook Both
Avenue
Time Limit;
Hours/Days
1 hr.
Location
From Central Street
to Summer Street
only in painted
designated areas
Aroostook
Avenue
Central
Street
Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. From Central Street
to 6:00 p.m., all to Summer Street
days except
Sundays and
holidays
Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. From Highland
to 6:00 p.m., all Avenue to Aroostook
days except Avenue
Sundays and
holidays
Katahdin Avenue [Repealed 11-5-1987 by Ord. No. 3-87]
Penobscot Both 2 hrs.; 8:00 From Central Street
Avenue a.m. to 6:00 to Poplar Street
[Amended p.m. all days
8-13-1987 except Sundays
by Ord. No. and holidays
1-87]
Poplar
Street
Spruce
Street
Summer
Street
Both 1 hr.; 8:00 From Penobscot
a.m. to 6:00 Avenue to Katahdin
p.m.; all Avenue
days except
Sundays and
holidays
Both 1 hr.; 8:00 From Aroostook
a.m. to 6:00 Avenue to Highland
p.m. all days Avenue
except Sundays
and holidays
Both 1 hr.; 8:00 From Aroostook
a.m. to 6:00 Avenue to Penobscot
p.m. all days Avenue
except Sundays
and holidays
11513 10-25-98
§ 115-18 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115-19
§ 115-18. No parking certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed upon
any of the following-described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Central Street Both 9:00 p.m. to From Aroostook
[Added 9-10-1998 7:00 a.m. Avenue to
by Ord. No. 4-98] State Street
Katahdin
Avenue
Penobscot
Avenue
[Added 7-8-
1986 by Ord.
No. 8-86;
amended8·
14-1986 by
Ord. No. 9-
86; 9-26-
1996 by Ord.
No.1-96]
Penobscot
Avenue
[Added
9-26-1996
by Ord.
No.1·96]
East
Both
West
9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
1:00 a.m. to
4:30 a.m.
1:00 a.m. to
4:30 a.m.
From Poplar Street
to Elm Street
From Central Street
to Poplar Street
From Poplar Street
to Katahdin Avenue
§ 115-19. Parking restricted certain months.
There shall be no parking on the following-described streets
or parts of streets during the hours and dates indicated, except
that in periods of emergency as herein provided, doctors,
clergymen, policemen, firemen, fire truck drivers, operators of
United States Mail vehicles, ambulance drivers and
undertakers, in pursuit of their respective professions and
occupations, shall not be subject to the provisions of this
section:
11514 10-25-98
/.) t ''..·.
() ,.._..
,.-, ( '}
........ ~,
()
0 '
§ 115-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-20
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Any street Both 11:00 p.m. to Entire length
7:00 a.m.,
November 1
to April 1
Central Street Both From From Aroostook
[Added 9-10-1998 November 1 Avenue to
by Ord. No. 4-98) to April 1 State Street
Congress East From From Cherry Street
Street [Added November to Pine Street
12-13-1983 by 1 to April 1
Ord. No. 12-
83; amended
6-7-1984 by
Ord. No. 5-
84)
Granite Both 7:00 a.m. to From York Street to
Street 4:00 p.m., Eastland Avenue
September 1
to June 20
ARTICLE VI
Handicapped Parking
[Added 1-10-1984 by Ord. No. 3-84]
§ 115-20. Parking stalls designated. [Amended 6-21-1984
by Ord. No. 6-84)
Five parking stalls in the downtown area of Penobscot
Avenue will be designated for handicapped parking and will be
posted with proper signs as designated by 30 M.R.S.A. § 2151,
Subsection 2K:
A. One parking stall in front of the Municipal Building.
B. Two parking stalls in the municipal parking lot.
C. One parking stall in front of the post office.
D. One parking stall in front of Emerson's Pharmacy.
11515 10-25-98
§ 115-21 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115-24
§ 115-21. Special registration plate required. [Amended
6-21-1984 by Ord. No. 6-84]
Any vehicle parked in the handicapped parking stalls or
spaces as listed in § 115-20 above must bear a special
registration plate or placard issued under 29 M.R.S.A. § 252 or
a similar plate issued by another state.
§ 115-22. Violations; extended parking allowed.
[Amended 6-21-1984 by Ord. No. 6-84]
A. It is a violation of this article for anyone to park a vehicle
in one of these spaces which does not have a special
registration plate or to park in excess of the time limit, if
any.
B. Vehicles having a special registration plate are
permitted to park twice as long as other cars parked in
the same vicinity, street or parking lot.
§ 115-23. Agreements for policing.
The Chief of Police, upon approval of the Town Manager, is
authorized to enter into agreements with owners of private offstreet
parking for the policing of stalls and spaces designated
for handicapped persons' vehicles.
ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 115-24. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever violates any of the provisions of the foregoing
regulations may be assessed an amount not exceeding
$25 for the first and any subsequent offenses.
[Amended 4-7-1994 by Ord. No. 3-94]
11516 10-25-98
.~) ( ·:
. -
(··)\ ,,
§ 115-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 115-25
B. ln the event of no assessment or the failure to pay the
assessment levied, said violator shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $20.
C. Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 115-9B shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$100.
D. Persons convicted of a violation of§ 115-9A shall be fined
$25 for the first offense and $50 for each offense
thereafter. [Added 1-10-1984 by Ord. No. 3-84]
E. All fines shall be recovered on complaint for the use of
the town.
F. Any police officer may cause any vehicle parked in
violation of this chapter to be removed and placed in a
suitable location at the expense of the owner of th~
vehicle if the vehicle hinders the normal movement of
traffic, hinders access to property abutting a public way
or if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located or refuses
to move the vehicle upon request. Neither the town nor
the officer shall be liable for any damage that may be
caused by such movement or storage. Any police officer
may impound any vehicle parked in violation of this
chapter and the owner shall be liable for all expenses
incurred by the town during the time of impoundment in
arranging to have the vehicle towed, storing the vehicle,
releasing the vehicle from storage or any similar
expenses. [Added 2-27-1992 by Ord. No. 1-92]
ARTICLE VIII
Jacob Engine Brakes
[Added 12-2-1999 by Ord. No. 8-99]
§ 115-25. Use prohibited.
A. Violation. In order to prevent excess noise created when
large trucks are traveling through certain areas of the
Town of Millinocket and to protect the general welfare of
11517 4-1-2000
§ 115-25 MILLINOCKET CODE § 115-25
residents, no person shall operate or use any vehicle
engine compression brake, a/k/a jacobs engine or jake
brakes.
B. Area defined. The area of applicability of this section
shall be within that area known as the "Urban Compact
Zone," as determined and posted by the Maine Department
of Transportation within the town limits of the
Town of Millinocket.
C. Penalties. Violators of this section shall be subject to a
fine of up to $100 (U.S.) for each occurrence.
11518 4-1-2000
(_)
... ~ \J
§ rn1-1 WEAPONS § 121-2
Chapter 121
\VEAPONS
§ 121-1. Purpose.
§ 121-2. Discharge prohibited.
§ 121-3. Definitions.
§ 121-4. Exceptions.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 3-8-83 as Art. IV of Ch. 11 of the Millinocket Code.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GE:SERAL REFEREXCES
Thro\\ing of objects - See Ch. 94, Art. I.
§ 121-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to minimize the risk of personal
damage or a breach of the peace resulting from the discharge of
weapons within the populated portions of the Town of Millinocket.
§ 121-2. Discharge prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to shoot, fire or discharge any weapon within
the populated portions or within two hundred (200) feet of the
populated portions of the Town of Millinocket except as provided in
§ 121-4.
12101
§ 121-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 121-3
§ 121-3. DefinitionM.
For the purpose of. this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
POPULATED PORTIONS - Those lands developed for
residential, municipal. commercial or industrial use. "Populated
portions" also includes:
A. Millinocket Recreational Complex located in Lot 62.
B. Hillcrest Golf Course located in Lot 62.
C. Harold E. Clark Recreational Area and approach road
located in Lots 63, 73.
D. Playgrounds located in municipal areas.
WEAPON:
A. Any rifle, handgun or shotgun which uses conventional
loaded cartridges or shells.
B. Any black powder riflet handgun or shotgun which uses
separate components of powder and projectile or shot.
C. Any cannon, either held or mounted, using conventional
loaded cartridges or shells or separate components of
gunpowder, carbide or other gas-generating chemical
and projectile or shot.
D. Any rifle or handgun which propels a projectile by means
of released compressed air or gas.
E. Any crossbow which propels an arrow, bolt or quarrel by
means of released spring pressure of bent wood or other
elastic materials.
F. Any slingshot which propels a projectile b~· means of
released spring pressure of stret.ched elastic bands.
G. Any "David sling" which propels a projectile by means of
released centrifugal force.
12102
()
(...). ··.·
(-~-)
·~· [ • ,. '
• . • ' . J '
§ 121-4 WEAPONS § 121-5
§ 121-4. Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply when:
A. A rifle. shotgun or handgun is discharged in an indoor firing
range by individuals or clubs.
B. A rifle, shotgun or handgun is discharged for the protection of
life or property.
C. Weapons are discharged as part of a military or police
ceremony, demonstration or by law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties.
D. Airguns, bows and arrows, slingshots are used by persons
sixteen (16) years of age or older or by children less than
sixteen (16) years of age under the direct supervision of an
adult.
E. Trappers discharge a weapon in the legal exercise of trapping.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Upon conviction, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.), to be recovered for the use of the town, shall be
imposed.
B. Juvenile offenders shall be handled by the Millinocket Police
Department in a manner consistent with provisions of the
Maine Juvenile Code.
12103
Chapter 123
WIND TURBINES
§ 123-1. Title.
(~) § 123-2. Purpose.
~
i
··-
l' €·'"·}·
... , ...
. ~····"'" ~··,, ,.
( 71 ·J
§ 123-3. Legislative authority.
§ 123-4. Provisions.
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 6-24-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning- See Ch. 125.
§ 123-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Wind Turbine Ordinance."
§ 123-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement and
operation of small, noncommercial wind turbines with a
capacity of no more than 50 kilowatts within the Town of
Millinocket.
§ 123-3. Legislative authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to and consistent with
municipal home rule powers as permitted in Article VIII, Part
123:1 05 . 01 - 2011
§ 123-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § 123-4
2, Section 1, of the Constitution of the State of Maine and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 123-4. Provisions.
The following provisions will apply:
A. Location. Wind turbines will be allowed in the
Neighborhood Commercial Development (NC), Industrial
Development (ID), Commercial Forestland (CF), Rural
Development (RD), Open Space/Recreation (OR), and
Highway Commercial (HC) Zones.
B. Capacity. A wind turbine shall not exceed 50 kilowatts of
generating capacity.
C. Minimum lot size. No minimum lot size will be required.
D. Mounting. Wind turbines may be mounted on a monopole
or lattice tower.
E . Property line setback. A turbine and its tower must be set
back at least 110% of its total height from any property
line, public utility line, or other towers.
F. Height restrictions. A tower height restriction will not
apply if sound and setback requirements are met and the
tower and turbine comply with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations and the manufacturer's
recommendations and specifications. Proof of compliance
will be the responsibility of the owner.
G. Noise levels. Noise generated by a wind turbine system
must not exceed a level of 60 decibels, measured from the
nearest property line, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. or a level of 50 decibels, measured from the
nearest property line, during the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
H. Installation. A wind turbine system will be installed only
by a certified professional1 and the installation will comply
123:2 05 - 01 . 2011
~7"\ (J
( ")
§ 123-4 \.VIND TURBINES § 123-5
with all federal and state codes and regulations and with
all the manufacturer's recommendations.
I. FCC compliance. Wind turbines must comply with all
Federal Communications Commission regulations. Proof of
compliance will be the responsibility of the owner.
J. Lighting. Artificial lighting of the turbine and tower will
not be allowed unless required by FAA regulations.
K. Climbing access. A wind turbine must have a minimum
climbing access of six feet. Access below 12 feet must be
secured with an anticlimbing device or a six-foot fence.
L. Signage. Signage is prohibited on a wind turbine and
tower except for safety and warning signs.
M. Tree removal. Wind turbines are to be erected with
minimum removal of trees and must be in compliance with
manufacturer's recommendations.
N. Nonoperation. The owner of a wind turbine that is
inoperable for six consecutive months will be notified to
repair the wind turbine or have it removed at the owner's
expense within six months of receiving notification to do
so.
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may
result in penalties of $50 per day for each day the violation
continues from the date of notification by the Code Enforcement
Oflicer (CEO) of th(;! Town of Millinocket. For repeat offenders,
the penalties may be assessed at $100 per day for each day the
violation continues from the date of notification by the CEO.
The CEO is authorized by the Town to issue summonses for
noncompliance with this chapter. If a wind turbine or tower
becomes a dangerous hazard due to lack of maintenance or acts
of God, the owner may be ordered to remove the structure at
the owner1s expense and penalties may be assessed as described
123:3 05 - 01 - 2011
§ 123-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § 123-5
above. Violations of this chapter shall be heard in lVIaine
District Court.
123:4 05. 01 - 2011
1.
(
r)
()
ZONING
Chapter 125
ZONING
Part 1
(Reserved)
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§§ 125-1through125-5. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§§ 125-6 through 125-11. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
§§ 125-12through125-15. (Reserved)
§ 125-16.
§ 125-17.
§ 125-18.
§ 125-19.
Part2
Town Zoning
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
Title.
Authority.
Purposes.
Applicability.
12501 4-26-93
§ 125-20.
§ 125-21.
§ 125-22.
§ 125-23.
§ 125-24.
§ 125-25.
MILLINOCKET CODE
Conflict with other provisions.
Severability.
Amendments.
Annual administrative review.
Effective date.
Repealer.
ARTICLE V
Nonconformities
Definitions.
General provisions.
Nonconforming structures.
§ 125-26.
§ 125-27.
§ 125-28.
§ 125-29.
§ 125-30.
§ 125-31.
Existing nonconforming mobile homes.
Nonconforming uses.
Nonconforming lots.
ARTICLE VI
Establishment of Zones
§ 125-32. Zones established.
§ 125-33. Standards for establishing zones.
§ 125-34. Official Zoning Map.
§ 125-35. Interpretation of zone boundaries.
ARTICLE VII
Schedule of Uses
§ 125-36. Activities described.
12502 4 - 25-93
() - _,.
.. -) ( :
\) .. _,./
(-'-y~
()
ZONING
§ 125-37. Symbols used in Schedule of Uses.
§ 125-38. Uses substantially similar to permitted uses.
§ 125-39. Uses substantially similar to prohibited uses
are prohibited.
§ 125-39.1. Uses permitted in Habitat Protection
Overlay Zone.
§ 125-40. Compliance with land use standards
required.
§ 125-41. Schedule of Uses.
§ 125-42.
§ 125-43.
§ 125-44 .
§ 125-45.
§ 125-46.
§ 125-47.
§ 125-48.
§ 125-49.
§ 125-50.
ARTICLE VIII
Land Use Standards
Purpose.
General standards.
Airport special standards.
Access to site.
Bed-and-breakfast.
Buffering and screening.
Campgrounds.
Conversions.
Dimensional requirements.
§ 125-51. Dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odors, glare and
explosive materials.
§ 125-52. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 125-52.1. Fences and retaining walls.
§ 125-53. Flood hazard areas.
§ 125-54. Home occupations.
12503 7 - 10- 911
MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 125-55. Junkyards.
§ 125-56. Land not suitable for development.
§ 125-57. Lighting.
§ 125-58. Mineral exploration and extraction.
§ 125-59. Mobile home parks.
§ 125-60. Mobile homes and recreation vehicles.
§ 125-61. Multiple uses on a single lot.
§ 125-62. Municipal services.
§ 125-63. Off-street loading and unloading
requirements.
§ 125-64. Off-street parking.
§ 125-65. Oil and chemical storage.
§ 125-66. On·site circulation.
§ 125-67. Pollution levels.
§ 125-68. Preservation and enhancement of the
landscape.
§ 125-69. Private rights-of-way.
§ 125-70. Signs.
§ 125-71. Site conditions.
§ 125-72. Utilities; sewage disposal; waste disposal;
water supply.
ARTICLE IX
Shoreland Standards
§ 125-73. ApplicabiHty.
§ 125-74. Agriculture.
§ 125-75. Archaeological sites.
12504 7-10-911
(. ),
()
( '~) '
'
()
ZONING
§ 125-76. Clearing of vegetation for development.
§ 125-77. Commercial and industrial uses.
§ 125-78. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(Cont'd on page 12505)
12504.1 7-10-95
I
(":)
ZONING
§ 125-79. Essential services.
§ 125-80. Individual private campsites.
§ 125-81. Mineral exploration and extraction.
§ 125-82. Minimum lot standards.
c·-3 § 125-83. Parking areas.
§ 125-84. Piers, docks, wharfs and bridges.
§ 125-85. Principal and accessory structures.
§ 125-86. Roads and driveways.
§ 125-87. Septic waste disposal.
§ 125-88. Signs.
§ 125-89. Soils.
§ 125-90. Stormwater runoff.
§ 125-91. Timber harvesting.
~
........
,__,. )
§ 125-92. Water quality •
ARTICLEX
Code Enforcement Officer Permits
§ 125·93. Code Enforcement Officer permit required.
§ 125-94. Procedure.
§ 125-95. Procedural exceptions to activities requiring
site plan review.
§ 125-96. Annual report on shoreland activities.
(· . ~~ •.
I L -' '-.
ARTICLE XI
Planning Board Site Plan Review
§ 125-97. Purpose.
12505 2-U-98
MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 125-98. Activities requiring site plan review.
§ 125-99. Activities not requiring site plan review.
§ 125-100. Classification of projects.
§ 125-101. Prohibition.
§ 125-102. Site plan review application.
§ 125-103. Additional information required of major :.j
developments.
§ 125-104. Review procedures.
§ 125-105. Public hearing procedures.
§ 125-106. Professional review.
§ 125-107. Failure to act.
§ 125-108. Expiration of approvals.
§ 125-109. Other permits.
§ 125-110. Access to site and records.
§ 125-111. Site plan review criteria.
§ 125-112. Waiver of submissions requirements.
§ 125-113. Waiver of review criteria.
ARTICLE XII
Certificate of Use and Occupancy
§ 125-114. Certificate required before use and
occupancy.
ARTICLE XIII
Administrative Fees
§ 125-115. General provisions.
§ 125-116. Code Enforcement Officer permit fees.
12506 2-25-96
(" ,)_ _ ,
.......
\ .
··--"'
ZONING
§ 125-117. Site plan review fees.
§ 125-118. Zoning Board of Appeals administration fees.
(Cont'd on page 12507)
12506.1 2-11-98

(j
· ... _.;
(~)
~'~
(IJ
ZONING
ARTICLE XIV
Enforcement
§ 125-119. Enforcement procedure.
§ 125-120. Legal action.
§ 125-121. Fines.
§ 125-122.
§ 125-123.
§ 125-124.
§ 125-125.
§ 125-126.
§ 125-127.
§ 125-128.
§ 125-129.
§ 125-130.
§ 125-131.
§ 125-132.
ARTICLE XV
Zoning Board of Appeals
Establishment.
Powers and duties.
Appeal procedure.
Appeal to Superior Court.
ARTICLE XVI
Performance Guaranties
Required improvements.
Contents of guaranty.
Types of guaranties.
Release of guaranty.
Default.
ARTICLE XVII
Definitions
Construction of language.
Definitions of words.
Schedule of Uses
12507 10-25-98
§ 125-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-11
Zoning Map
Table of Zoning Map Amendments
[filSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket: Part 2, 6-18-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92.1
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plannin1 Board - See Ch. 23.
Buildinl( construction - See Ch. 48.
F1oodplain management - See Ch. 68.
Mobile home parka - See Cb. 83.
Part 12
(Reserved)
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§§ 125-1through125-5. (Reserved)
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)
§§ 125-6 through 125-11. (Reserved)
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
1 Editor's Note: Thia ordinance passed a referendum held 7-29-1992 and was deemed
effective 7·30-1992. This ordinance also repealed former Part 1, Shoreland Zoning,
adopted 7-21-1981 as Art. II of Ch. 15 of the Millinocket Code.
2 Editor's Note: Former Part 1, Shoreland Zoning, adopted 7-21-1981 as Art. II of Ch. l:S
of the Millinocket Code, was repealed 6-18-1992 by Ord. No. 4-92, which appears as Part
2 of this chapter.
12508 10-25-98
(.).:
-;
(_ .. ;~ '-,J
()
§ 125-12 ZONING
§§ 125-12 through 125-15. (Reserved)
Part2
Town Zoning
[Adopted 6-18-1992 as Ord. No. 4-92]
§ 125-16. Title.
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 125-18
This Part 2 shall be known as and may be cited as the
"Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Millinocket, Maine," and will
be referred to herein as "this Part 2."
§ 125-17. Authority.
This Part 2 is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and
30-AM.R.S.A. § 4352 and 38M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq.
§ 125-18. Purposes.
The purposes of this Part 2 are as follows:
A. Comprehensive plan implementation: to implement the
policies and recommendations of the Millinocket
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Protection of the general welfare: to assure the comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare of the present
and future inhabitants of the Town of Millinocket.
C. Preservation of the town character: to preserve and
protect the character of Millinocket by dividing the town
into neighborhood zones according to the use of land and
buildings and the intensity of such uses.
12509 4-25-93
§ 125-18 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-18
D. Protection of the environment: to protect and enhance
the natural, cultural and historic resources of the town
from unacceptable adverse impacts and to integrate new
development harmoniously into the town's natural
environment.
E. Promotion of community development: to promote the
development of an economically sound and stable
community.
F. Reduction of traffic congestion: to lessen the danger and
congestion of traffic on roads and highways, limit
excessive numbers of intersections, driveways and other
friction points, minimize hazards and ensure the
continued usefulness of all elements of the existing
transportation system for their planned function.
G. Balancing of property rights: to protect property rights
and values by balancing the rights of landowners to use
their land with -the corresponding rights of abutting and
neighboring landowners to enjoy their property without
undue disturbance from abutting or neighboring uses.
H. Reduction of fiscal impact: to provide a means of
evaluating development proposals to . determine their
fiscal impacts on the municipality's ability to provide and
improve necessary public facilities and services.
I. Establishment of procedures and standards: to establish
procedures whereby the town officials may review the
developments regulated by this Part 2 by providing fair
and reasonable standards for evaluating such
developments; to provide a public hearing process
through which interested persons may raise questions
and receive answers regarding how such developments
may affect them; and to provide procedures whereby
aggrieved parties may appeal decisions made under this
Part2.
12510 4-25-93
C.. )·
()
§ 125-19 ZONING § 125-22
§ 125-19. Applicability.
This Part 2 shall apply to all land and water areas within the
Town of Millinocket. All buildings or structures thereinafter
constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved and the
uses of buildings and land, including the division of land, shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this Part 2. No existing
or future building, structure, land or water area shall be used
for any purpose or in any manner except as provided for in this
Part 2.
§ 125-20. Conflict with other provisions.
Whenever the requirements of this Part 2 are in conflict with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation,
ordinance, deed restriction or covenant, that imposing the most
restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
§ 125-21. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or provision of this
Part 2 shall be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed
to affect the validity of any other section, subsection or
provision of this Part 2; to this end, the provisions of this Part 2
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 125-22. Amendments.
The process for amending this Part 2 and the Official Zoning
Map is as follows:
A. Initiation. A proposal to amend this Part 2 or the Official
Zoning Map may be initiated by:
(1) The Planning Board, by majority vote.
(2) The Town Council, through a request to the
Planning Board.
12511 7-10-95
§ 125-22 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-22
(3) The public, through a written petition by registered
voters as provided for in the Town Charter.
B. Process of adoption. The process to be followed in
adopting an amendment to this Part 2 or the Official
Zoning Map is as follows:
(1) Proposed amendments must first be submitted to
the Planning Board for its consideration.
(2) The Planning Board shall, within thirty (30) days of
receiving a proposed amendment, set a date to hold
a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
(3) Notice of the public hearing shall be given as
required by state law.
( 4) The Planning Board shall make its official report at
a Town Council meeting occurring within sixty (60)
days after the public hearing.
(5) Enactment of a proposed amendment shall require a
majority vote of the members of the Town Council.
C. Criteria to be considered. [Added 4-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 1-951]
( 1) In deciding whether to adopt a proposed amendment
to · this chapter or the Official Zoning Map, the
central issue before the Town Council shall be
whether the proposed amendment advances the
public health, safety or welfare of the community
and whether the proposed amendment:
(a) Is consistent with the purposes of this chapter
as listed in § 125-18.
(b) Is consistent with the policies and recommendations
of the town's adopted Comprehensive
Plan.
1 Editors Note: Thia ordinance also provided for the reuumberinar of former
Subaection C as Subsection D.
12512 7 -10-915
1·.~~·· 'v
()
§ 125-22 ZONING § 125-23
(c) Will satisfy a demonstrated need in the
community.
(d) Will not result in an undue adverse impact on
existing uses or protected natural resources.
(2) In addition, when the proposed rezoning is for lands
currently classified as (CF) Commercial Forestland
to be rezoned for development purposes, the Town
Council shall determine whether such lands are
proximate to existing compatibly developed areas.
D. Notification of state. The Commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Protection and the Director of
the Land Use Regulation Commission shall be notified of
amendments to this Part 2 or zone boundaries in
shoreland areas as required by the Mandatory Shoreland
Zoning Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 438-A, Subsection 3, and by
the Land Use Regulation Commission (LURC) Statute,
12 M.R.S.A. § 685-A, Subsection 4.
§ 125-23. Annual administrative review.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board and
Board of Appeals each shall report annually, in the
month of November, to the Town Council on their
respective experience with the administration of this
Part 2 during the previous year. Their reports to the
(Cont'd on page 12513)
12512.1 7-10-915

()
0
§ 125-23 ZONING § 125-25
Town Council shall include any recommended
amendments they may have that would:
(1) Enhance their ability to more effectively meet their
respective administrative responsibilities under this
Part 2; and
(2) Enhance the implementation of the purposes of this
Part 2 contained in § 125-lBA through I above.
B. Failure of any person or Board to comply with this
provision shall not affect the validity or enforceability of
this Part 2 in any way.
§ 125-24. Effective date.
The effective date of this Part 2 or any amendments thereto
shall be the 30th day following its/their adoption at a Town
Council meeting. A copy of this Part 2, certified by the Town
Clerk, shall be on file at the town offices.
§ 125-25. Repealer.
The existing Zoning and Shoreland Zoning Ordinances of the
Town of Millinocket, Maine, as amended, are repealed as of the
effective date of this Part 2. The adoption of this Part 2,
however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future
prosecution of, or action to abate, any violation of the
ordinances repealed by this section, if the violation is also a
violation of the provisions of this Part 2. It is further the
intention and direction of this section that if this Part 2 is held
to be invalid or void in its entirety, the ordinances repealed by
this section shall be automatically revived.
12513 4-26-93
§ 125-26 MILLINOCKET CODE
ARTICLEV
Nonconformities
§ 125-26. Definitions.
§ 125-27
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
NONCONFORMITY - A legally existing
(grandfathered) nonconforming lot, structure, sign or use
that lawfully existed immediately prior to the enactment
of this Part 2, or any subsequent amendment hereto and
which, as a result of the enactment or subsequent
amendment, fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this Part 2. Such requirements include
but are not limited to the use restrictions and lot
standards for the zone in which it is located or any land
use standards set forth in Articles VIII and IX. An illegal
nonconformity is any other lot, structure, sign or use
that fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
Part 2 or its amendments.
§ 125-27. General provisions.
The following provisions apply to nonconformities generally:
A. Normal repair and maintenance. The normal upkeep and
maintenance of nonconforming structures is permitted,
including repairs or renovations which do not involve
expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and
such other changes in a nonconforming use or structure
as federal, state or local building and safety codes may
require are permitted.
B. Transfer of ownership. Any legal nonconformity may be
transferred and the new owner may, subject strictly to
the requirements of this section, continue such
nonconformity; provided, however, that nothing
contained herein shall be construed to permit any person
or entity to occupy or use any lot or structure or to
12514 4-25-93
()
,..,
'J
§ 125-27 ZONING § 125-28
continue any use in violation of any other federal, state
or municipal statute, ordinance or regulation.
C. Illegal nonconformity. Any illegal nonconformity shall
cease or be corrected immediately. Any continuation of
an illegal nonconformity is a violation of this Part 2.
D. Burden of proof related to establishing legal
nonconformity. The burden of establishing that any
nonconformity is a legal nonconformity shall, in all
cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not
upon the Town of Millinocket.
E. Conversion to conformity encouraged. All
nonconformities shall be encouraged to convert to
conformity whenever possible and, when required by this
Part 2, shall convert to conformity.
F. Reversion to nonconformity prohibited. Once converted
to conformity, no lot, structure or use shall revert to
nonconformity.
§ 125-28. Nonconforming structures.
The following provision shall apply to nonconforming
structures:
A. Expansion of nonconforming structures. A
nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded
after obtaining a permit from the same permitting
authority identified in § 125-36, as that for a new
structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase
the nonconformity of the structure. Such expansion is
further limited as follows:
(1) After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure
is less than the required setback from the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be
expanded in floor area or volume, by thirty percent
(30%) or more, during the lifetime of the structure.
12515 4-25-93
§ 125-28 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-28
(2) Construction or enlargement of a foundation
beneath the existing structure shall not be
considered an expansion of the structure, provided
that:
(a) The structure and new foundation are placed
such that the setback requirement is met to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the
Planning Board, basing its decision on the
criteria specified in Subsection B below;
(b) The completed foundation does not extend
beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure;
and
(c) The foundation does not cause the structure to
be elevated by more than three (3) additional
feet.
(3) No structure which is less than the required setback
from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland shall
be expanded toward the water body, tributary
stream or wetland.
B. Relocation of nonconforming structures.
(1) A nonconforming structure may be relocated within
the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure
is located, provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board, and provided that the applicant
demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of state law
and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules or that a new system can be installed
in a manner that causes the system to be less
nonconforming.
(2) In determining whether the building relocation
meets the setback to the greatest practical extent,
the Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot,
12516 4-25-93
()
§ 125-28 ZONING § 125-28
the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion,
the location of the septic system and other on-site
soils suitable for septic systems and the type and
amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish
the relocation.
C. Reconstruction or replacement of nonconforming
structures.
( 1) Any nonconforming structure which is located less
than the required setback from the normal highwater
line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland or from the property line, or which
otherwise fails to meet the dimensional
requirements of this Part 2, and which is removed,
damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before
such damage, destruction or removal, may be
reconstructed or replaced within one (1) year of the
date of said damage, destruction or removal,
provided that such reconstruction or replacement is
in compliance with the setback requirements to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the
Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of
this Part 2. In no case shall a structure be
reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity.
(2) Any structure which is damaged or destroyed by
fifty percent (50%) or less of the market value of the
structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be repaired or reconstructed in place
within one (1) year of such damage or destruction,
with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
(3) In determining whether the building reconstruction
or replacement meets setbacks to the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider,
in addition to the criteria in Subsection C above, the
type of foundation present, if any. It is not the intent
of this section to require the destruction of
12517 4-25-93
§ 125-28 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-29
functional concrete or block foundations in order to
meet setback requirements.
D. Change of use of a nonconforming structure within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the normal high-water line of
any great pond or river, within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland or within
seventy-five (75) feet of the high-water line of a stream.
(1) The use of a nonconforming structure may not be
changed to another use unless the Planning Board,
after receiving a written application, determines
that the new use will not have a greater adverse
impact on the water body or wetland or on the
property on which it is located or on adjacent
properties and resources than the existing use.
(2) In determining that no greater adverse impact will
occur, the Planning Board shall require written
documentation from the applicant regarding the
probable effects on public health and safety, erosion
and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife
habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of
public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain
management, archaeological and historic resources,
commercial fishing and maritime activities and
other functionally water-dependent uses.
§ 125-29. Existing nonconforming mobile homes.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part 2, the
lawful use of a mobile home as a single-family dwelling,
in any zone, which use legally existed on the date of the
enactment of this Part 2, may be continued, except that
the mobile home shall not be;
(1) Rebuilt, altered or repaired after being damaged in
excess of fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost
at the time of destruction as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer, except that such mobile home
may be replaced as provided in the exception
12518 4-25-93
(}
---
()· ·
"'·
CJ
§ 125-29 ZONING § 125-31
contained in Subsection A(2) below, or may be
rebuilt or repaired to its original condition if the
mobile home had, before destruction, been certified
or excluded as provided in said exception; or
(2) Replaced with a different mobile home, unless the
new mobile home is certified, pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
§ 5415, as amended, as conforming to all applicable
federal manufactured home construction and safety
standards or is excluded from the coverage of 42
U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.
B. Any mobile home lawfully used as a single-family
dwelling may be improved by the addition of a
foundation or by other new construction, alteration or
repair, subject to the requirements of any applicable
building code or other law, and subject to the other
provisions of Articles VIII and IX.
§ 125-30. Nonconforming uses.
The following provisions shall apply to nonconforming uses:
A. Expansion. Expansions of nonconforming uses are
prohibited.
B. Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or
on which a nonconforming use ceases to be actively
pursued for a period exceeding one (1) year, or which is
superseded by a conforming use, may not again be
devoted to a nonconforming use.
C. Change of use. An existing nonconforming use may not
be changed to another nonconforming use.
§ 125·31. Nonconforming lots.
A single, vacant parcel of land, the legal description or
dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file
at the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds, at the effective date
12519 '7-10-95
§ 125-31 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-32
of this Part 2 or any amendment, and which, as a result of the
enactment or restrictive amendment of this Part 2, does not
meet the lot area, frontage and/or width requirements, or both,
of the zone in which it is located, and which does not adjoin
another vacant parcel in common ownership, may be built upon,
subject to the following:
A. Such building or construction shall, in all other respects,
comply with the provisions of this Part 2.
B. No construction shall commence until the owner
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement
Officer that there is reasonable access to the site
for emergency vehicles.
C. Two (2) or more nonconforming adjacent vacant parcels
of land in common ownership shall be consolidated to
form one (1) or more lots conforming so far as possible to
the lot standards of the district in which the parcels are
located. If possible, the lots shall be consolidated so that
no nonconforming lot or lots are formed. Lots so
consolidated shall not be split thereafter.
D. One (1) or more vacant parcels of land that adjoin a
nonconforming lot in common ownership and containing
a building or structure shall be consolidated with said
improved lot to the extent necessary to bring the
improved lot into conformity so far as possible. If the
remaining portion of the vacant parcels constitutes a
conforming lot, said remaining portion shall constitute a
separate lot. · Otherwise, the combined lots shall
constitute one ( 1) lot.
ARTICLE VI
Establishment of Zones
§ 125·32. Zones established. [Amended 4· 13· 1995 by Ord.
No. 1·95]
For the purposes of this Part 2, the Town of Millinocket is
hereby divided into the following zones:
12520 '7 -10-95
() ... _ _,,,.
()· .....
(_)
§ 125-32 ZONING § 125-33
A. Downtown Residential Zone (Rl).
B. Medium Density Residential Zone (R2).
C. Rural Development Zone (RD).
D. Downtown Commercial Development Zone (DC).
E. Neighborhood Commercial Development Zone (NC).
F. Highway Commercial Development Zone (HC).
G. Industrial Development Zone (ID).
H. Airport Development Zone (AD).
I. Open Space/Recreation Zone (OR).
J. Wetland Protection Zone (WP).
K. Shoreland Protection Zone (SP).
L. Habitat Protection Overlay Zone (HP).
M. Commercial Forestland Zone (CF).
§ 125-33. Standards for establishing zones.
A. Downtown Residential Zone (Rl).
(1) The purpose of the Downtown Residential Zone (Rl)
is to preserve the character of existing downtown
residential neighborhoods and to provide highdensity
residential opportunities and neighborhood
characteristics within the service area of existing
public sewer and water.
(2) Areas designated as being the Downtown
Residential Zone (Rl) include all those areas
designated as Rl within the property lines and
street center lines shown on the Official Zoning Map
and not otherwise designated.
B. Medium Density Residential Zone (R2).
(1) The purpose of the Medium Density Residential
Zone (R2) is to provide medium density residential
12521 7-10-95
§ 125-33 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-33
opportunities and neighborhood characteristics
between the higher density Downtown Residential
Zone (Rl) and the lower density Rural Development
Zone (RD).
(2) Areas designated as being in the Medium Density
Residential Zone (R2) include all those areas
designated as R2 within the property lines and
street center lines shown on the Official Zoning Map
and not otherwise designated.
C. Rural Development Zone (RD).
(1) The purpose of the Rural Development Zone (RD) is
to conserve areas that are presently rural in
character and use, provide opportunities for those
who desire low-density residential living and to
provide for the orderly development of this area to
meet community needs.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Rural Development
Zone (RD) include all those areas designated as RD
shown on the Official Zoning Map and not otherwise
designated.
D. Downtown Commercial Development Zone (DC).
(1) The purpose of the Downtown Commercial
Development Zone (DC) is to preserve the character
of the existing downtown central business district as
the community focal point for cultural, business and
service activities by providing a full range of public
facilities within the service area of existing public
sewer and water and to provide for reasonable
expansion.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Downtown
Commercial Development Zone (DC) include all land
designated as DC within the property lines and
street center lines shown on the Official Zoning Map
and which is not otherwise designated.
E. Neighborhood Commercial Development Zone (NC).
12522 7-10-95
()
§ 125-33 ZONING § 125-33
(1) The Neighborhood Commercial Development Zone
(NC) is intended to provide opportunities for a
mixture of compatible commercial and residential
activities in residential areas adjacent to the
Downtown Commercial Development Zone (DC).
(2) Areas designated as being in the Neighborhood
Commercial Development Zone (NC) include all
those areas designated as NC within the property
lines and street center lines shown on the Official
Zoning Map, plus:
(a) The land between the street center line of Bates
Street and a parallel line two hundred (200)
feet back from either side of the center line of
Bates Street which is not otherwise designated;
and
(b) The land between the street center line of
Poplar Street and a parallel line two hundred
(200) feet back from either side of the center
line of Poplar Street which is not otherwise
designated.
F . Highway Commercial Development Zone (HC).
(1) The purpose of the Highway Commercial
Development Zone (HC) is to provide for the orderly
expansion of commercial development along Route
11or157.
(2) Areas designated as being in the High Commercial
Development Zone (HC) include all those areas
designated as HC within the property lines shown
on the Official Zoning Map, plus the land between
the edge of the right-of-way of Roule 11 or 157 and a
parallel line one thousand (1,000) feet back from the
edge of the right-of-way of Route 11 or 157 which is
not designated otherwise.
G. Industrial Development Zone (ID).
12523 7-10-95
§ 125-33 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-33
( 1) The purpose of the Industrial Development Zone
(ID) is to accommodate existing industrial
development and to provide land which is
conveniently located with respect to appropriate
road and rail transportation corridors and other
conditions favorable to the development of
additional industry and which is located as to limit
undesirable conflict between residential and
industrial development.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Industrial
Development Zone (ID) include all those areas
designated as ID within the property lines and
street center lines shown on the Official Zoning
Map, plus the land between the center line of
Golden Road and a parallel line one thousand
( 1, 000) feet back from the center line of Golden Road
which is not designated otherwise.
H. Airport Development Zone (AD).
( 1) The purpose of the Airport Development Zone is to
promote the harmonious arrangement and
development of land uses surrounding the
Millinocket Airport, to encourage the types of
development having maximum compatibility with
aircraft operations and which provide goods and
services to passengers or aircraft and to support and
promote the public utility of the airport.
(2) The area designated as being in the Airport
Development Zone (AD) include all those areas
designated as AD on the Official Zoning Map and
not otherwise designated.
I. Open Space/Recreation Zone (OR).
(1) The purpose of the Open Space/Recreation Zone
(OR) is to protect areas of significant natural,
recreational or aesthetic value which are susceptible
to significant degradation by man's activities and for
12524 7-10-95
()
f )
()
§ 125-33 ZONING § 125-33
which protection cannot adequately be accomplished
by inclusion in any of the other zones.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Open
Space/Recreation Zone (OR) include all those areas
designated as OR within the property lines and
street center lines shown on the Official Zoning
Map, plus the land between the normal high-water
line and a line one thousand (1,000) feet back from
the normal high-water line of Jerry Pond which is
not designated otherwise.
J. Wetland Protection Zone (WP). [Amended 4-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 1-95]
( 1) The purpose of the Wetland Protection Zone (WP) is
to conserve freshwater wetlands in essentially their
natural state because of the indispensable biologic,
hydrologic and environmental functions that they
perform.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Wetland Protection
Zone (WP) include the land enclosed by the upland
edge of nonforested areas ten (10) acres or more in
size, identified as nonforested freshwater wetlands
by the National Wetlands Inventory prepared by the
Fish and Wildlife Service of the United States Department
of Interior.
K. Shoreland Protection Zone (SP). [Amended 4-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1-95]
(1) The purpose of the Shoreland Protection Zone (SP)
is to protect water quality, productive habitat, biotic
systems and the scenic' and natural values on
relatively undeveloped shorelands from adverse
impact from development.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Shoreland
Protection Zone (SP) include:
(a) The land between the normal high·water line
and a line one hundred (100) feet back from the
12525 7-10-91
§ 125-33 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-33
normal high-water line of the following water
bodies:
[1] Jerry Pond.
[2] Dolby Flowage.
[3] The West Branch of the Penobscot River.
(b) The land between the normal high-water line
and a line seventy-five (75) feet back from the
normal high-water line of all tributary brooks
and streams to the water bodies listed in
Subsection K(2)(a) above, including Millinocket
Stream, Ledge Cut Brook and Jerry Brook,
which is not designated otherwise.
(c) The land between the upland edge and a line
seventy-five (75) feet back from the upland edge
of all nonforested freshwater wetlands
designated as (WP), which is not designated
otherwise.
(d) The land between the upland edge and a line
two hundred fifty (250) feet back from the
upland edge of all nonforested freshwater
wetlands designated as (WP), and as high or
moderate value for wildlife by the Maine Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along
artificially formed great ponds, along rivers
defined by the one-hundred-year floodplain as
designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance
Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps or
the flood of record or, in the absence of these, by
soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
L. Habitat Protection Overlay Zone (HP). [Added
4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95)
(1) The purpose of the Habitat ProtectiOn Overlay Zone
(HP) is to protect essential and significant wildlife
12526 7-10-96
()
~,
\ .. )
§ 125-33 ZONING § 125-34
habitats in accordance with the requirements of the
Comprehensive Planning and Land Use Regulation
Act (30-A M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.) and the
Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act (38 M.R.S.A. § 435
et seq.).
(2) Areas designated as being in the Habitat Protection
Overlay Zone (HP) include all those lands identified
and mapped by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife, pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act (38 M.R.S.A. § 480 A-V).
M. Commercial Forestland Zone (CF). [Added 4.13 .. 1995 by
Ord. No. 1-95)
(1) The purpose of the Commercial Forestland Zone
(CF) is to safeguard the town's commercial
forestland registered under the Tree Growth Tax
Law (36 M.R.S.A. § 571 et seq.) from future growth
and development except for those structures, uses
and activities considered necessary or desirable for
the growing, management, harvesting and
processing of commercial forest products and those
structures, uses and activities considered necessary
or desirable for the well planned multiple-use of said
lands.
(2) Areas designated as being in the Commercial
Forestland Zone (CF) include all those lands
registered, as of April 1, 1994, under the Tree
Growth Tax Law (36 M.R.S.A. § 571 et seq.),
designated as (CF) on the Official Zoning Map and
not otherwise designated.
() § 125-34. Official Zoning Map.
A. Zones established by this Part 2 are defined and bounded
as shown on the Official Land Use Zoning Map of
Millinocket, Maine, which, together with its notations
and amendments from time to time, is hereby made a
part of this Part 2.
12527 7-10-95
§ 125-34 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-35
B. The official copy of the map shall be that map which
bears the certification that it is true and correct, signed
by the Chairman of the Planning Board, attested by the
Town Clerk and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 125-35. Interpretation of zone boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundary lines of zones as
shown on the Official Zoning Map of Millinocket, Maine, the
following rules of interpretation shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, public utilities or
rights-of-ways shall be construed as following such
center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
property lines shall be construed as following property
lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following
shorelines of any lake or pond shall be construed as
following the normal high water mark.
D. Boundaries indicated as being the extension of center
lines of streets shall be construed to be the extension of
such center lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as being the extension of property
lines shall be construed to be extensions of such property
lines.
F. Boundaries iridicated as approximately following the
center lines of streams, rivers or other continuously
flmving watercourses shall be construed as following the
channel center line of such watercourses.
G. Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extension of
features listed above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
12528 7-10-915
§ 125-35 ZONING § 125-37
H. Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown on the Official
Map, or in other circumstances where uncertainty exists
with respect to the location of a boundary, the Planning
Board shall interpret the zone boundaries.
ARTICLE VII
Schedule of Uses
§ 125-36. Activities described.
A. A matrix listing the uses permitted in the various zones
under this Part 2 appears at the end of this chapter.
B. The various land uses contained in the matrix are
organized according to the following eight (8) activity
classifications:
1. Noncommercial Recreational Activities
2. Resource Management Activities
3. Resource Extraction Activities
4. Residential Activities
5. Institutional Activities
6. Commercial Activities
7. Industrial Activities
8. Transportation and Utilities
§ 125-37. Symbols used in Schedule of Uses. [Am.ended
4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95]
The following symbols contained in the Schedule of Uses
have the following meanings:
A. Zone symbols.
Symbol
Rl
R2
RD
DC
Description
Downtown Residential Zone
Medium Density Residential Zone
Rural Development Zone
Downtown Commercial Development Zone
12529 7-10-98
§ 125-37 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-38
Symbol Description
HC Highway Commercial Development Zone
NC Neighborhood Commercial Development
Zone
ID Industrial Development Zone
AD Airport Development Zone
OR Open Space/Recreation Zone
WP Wetland Protection Zone
SP Shoreland Protection Zone
HP Habitat Protection Overlay Zone
CF Commercial Forestland Zone
B. Pennit symbols.
Symbol
y
s
N
Description
Use allowed without a site plan review
Use requires site plan review and
approval of either the- Planning Board or
the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
Article XI or if a subdivision,
subdivision approval from the Planning
Board pursuant to the Subdivision
Ordinance
Use prohibited within the zone
§ 125-38. Uses substantially similar to permitted uses.
Uses substantially similar to permitted uses may be
permitted.
A. Uses allowed without a permit. Uses substantially
similar to those allowed without a permit, but which arc
not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be permitted
upon a ruling by the Planning Board that such use is
substantially similar to such uses.
B. Uses requiring the review and approval of the Planning
Board. Uses substantially similar to those requiring the
review and approval of the Planning Board, but which
12530 7-10-95
()
() ... ..-
§ 125-38 ZONING § 125-41
are not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be permitted
by the Planning Board.
§ 125-39. Uses substantially similar to prohibited uses
are prohibited.
Uses substantially similar to any uses listed as prohibited
uses in the Schedule of Uses shall be prohibited.
§ 125-39.1. Uses permitted in Habitat Protection Overlay
Zone. [Added 4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95]
Uses permitted in the Habitat Protection Overlay Zone shall
be those permitted in the underlying zone classification,
provided that such use or activity has been reviewed by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and
approved in Writing and subject to such terms and conditions as
the Department deems necessary to mitigate any potential
adverse impacts on the habitat being protected.
§ 125-40. Compliance with land use standards required.
All uses permitted must occur and be maintained in
compliance with the applicable requirements and land use
standards contained in Article VIII.
§ 125-41. Schedule of Uses.2
2 Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses appears at the end of this chapter.
12530.1 7-10-95
§ 125-42 MILLINOCKET CODE
§ 125·42. Purpose.
ARTICLE VIII
Land Use Standards
§ 125-43
The purpose of the regulations contained in this Article is to
allow maximum utilization of land while assuring against
adverse impacts on the environment, neighboring properties
and the public interest. This assurance is provided by
separating the area of the Town of Millinocket into zones and
permitting specific land uses within each, provided that a use
meets all the additional criteria specified in this Part 2.
§ 125·43. General standards.
A. The following land use standards shall govern all
permits and approvals issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer and the Planning Board.
B. Shoreland standards are included, beginning in Article
IX of this Part 2, which apply to land uses within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the normal high-water line of
any great pond or river, within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland or within
seventy-five (75) feet of the high-water line of a stream.
C. In reviewing applications submitted pursuant to this
Part 2, the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
(Cont'd on page 12531)
12530.2 7-10-95
()
(7' '.J
§ 125-43 ZONING § 125-44
Board shall consider the following standards · prior to
issuing final approval.
§ 125-44. Airport special standards.
The following special requirements shall apply to each
permitted use within the Airport Development Zone (AD):
A. Lighting.
(1) Pulsating, flashing, rotating, oscillating or other
type of lighting intended as an attention~getting
device, except as approved by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), shall be expressly prohibited.
(2) Floodlights, spotlights or other lighting devices shall
be arranged or shielded so as not to cast
illumination in an upward direction above an
imaginary line extended from the light source
parallel to the ground.
(3) Any light which constitutes a misleading light
within the meaning of TSO-N19, or such other
regulations as may be thereafter duly adopted by
the Civil Aeronautics Administration, is expressly
prohibited.
B. Radio and electronic.
(1) Any radio or electronic device shall be permitted
only in conjunction with a valid license therefor or
other authorization as may be issued by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(2) Any radio or electronic device, the operation of
which would violate any rules or regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission, is expressly
prohibited.
C. Smoke. Any operation or use which emits smoke, dust or
any visible fumes or vapors into the atmosphere shall be
expressly prohibited.
12531 4-215-93
§ 125-45 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-45
§ 125-45. Access to site.
A. Capacity of off-site roads.
(1) Vehicular access to the site shall be on roads which
have adequate capacity to accommodate the
additional traffic generated by the development.
Intersections on major access routes to the site
within one-half (112) mile of any entrance road which
are functioning at a level of service of C or better
prior to the development shall function at a
minimum level of service of C after development. If
any intersection is functioning at a level of service of
D or lower prior to the development, the project
shall not reduce the current level of service.
(2) The Planning Board may approve a development not
meeting this requirement if the applicant
demonstrates that:
(a) A public agency has committed funds to
construct the improvements necessary to bring
the level of access to the required standard; or
(b) The applicant will assume financial
responsibility for the improvements necessary
to bring the level of service to the required
standard and will guaranty the completion of
the improvements within one (1) year of
approval of the project.
B. Vehicular access. The following standards apply to
design and construction of vehicular access to properties:
(1) Each property shall be provided with vehicular
access to the property by abutting private or public
ways. Private rights-of-way shall be protected by
permanent easements.
(2) The following criteria shall be followed for entrances
and/or driveways to any use other than single- and
two-family dwellings:
12532 4-215 -93
§ 125-45
C)
ZONING
(a) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located
and designed in profile and grading to afford
safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient
ingress and egress to and from the site and to
minimize conflict with the flow of traffic.
(b) The dimensions of driveways shall be designed
to adequately accommodate the volume and
character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted
daily.
(c) Provision shall be made for convenient and safe
emergency vehicle access to all buildings and
structures at all times.
(d) For a distance of twenty (20) feet from the
intersection of any two (2) streets along street
lines, no wall, fence, sign or other structure and
no hedges, trees or other growth shall be
planted or erected in such a manner as to
materially impede vision between a height of
two and one-half (2112) and ten (10) feet above
street level.
(e) Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so
designed in profile and grading and so located
as to provide the following minimum sight
distance measured in each direction. The
measurements shall be from the driver's seat of
a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit
driveway with the front of the vehicle a
minimum of ten (10) feet behind the curbline or
edge of the shoulder.
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
25
35
40
45
12533
Required Sight
Distance
(feet)
160
240
275
325
4.-25-93
§ 125-45 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-45
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
50
55
Required Sight
Distance
(feet)
350
425
(0 Where a site occupies a corner of two (2)
intersecting roads, no driveway entrance or exit
shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the point
of tangency of the existing or proposed curb
radius of that site. Access to the lot shall be
provided across the frontage and to the street
where there · is less potential for traffic
congestion and for hazards to traffic and
pedestrians.
(g) The intersection of any access drive or proposed
street shall function at a level of service of C
following development if the project will
generate four hundred (400) or more vehicle
trips per twenty-four-hour period or at a level
which shall allow safe access into and out of the
project if less than four hundred (400) trips are
generated. Projects generating four hundred
(400) or more vehicle trips per twenty-four-hour
period shall provide two (2) or more separate
points of vehicular access into and out of the
site.
(h) In all zones where two (2) or more driveways
connect on a single site to any one (1) road, a
minimum clear distance of one hundred (100)
feet measured along the right-of-way shall
separate the closest edges of any two (2) such
driveways, unless the driveways are one ( 1) way
only, then the minimum clear distance. shall be
no less than fifty ( 50) feet.
(i) Angles. Driveways used for two-way operation
shall intersect the road at an angle of or as near
12534 4 - 2G-93
()
\._' )
~~ .J
()
§ 125-45 ZONING § 125-45
to ninety degrees (90°) as site conditions will
permit and in no case less than sixty degrees
(60°). Driveways used by vehicles in one (1)
direction of travel (right-tum only) shall not
form an angle smaller than forty~five degrees
( 45°) with the road, unless acceleration and
deceleration lanes are provided.
G) Dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall
be designed to adequately accommodate the
volume and character of vehicles anticipated.
The required maximum and m1n1mum
dimensions for driveways are indicated below.
Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic
or traffic of over fifteen percent (15%) truck
traffic shall be required to utilize high to
maximum dimensions.
Use
3 to 10 dwelling
units
10 dwelling
units or more
Commercial and
industrial
NOTES:
Driveway Width*
1-Way
Operation
(feet)
10 to 15
15 to 25
15 to 30
2-Way
Operation
(feet)
15 to 25
20 to 35
25 to 35
*All driveways shall be five (5) feet wider at the
curbline, and this additional width shall be
maintained for a distance of twenty (20) feet into
the site.
(k) Grades. Driveways shall not have a grade in
excess of ten percent (10%) over the entire
length. On driveways entering onto Route 11 or
157, the grade shall not be more than three
12535 4-25-93
§ 125-45 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-45
percent (3%) for the first one hundred (100) feet
from the road unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board. Driveways shall not be located
where visibility is limited because of curves or
topography.
(l) Stacking or queuing space standards for drivethrough
businesses. Stacking or queuing spaces
shall be located on site and shall not be located
within the required setbacks. Stacking or
queuing spaces shall not interfere with the stall
and aisle space requirements as described in
the off-street parking and loading
requirements. 4
[ 1] Banks or other commercial uses. There
shall be a minimum of eight (8) spaces.
[2] Drive-up restaurant. There shall be eleven
(11) spaces for the drive-up window, with a
minimum of five (5) of these spaces for the
ordering station.
C. Highway access. The following provisions shall apply to
all properties which abut and/or have frontage on Route
11or157:
(1) Buffer strip. Access to the highway shall be
controlled in the interest of public safety. Each
building or group of buildings and its parking or
service areas shall be physically separated from the
highway or street by a buffer strip as required by
§ 125-47 of this Article. Such buffer strips shall be
landscaped as required in § 125-4 7B( 4) of this
Article.
(2) Such property may be divided into lots, provided
that all vehicular movements to and from the
highway shall be via a single paved driveway or
entrance serving all lots or premises.
4 Editor's Note: See §§ 125-83 and 126·64.
12536 4-25- 93
()
--,
\. .'
§ 125-45 ZONING § 125-46
(3) All lots of record legally existing at the time of the
adoption of this Part 2 shall be allowed one (1) direct
access to Route 11 or 157, provided that the
minimum sight distance specified in Subsection
B(2)(e) of this section is met.
( 4) A second driveway entrance or exit for large parking
areas serving two (2) or more permitted uses may be
permitted, provided that the two (2) access points
are' not closer than eight hundred (800) feet, and
they both can meet the minimum sight distances
specified in Subsection B(2)(e) of this section.
D. Emergency vehicle access. Provisions shall be made for
providing and maintaining convenient and safe
emergency vehicle access to all buildings and strnctures
at all times.
§ 125-46. Bed-and-breakfast.
Bed-and-breakfast accommodations shall be permitted in the
private, year-round residence of the host family who lives on the
premises, provided that:
A. The maximum number of guests at any time is six (6)
persons, not including children under the age of twelve
(12).
B. The maximum number of guest rooms is three (3).
C. Breakfast is the only meal provided by the host family.
D. One (1) sign not to exceed four (4) square feet is
permitted on the premises.
E. 'rhe bed-and-breakfast operation shall not have any
adverse effect on the neighbors.
12537 "-25- 93
§ 125-47 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-47
§ 125-47. Buffering and screening.
All projects requiring site plan review under this Part 2 shall
provide buffer strips and/or screening in accordance with the
following standards:
A. Buffer strips. Buffer strips may be required of the
following specified widths for the following areas and/or
purposes:
(1) Along any water body within or adjacent to the
project, where the Board determines it desirable and
necessary, to protect such water bodies from
sedimentation and surface runoff. Such buffer strips
shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet in
width.
(2) Along any property line of any lot located in the
Highway Commercial (HC) and Industrial
Development (ID) Zones which abuts a Downtown
Residential (Rl), Medium Density Residential (R2)
or Rural Development (RD) Zone. Such buffer strips
shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width
if the adjacent lot is undeveloped, and fifty (50) feet
if the adjacent lot is developed and there is no buffer
strip on the adjacent lot. If there is a buffer strip on
the adjacent lot and the applicant for site plan
approval provides the Board with some form of
guaranty that the adjoining buffer strip will remain
undeveloped, the Board may reduce the required
buffer strip by the width of the encumbered
adjoining buffer strip.
(3) Along on-site roads running parallel to an off-site
road, where the Board determines it desirable and
necessary, to prevent driver confusion particularly
at night. Such buffer strips shall be a minimum of
fifty (50) feet in width.
(4) Along any property line which abuts Route 11 or
157, where the Board determines it desirable and
necessary, to protect and enhance scenic character
12538 4-25-93
(~
"' . .../
()
,«) ( .
\
§ 125-47 ZONING § 125-47
and provide visual separation between the highway
and adjacent uses. Such buffer strips shall be a
minimum of fifty (50) feet in width.
(5) Along any property line, where the Board
determines it desirable and necessary, to shield
incompatible uses from one another. Such buffer
strips shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in
width.
(6) Along any property line, where the Board
determines it desirable and necessary, to block
prevailing winds to stop wind-borne debris from
leaving the site. Such buffer strips shall be a
minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width.
(7) Along any property line, where the Board
determines it desirable and necessary, to prevent
any proposed lighting from interfering with
residential properties or with safe driving. Such
buffer strips shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25)
feet in width.
(8) Along any property line, where the Board
determines it desirable and necessary, of all exposed
storage and service areas, sand and gravel
extraction operations, utility buildings and
structures, automobile salvage and junkyards,
parking areas, garbage collection areas and loading
and unloading areas, to minimize their visual
impact on adjoining traveled ways and properties.
Such buffer strips shall be a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet in width.
(9) Where a potential safP.ty hAzard to children would
be likely to arise, and physical screening sufficient
to deter small children from entering the premises is
determined by the Board to be desirable and
necessary, a buffer strip shall be required.
(10) In areas between important wildlife habitats to
provide adequate space for the movement of wildlife
12539 4-25-93
§ 125-47 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-47
from one area to another. Such buffer strips shall be
as recommended by the Maine Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
B. Screening. Screening, within the required buffer strips,
in the form of natural or man-made barriers, existing
vegetation or new plantings, if suitable existing
vegetation and natural features do not exist, is required
as follows:
(1) Retention of natural features in buffer strips.
Natural features in buffer strips shall be
maintained wherever possible. When natural
features, such as topography, gullies, stands of
trees, shrubbery or rock outcrops, do not exist or are
insufficient to provide the required screening, other
kinds of screening shall be considered.
(2) Classification of screens. Screening shall be
classified as follows:
(a) Screening with an opaque screen: a visual
screen that is opaque, from the ground to a
height of at least six (6) feet with semiopaque
visual barrier from above the opaque barrier to
a height of at least twenty (20) feet. The
purpose of this screen is to exclud~ all visual
contact between uses and cr('. et+.£ a strong
impression of spatial separatio~. Such screen
may be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped
earth berm, planted vegetation, existing
vegetation or appropriate combinations thereof.
(b) Screening with a semiopaque screen: a visual
screen that is opaque, from the ground to a
height of three (3) feet with semiopaque visual
barrier from above the opaque barrier to a
height of at least twenty (20) feet. The purpose
of this screen is to partially block visual contact
between uses and to create a strong separation
of spaces. Such screen may be composed of a
wall, fence, landscaped earth berm, planted
12540 4-25-93
()
)
\.. _ ... l
<)
§ 125-47 ZONING § 125-47
vegetation, existing vegetation or appropriate
combinations hereof.
(c) Screening with a broken screen: an intermittent
visual screen from above the ground to a height
of at least twenty (20) feet. The purpose of this
screen is to create the impression of a
separation of spaces without necessarily
eliminating visual contact between the spaces.
Such screen may be composed of a wall, fence,
landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation,
existing vegetation or appropriate combinations
thereof.
(3) Suggested screening combinations. The following
suggested screening combinations are considered a
minimum to achieve the above screen classifications:
(a)
(b)
Screening with an opaque screen:
[1] Small trees planted twenty (20) feet on
center in combination with a six-foot-high
evergreen hedge planted four ( 4) feet on
center;
[2] Large trees planted thirty-five (35) feet on
center in combination with a six-foot-high
wooden fence; or
[3] Tall evergreen trees, stagger planted, with
branches touching the ground.
Screening with a semiopaque screen:
[1] Small trees planted twenty (20) feet on
center in combination with a three-foothigh
stone wall or wood fence;
[2] Small trees planted twenty (20) feet on
center on top of a three-foot-high seeded
earth berm; or
[3] Large trees planted thirty-five (35) feet on
center in combination with a three-foot-
12541 4-25 - 93
§ 125-47 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-47
high evergreen hedge planted three (3) feet
on center.
(c) Screening with a broken screen. Small trees
planted twenty (20) feet on center, small trees
planted thirty (30) feet on center in combination
with a split rail fence or large trees planted
thirty-five (35) feet on center in combination
with assorted shrubbery.
( 4) Screening required. The screening required for
various areas and purpose are as follows:
(a) In any buffer strip established between lots
located in any of the commercial or industrial
zones designated as HC or ID which abuts any
residential zone designated as RI, R2 or RD:
semiopaque screening.
(b) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of preventing driver confusion between on-site
road.s running pa.r allel to an off-site road: sem1opaque screerung.
(c) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of protecting or enhancing the scenic character
along Route 11 or 157: broken screening.
( d) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of shielding incompatible uses from one
another: opaque or semiopaque screening.
(e) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of blocking prevailing winds to stop wind-borne
debr.i s from leav.i ng the site: opaque or sem1opaque screemng.
(f) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of preventing any proposed lighting from
interfering with residential properties or with
safe driving: opaque or semiopaque screening.
(g) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of deterring small children from entering areas
12542 4-25-93
§ 125-47
()
(5)
ZONING § 125-47
with potential safety hazards: opaque
screening.
(h) In any buffer strip established for the purpose
of screening exposed storage and service areas,
sand and gravel extracting operations, utility
buildings and structures, automobile salvage
and junkyards, parking areas, garbage
collection areas and loading and unloading
areas, to minimize their visual impact on
adjoining traveled ways and properties: opaque
screening.
(i) ·Between lots located in any commercial zone
designated as NC or DC which abut any
residential zone designated as Rl, R2 or RD,
when, in the judgment of the Planning Board or
Code Enforcement Officer, such screening is
desirable and/or necessary to separate
incompatible activities, minimize visual impact,
protect property values and protect the public.
health, safety and general welfare: a wooden
fence of appropriate design, height and
construction.
Plant material specifications. Unless otherwise
specifically indicated by the Planning Board, all
plant material used for any screening required
under this Part 2 shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(a) All planting shall be of a type and species
appropriate for the soil types, site conditions
and climatic conditions of the Town of
Mil1inocket.
(b) Plant material used for screening shall meet
the following minimum size standards:
Plant Type
Canopy tree, single stem
U nderstory tree
12543
Size
2.5-inch caliper
1.5-inch caliper
4-28-93
§ 125-47 :MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-48
Plant Type
Evergreen tree
Deciduous shrub
Evergreen shrub
Size
5 to 7 feet high
24 inches high
18 inches high
(c) Evergreen trees can be used as screening,
provided that they are planted properly. An
evergreen screen requires two (2) or three (3)
rows of staggered plantings. The rows should be
five (5) feet apart and the evergreer::is planted
four (4) feet on center.
(6) Maintenance of buffers and screening. Buffers and
screening shall be located and maintained as
follows:
(a) Fencing and screening shall be so located
within the property line to allow access for
maintenance on both sides without intruding
upon abutting properties.
(b) Fencing and screening shall be durable and
properly maintained at all times by the owner.
(c) All buffer strips shall be maintained in a neat
and sanitary condition by the owner.
(7) Plant material maintenance required. The owner of
any premises approved by the Board under any
section of this Part 2 shall have a continuing
obligation to maintain required plantings in
accordance with the terms of the Board's approval
and in a good and healthy condition.
§ 125-48. Campgrounds.
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements
imposed under state licensing procedures and the following:
A. Each tent or shelter site shall contain a minimum of five
thousand (5,000) square feet of suitable land in
12544 4-25-93
(}
( ' /)
§ 125-48 ZONING § 125-49
shoreland areas [i.e., within two hundred fifty (250) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water mark of
any pond or river], and two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of suitable land in inland areas, not
including driveways and roads, for each site.
B. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of off-street
parking plus maneuvering space shall be provided for
each tent or shelter site.
C. The area intended for placement of the tent or shelter
site and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of fifty ( 50) feet from the exterior lot lines of
the camping area and one hundred (100) feet from the
normal high-water elevation of any body ofwat.er.
D. Screening shall be required to shield the campground
from abutting areas.
§ 125-49. Conversions. 0 Conversion of existing structures into multifamily dwelling
units, in zones permitting multifamily dwellings, may be
permitted, provided that:
(.4' ,:;;
()
A. Off-street parking for two (2) vehicles per dwelling unit
plus maneuvering space will be provided.
B. Approval of conversion plans by the fire, electrical and
plumbing inspector(s) is required prior to issuance of a
building permit.
C. Each dwelling unit shall be at least four hundred ( 400)
square feet in area for one-bedroom units plus one
hundred twenty (120) square feet for each additional
bedroom.
D. Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet and kitchen
facilities, and no dwelling unit will share these facilities
with any other dwelling unit.
12545 7-10-95
§ 125-50 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-50
§ 125-50. Dimensional requirements. [Amended 1·20-1994
by Ord. No. 1-94; 4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95]
All strnctures and uses shall meet or exceed the following
dimensional requirements:
A. Residential zone dimensional requirements. 1
Residential Zone
Dimensional
Requirements
Minimum lot size
(square feet)
Minimum road/shore
frontage (feet)
Minimum front yard setback
from edge of right-of-way
(feet)
Minimum aide yard setback
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
Minimum rear yard setback
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
.rvlaximumlotcoverage
Maximum building height
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
NOTES:
Rl R2
Downtowu Medium Denaity
Residential Reaidential
Zone Zone
5,000 10,000
50 100
10 25
5
5 5
10 10
5 5
60% 25%
40 30
20 16
RD
Rural
Development
Zone
40,000
150
50
20
10
20
10
20%
30
16
1 These dimensional requirements do not prohibit the change of a permitted use to another permitted use
where the property or structure on or in which the use is located is a legal nonconformity.
2 On all built-upon lots, one (1) side yard setback may be reduced to five (5) feet, provided that the
remaining side yard setback is ten (10) feeL. 0111ill lots nut built upon prior~ January 1, 1994, both sid~ yard
setbacks shall he ten (10) feet or greater.
12546 7 - 10-95
()
·-,~
(.. .'... :J \
<J
§ 125-50 ZONING § 125-50
B. Commercial zo.ne dimensional requirements. 1
Commercial Zone
Dimensional
Requirement&
Minimum lot sil:e
(square feet)
Minimum road/shore
frontage (feet)
Minimum front yard
setback from edge of
right-of-way (feet)
Minimum side yard aetback
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
Minimum rear yard setback
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
Maxiinumlotcoverage
Maximum building height
Principal structures
(feet)
Accessory structures
(feet)
NOTES:
DC
Downtown
Commercial
Zone
5,000
50
0
NIA
NIA
10
5
90%
40
20
HC NC
Hilfbway Neighborhood
Commercial Commercial
Zone Zone
1 acre 7,500
200 75
50 20
25 10
10 5
25 10
10 5
80% 60%
40 30
20 16
1 These dimensional requirements do not prohibit the change of a permitted use to another perm
where the property or structure on or in which the use is located is a legal nonconformity.
C. Industrial zone dimensional requirements. 1
Industrial Zone Dimensional
Requirements
Minimum lot size
l'.finimum road/shore frontage
Minimum front yard setback from edge of
right-of-way
Minimum side yard setback
Principal structures
Accessory structures
12547
ID Industrial
Zone
2acres
2001aoo feet
100 feet
25 feet
25 feet
7-10-95
§ 125-50 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-50
Industrial Zone Dimensional
Requirements
Minimum rear yard setback
Principal structures
Accessory structures
Maximum lot coverage
Maximum building height
Principal structures
Accessory structures
NOTES:
ID Industrial
Zone
25 feet
25 feet
30%
100 feet
100 feet
1 These dimensional requirements do not prohibit the change
of a permitted use to another permitted use where the property
or structure on or in which the use is located is a legal
nonconformity.
D. Commercial forestland zone dimensional requirements.1
Commercial
Forestland Zone
Dimensional Requirements
Minimum lot size
Minimum road/shore frontage
Minimum front yard setback from edge
of right-of-way
Minimum side yard setback
Principal structures
Accessory structures
Minimum rear yard setback
Principle structures
Accessory structures
Maximum lot coverage
12548
CF Commercial
Forestland Zone
10 acres
200/300 feet
100 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
25 feet
30%
7-10-915
c:)
()
. """" . I
\ ,_,,. .
()
§ 125-50 ZONING
Commercial
Forestland Zone
Dimensional Requirements
Maximum building height
Principal structures
Accessory structures
NOTES:
§ 125-51
CF Commercial
Forestland Zone
100 feet
100 feet
1 These dimensional requirements do not prohibit the change of
a permitted use to another permitted use where the property or
structure on or in which the use is located is a legal
nonconformity.
§ 125-51. Dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odors, glare and
explosive materials.
A. Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases
which pose an unreasonable risk of harm to human
health or the environment shall be prohibited .
B. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to
produce unreasonable, offensive or . ·harmful odors
perceptible beyond its lot lines, measured either at
ground or habitable elevations.
C. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to
produce unreasonable glare or brightness beyond its lot
lines.
D. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases
shall be stored in bulk above ground, unless they are
stored in compliance with the requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Sections
30, 58 and 59-A.
12549 7-10-95
§ 125-52 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-52
§ 125-52. Erosion and sedimentation control.
The following measures relating to conservation, erosion and
sediment control shall be included where applicable as part of
all projects submitted for review and approval under this Part
2:
A. The procedures outlined in the erosion and
sedimentation control plan, prepared and submitted by
the applicant, shall be implemented during the site
preparation, construction and cleanup stages.
B. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and
water bodies shall be minimized by employing the
following best-management practices:
( 1) Stripping of vegetation, soil removal and regrading
or other development shall be done in such a way as
to minimize erosion.
(2) Development shall preserve outstanding natural
features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and
ensure conformity with topography so as to create
the least erosion potential and adequately handle
the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) The development shall not unreasonably increase
the rate or volume of surface water runoff from the
proposed site.
(4) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained, protected and supplemented.
(5) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minim um.
(6) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as
practicable.
(7) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to
protect disturbed areas during development.
(8) Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical
erosion control measures in accordance with the
standards of the County Soil and Water
12550 7-10-915
()
()
l· 3·""
-..._ , ,,
()
§ 125-52 ZONING § 125-52
Conservation District or the Maine Soil and Water
Conservation Commission shall be installed as soon
as practicable after construction ends.
(9) Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in
the runoff water shall be trapped by the use of
debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other
acceptable methods.
( 10) The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall
not be closer than ten ( 10) feet to an adjoining
property, unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board. Extraction operations (gravel pits, etc.) shall
not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of
any property line in absence of the prior written
agreement of the owner of such acljoining property.
( 11) During grading operations, methods of dust control
shall be employed wherever practicable.
(12) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping
vegetation, regrading or other development, it shall
be the responsibility of the developer causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all acljoining
surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his expense as quickly as
possible.
(13) Any activity on a stream, watercourse or swale or
upon a fioodway or right-of-way shall comply with
the Natural Resource Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A.
§§ 480-A and 480-S. Any such activity shall also be
conducted in such a manner so as to maintain as
nearly as possible the present state of the stream,
watercourse, swale1 floodway or right-of-way for the
duration of the activity and shall be returned to its
original or equal condition after such activity is
completed.
(14) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses
originating and completely on private property is
the responsibility of the owner to the point of open
12551 7-10-915
MILLINOCKET CODE
discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
§ 125-52.1. Fences and retaining walls. [Added 1·12-1995
by Ord. No. 7-94]
A. Height standards.
(1) Maximum fence heights. The maximum height of
fences shall be as follows:
(a) Rear lines. The maximum height of any fence
erected along the rear property line shall be
eight (8) feet, except as further limited in
Subsection A(2) below.
(b) Side lines. The maximum height of any fence
erected along the side property lines, not
fronting on the right-of-way of any public or
private road, from the rear property line to the
building front line shall be six (6) feet, except as
further limited in Subsection A(2) below.
(c) Front yards. The maximum height of any fence
erected between any side of a building facing a
street and the street right-of-way shall be
thirty-six (36) inches. In the case of doublefrontage
lots, this provision applies to both
front lot lines.
(2) Height exceptions. The Code Enforcement Officer
may permit fence heights greater than those
required in Subsection A(l):
(a) Upon a determination that such additional
height is necessary to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(b) Upon a determination that such additional
height is required by a more restrictive
provision of a state law, rule or regulation or
local ordinance, rule or regulation.
12552 7-10-95
()
(_)
(°0 ·J
()
§ 125-52.1 ZONING § 125-52.1
(c) In front yards, when the higher fence is of a
design that it will not create a safety problem or
obstruct the visibility of vehicles or pedestrians
entering or exiting adjoining or neighboring
properties.
(d) When a special exception has been granted by
the Board of Appeals as provided below.
(3) Special exceptions. The Board of Appeals may
authorize, as a special exception, the Code Enforcement
Officer to permit fence heights greater than in
Subsection A(l) above, after holding a public
hearing and preparing written findings, that such
additional height:
(a) Will not result in an adverse impact on the
public health, safety or general welfare.
(b) Will relate harmoniously to the terrain so as to
have a mimmum adverse affect on the
environment and aesthetic qualities of the
neighborhood.
(c) Will relate harmoniously to existing buildings
in the vicinity that have a visual relationship
with the proposed fence so as to have a
mirumum adverse affect on the view, air
circulation, solar gain, light or the aesthetic
qualities of the neighboring buildings.
( d) Will not be injurious to the comfort and
happiness of individuals and the public or
injurious to property rights and property
values. The favorable testimony and written
statements of affected abutting property owners
shall be prima facie evidence that criteria in
Subsection A(3)(c) and (d) have been met.
( 4) Retaining wall heights. The height of retaining
walls shall be the minimum necessary to complete
the retaining task.
12552.1 7-10-95
§ 125-52.1 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-52.l
B. Location standards.
( 1) Location. All parts, including the footings, of any
fence or retaining wall shall be located on the
property in which the person constructing the fence
or retaining wall has a legal right or title.
(2) Burden of proof. In all instances, the burden of proof
as to where the property line is located shall be upon
the person proposing to erect the fence or retaining
wali.
(3) Requiring a survey authorized. In situations where
there is a dispute or where there is uncertainty on
the part of the applicant as to. exactly where the
property line is located, the Code· Enforcement
Officer is authorized to require the submission of a
line survey prepared and attested to by a registered
land surveyor. If a survey is ordered, such a suriey
shall be submitted prior to the issuance of any fence
permit.
C. Design and construction standards.
(1) Design and construction. All fences and retaining
walls shall be designed and erected or constructed so
as not to pose a threat to the safety of the general
public or abutting properties and to meet applicable
local and state construction standards.
(2) Dress side to face public ways and spaces. The dress
side or the side showing the least amount of the post
and rail structure of any fence shall face all public
ways and publicly owned areas.
(3) Dress side to face neighboring properties. The dress
side or the side showing the least amount of the post
and rail structure of any fence shall face all private
properties abutting the property upon which the
fence is being erected, unl_ess the abutting
landowner agrees otherwise in writing and a
notarized copy of said agreement is provided to the
Code Enforcement Officer.
12552.2 7-10- 95
()
()
§ 125-52.1 ZONING § 125-53
D. Maintenance offences and walls.
(1) Proper maintenance required. All fences and
retaining walls shall be maintained in such a
manner as to be durable, safe, neat in appearance
and structurally sound at all times.
(2) Maintenance responsibility. Proper maintenance
shall be the responsibility of the owner of record of
the property on which the fence or retaining wall is
located.
(3) Order to repair authorized. Upon a determination
that an existing fence or retaining wall constitutes a
risk to the health and safety of the general public or
to abutting properties, the Code Enforcement Officer
is authorized to issue an order to repair to the owner
of such fence or retaining wall.
E. Special situations.
(1) Swimming pools. All swimming pools shall be
enclosed with fences which meet the requirements of
30-A M.R.S.A. § 1631.
(2) Junkyards and automobile graveyards. All
junkyards and automobile graveyards shall be
enclosed with fences or screening which meet the
requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3755 and the
provisions of§ 125-55 of this chapter.
§ 125-53. Flood hazard areas.
When any part of a development is located in a flood hazard
area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, the plan shall indicate that all principal structures on
lots in the development shall be constructed with their lowest
floor, including the basement, at least one (1) foot above the one
hundred-year-flood elevation. Such a restriction shall be
included in the deed to any lot which is included or partially
included in the fiood hazard area.
12552.3 7-10-915
§ 125-54 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-54
§ 125-54. Home occupations. [Amended 8-4-1994 by Ord.
No. 4-94]
A. Purposes. The purposes of these home occupation
provisions are in recognition of:
(1) The need to protect market value of existing
residential properties;
(2) The need to guarantee existing residential property
owners freedom from excessive noise, excessive
traffic, nuisance, fire hazard and other possible
adverse effects from commercial-type activities
being conducted in residential areas;
(3) The need of some. citizens to use their place of
residence for limited commercial type activities to
produce or supplement personal or family income;
( 4) The fact that certain limited home occupational uses
can be useful to both the community as well as the
residential-proprietor;
(5) The fact that the nature of the investment or
operation of some activities have a pronounced
tendency once started to rapidly increase beyond the
limits permitted and thereby impair the use and
value of residentially zoned areas for residential
purposes; and
(6) The town's obligation to protect the integrity of its
residential areas from activities which detract from
the residential character of a neighborhood and
infringe upon the rights of neighborhood residents.
B. General limitations. Uses permitted as home occupations
shall be limited as follows:
(1) Uses that are limited in extent;
(2) Uses that are clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the premises for residential purposes;
12552.4 '7-10-95
()
·-...
)
\ --~;'
§ 125-54 ZONING § 125-54
(3) Uses that do not substantially change the
appearance or condition of the residence or
accessory structure;
(4) Uses that are compatible with neighboring
residential uses; and
(5) Do not detract from the residential character of the
neighborhood.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
HOME OCCUPATION- Any use of a legally existing
residential property which is consistent with the
limitations established in Subsection B above and which
is in compliance with the performance standards
established in Subsection D below. Uses which are not
consistent with the limitations established in Subsection
B above and/or which are not in compliance with the
(Cont'd on page 12553)
12552.5 7-10 -915

.(1--.': \)
()
@·,
0
§ 125-54 ZONING * 125-54
performance standards established in Subsection D
below shall not be registered us a home occupation or be
issued a permit as a home occupation. Such activities
shall be considered by definition either a conforming or a
nonconforming commercial activity.
D. Performance standards. In any legally existing dwelling
unit or accessory structure, home occupations may be
conducted, provided that they are in compliance with the
applicable requirements of Article VIII and the following
performance standards:
( 1) Number allowed per residential unit. The total
number of home occupations conducted within a
dwelling unit is not limited, except that the
cumulative impact of all home occupations
conducted within the dwelling unit or on the
premises thereof shall not be greater than the
impact of one ( 1) home occupation.
(2) Appearance. In no way shall the appearance of the
residential structure or the premises be altered by a
home occupation, and in no way shall the home
occupation be conducted such that the structure or
premises differs from its residential character by the
use of colors, materials, premises layout,
construction or lighting.
!3) Garage sales and yard sales. Home occupations do
not include garage sales and yard sales.
(4) Home occupations involving classes or instruction. If
the home occupation is the type in which classes or
instruction is given, there shall be no more than
four (4) students or pupils in the dwelling unit or on
the premises at any one ( 1) time, provided that the
Planning Board may grant specific conditional
approval of a reasonable number of additional
students if it is found that the additional students
will not generate additional motor vehicle traffic.
This requirement limiting class size shall not be
construed to prohibit occasional exceptions for
12553 12- 10 - 94
* 125-54 MILLINOCKET CODE * 125-54
events such as recitals, demonstrations and other
similar gatherings.
(5) Retail sales limited. Retail sales, on premises, shall
be prohibited except for the retail sales of
merchandise, products, supplies or goods produced
or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home
occupation, provided that incidental retail sales may
be made in connection with other permitted home
occupations. (Examples: a single-chair beauty parlor
would be allowed to sell combs, hair spray and other
miscellaneous items to customers. A dressmaker
would be permitted to sell only clothing produced or
fabricated on site and would not be allowed to
purchase stocks of dresses for sale to the general
public on-site.)
(6) Number of employees.
(a) Not more than one (1) person other than
members of the immediate family permanently
residing on the premises shall be employed, on
a full-time or part-time basis, in the home
occupation, except that the Planning Board may
grant specific conditional approval of up to two
(2) additional persons to be employed on a
part-time basis for periods not to exceed three
(3) months if it is found that the additional
persons will not genera te additional motor
vehicle traffic.
(b) Persons engaged in building trades or similar
fields, using their dwelling units or residential
premises as an office for business activities
carried on off the premises, may have more
employees if they are not employed on the
premises.
(7) Space/floor area devoted to home occupation. A
home occupation shall be conducted only within the
dwelling unit or an accessory building and shall not
occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the
12554 . 12 - 10 - 94
(,,._~
'·~:.}
()
l\ ":.~'. . d.. .
(J
* 125-54 ZONING * 125-54
combined total floor area of the dwelling unit and
accessory buildings on the premises, excluding any
unenclosed areas such as decks and open porches,
etc.
!8) Outdoor display and storage. There shall be no
outside operations, storage or display of products,
materials, goods, supplies or equipment associated
with the home occupation without the specific
conditional approval of the Planning Board based
upon a determination that such out-of-doors
operation can be accomplished without adverse
impact to adjoining properties and the traveling
public, except that samples of goods sold or jobrelated
materials may be carried in vehicles used for
business purposes.
(9} Off-street parking. The home occupation shall not
require more than two (2) on-street parking spaces,
for clients or customers, in addition to the off-street
parking spaces available to the residence. The two
(2) on-street spaces shall be limited to parking
within the street frontage of the residence.
( 10) Home deliveries.
(a} Home occupations shall not involve the use or
storage of tractor trailers, semi-trucks or heavy
equipment such as fuel trucks, logging or
construction trucks or equipment.
(b) Deliveries shall not exceed those normally and
reasonably occurring from a residence and shall
not include more than an average of four ( 4)
deliveries of products or materials per day.
(c) At any one (1) time only one (1) commercial
vehicle associated with the activities of the
home occupation may be parked on-street near
the premises for more than one (1) consecutive
hour.
(11) Signs.
12554.1 H-10-94
§ 125-54 MILLINOCKET CODE * 125-54
(a) There shall be no signs related to the home
occupation present on the property, except one
(1) flush-mounted wall sign, not over three {3)
square feet in area, indicating only the address
and occupant's name and occupation.
(b) The Planning Board may grant specific
conditional approval of larger signs and nonftush-
mounted signs upon a determination that
a sign would not detract from the essential
residential appearance of the particular
dwelling and is consistent with the character of
the zone in which it is located.
(c} Flush-mounted wall signs in existence prior to
January 1, 1993, shall be considered as a
legally existing nonconforming sign and shall
not be used as a basis for not registering a use
as a home occupation.
(12) Adverse impacts.
(a) A home occupation shall not be permitted to
produce any offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
electrical interference, dust, odors or heat. Any
noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference,
dust, odors or heat detectable beyond the
property lines shall constitute a violation of the
terms of this provision.
(b) Home occupations which will constitute a fire
hazard to neighboring residences, will adversely
affect neighboring property values or will
constitute a nuisance or otherwise be
detrimental to the neighbors because of
excessive traffic, excessive noise, odors or other
circumstances shall not be approved.
(13) Hours of operation. In no case shall a home
occupation be open to the public at times earlier
than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m.
E. Administrative procedures.
12554.2 12- 10 - 94
t"J ·--
('·.)" .
(0
0
ZONING § 125-54
(1) Registration required. All home occupations
established, operated or maintained in the Town of
l\ilillinocket are required to register with the Code
Enforcement Officer, as follows:
(a) Existing home occupations. Within six (6)
months of the effective date of this provision all
existing home occupations are required to
register.
(b) Registration forms. Applications to register a
home occupation shall be on forms provided by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Registration limited. Uses which do not meet
the definition of a home occupation, as provided
in Subsection C above, shall not be registered
as a home occupation.
(d) Failure to register. A failure to register us
required in Subsection E(l)(a) above shall be
deemed abandonment of any right to operate a
nonconforming home occupation regardless of
actual intent. Thereafter, that home occupation
will be required to obtain a permit and treated
as though it were a new home occupation.
(2) Permits l'equired. Pl'ior to the establishment of a
new home occupation after the effective date of this
provision, the owner of the residential property shall
apply for a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuan~ to § 125-93F.
(a) Application forms. Applications for a home
occupation permit shall be on forms provid~d by
the Code Enforcement Oilicer.
(b) Permits limited. Permits for home occupations
are limited as follows:
[11 Permits for home occupations shall be
granted to a designated person who resides
at the residential address.
12554.3 12 - 10 - 94
* 125-54 l\ULLINOCKET CODE § 125-54
121 Permits for home occupations are not
transferable from person to person or from
address to address.
131 Should a home occupation permit holder
die or move to a new location, the existing
permit shall be automatically terminated,
except that, in the case of death, the
surviving spouse or child residing at the
same address may continue the permit
upon notice to and written authorization
from the Code Enforcement Officer.
[41 In cases where an application is considered
not to be in compliance with the home
occupation performance standards, the
application will be denied.
(c) Revocation of a permit. The Code Enforcement
Officer may revoke any home occupation permit
for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in
this Part 2. If the permit is revokf~d. such home
occupation use shall be terminated.
(d ) Compliance with other applicable statutes and
standards. Home occupations shall comply with
all local, state or federal regulations pertinent
to the activity pursued, and the requirements of
or permission granted by this section shall not
be construed as an exemption from such
regulations.
(e) Inspections.
[11 Initial inspection. The premises to be used
for a home occupation shall be inspected by
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to any
approval or registratio!1 of a home
occupation permit.
f2J Compliance inspections. Home occupation
applicants shall permit a reasonable
inspection of the premises by the Code En-
12554.4 12 - 10- 94
(-~-
()
( ].. '\. ·-,
·~., (J
§ 125-54 ZONING § 125-55
forcement Officer or designee to determine
compliance with this Part 2.
~ 125-55. Junkyards. [Amended 8-4-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94]
A. No junkyard as defined in this Part 2 shall be
established, operated or maintained without first
obtaining site plan approval by the Planning Board, a
nontransferable land use permit issued by the Town
Council i·n accordance with state licensing and local
requfrements, and complying with the following
provisions:
( 1) Junkyards shall be located a minimum of two
hundred (200) feet from the edge of the right-ofways
and shall be set back one hundred (100) feet
from all side and rear lot lines.
(2) Junkyards shall be located a minimum of three
hundred (300) feet from any public park, facility or
grounds.
(3) Junkyards shall be entirely screened from view by
earth berms, plantings or fences, which shall be well
constructed and properly maintained at a minimum
height of six (6) feet and sufficient to accomplish the
complete screening from ordinary view.
B. In addition, the following provisions apply to the
operation of all junkyards, as defined, in the Town of
Millinocket:
( 1) Upon arrival at the junkyard, all fuel, engine oil and
radiator, battery and transmission fluids, etc., shall
be drained from all vehicles, and appropriate safety
precautions, such as the removal of door and trunk
locks, shall be taken to avoid injury and accidents.
(2) No vehicles may remain intact in the yard for more
than thirty (30) days, and complete processing of
vehicles into salvage materials shall be
accomplished within four (4) months.
12554.5 12- 10 - 94
MILLINOCKET CODE ~ 125-56
(3) All junk and salvage materials shall be stored
within the screened/fenced areas and the operation
shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent
unsightliness to the adjacent area.
(4) No open burning of salvage material or junk shall be
permitted on the premises. Waste fluids and
unusable materials shall be disposed of in an environmentally
sound manner.
§ 125-56. Land not suitable for development.
A. The following lands shall not be included in the
calculations of lot area for the purpose of meeting the
requirements of the minimum lot size requirements of
this Part 2:
(1) Land which is situated below the normal high-water
mark of any water body.
(2) Land which is located within the one-hundred-year
frequency floodplain as identified by the Federal
Emergency :Management Agency or the Department
of Housing and Urban Development, Flood
Insurance Administration, unless the developer
shows proof through the submittal of materials
prepared by a registered land surveyor that the
property in question lies at least one (1) foot above
the one-hundred-year flood level. The elevation of
filled or made land shall not be considered.
(3) Land which is part of a right-of-way or easement,
including utility easements.
(4) Land which, on or after tht! <late of the adoption of
this Part 2, is created by filling or draining a pond or
wetland.
(5) Land that has been determined to be a freshwater
wetland, as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-B.
12554.6 12 - 10 - 94
()
()
§ 125-56 ZONING * 125-58
B. This section does not apply to existing single lots of
record proposed to be utilized for single-family
residences only.
~ 125-57. Lighting.
All exterior lighting shall be desibrned to encourage energy
efficiency, to ensure safe movement of people and vehicles and
to minimize adverse impact on neighboring properties and
public ways. Adverse impact is to be judged in terms of hazards
to people and vehicular traffic and potential damage to the
value of adjacent properties. Lighting shall be ananged to
minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties and the
traveling public.
§ 125-58. Mineral exploration and extraction.
The following requirements for mineral exploration and
extraction activities .shall apply in all zones, except as otherwise
hereinafter provided:
A. The following requirements shall apply to mineral
exploration activities:
(1) All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall
be promptly capped, refilled or secured by other
equally effective measures so as to reasonably
restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
(2) Filter strip.
(a) Mineral exploration activities or associated
accessways, where the operation of machinery
used in such activities results in the exposure of
mineral soils, shall be located such that an
unscarified filter strip of at least the width
indicated below is retained between the exposed
(Cont'd on page 12555)
12554 .. 7 12-10 - 94

(]
··· ./
()
\ ._ .'_ . ,. I
§ 125-58 ZONING § 125-58
mineral soil and the normal high-water mark of
surface water areas:
Average Slope of Land
Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and Normal
High· Water Mark
(percent)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Width of Strip
Between Exposed
Mineral Soil and
Normal High-Mark
(feet along surface
of the ground)
25
45
65
85
105
125
145
165
(b) The provis10ns of this Subsection A(2) apply
only on a face sloping toward the water;
provided, however, that no portion of such
exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be
closer than twentywfive (25) feet. The provisions
of this subsection do not apply where
accessways cross such waters.
(3) Except when surface waters are frozen, accessways
for mineral exploration activities shall not utilize
stream channels bordered by protection zones except
to cross the same by the shortest possible route;
unless culverts or bridges are installed in
accordance with this Part 2, such crossings shall
only use channel beds which are composed of gravel,
rock or similar hard surfaces which would not be
eroded or otherwise damaged.
(4) Accessway approaches to stream channels shall be
located and designed so as to divert water runoff
from the way in order to prevent such runoff from
directly entering the stream.
12555 4-25-93
§ 125-58 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-58
(5) In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements,
when conducting mineral exploration activities and
creating and maintaining associated accessways,
provision shall be made to effectively stabilize all
areas of disturbed soil so as to reasonably avoid soil
erosion and sedimentation of surface waters. These
measures shall include seeding and mulching if
necessary to ensure effective stabilization.
B. The following requirements shall apply to mineral
extraction activities in all zones:
( 1) No portion of any ground area disturbed by the
extraction activity on a face sloping toward the
water shall be closer to the normal high-water mark
of a flowing or standing body of water than is
indicated by the following table; provided, however,
that no portion of such ground area on a back face
shall be closer than fifty ( 50) feet.
(2) No portion of any ground area disturbed by the
extraction activity shall be closer than fifty (50) feet
to any public roadway or one hundred (100) feet to
any property line in the absence of the prior written
agreement of the owner of such adjoining property.
Width of Strip
Average Slope of Land Between Exposed
Between Exposed Mineral Mineral Soil and
Soil and Normal Normal High-Mark
High-Water Mark (feet along surface
(percent) of the ground)
0 50
10 90
20 130
30 170
~ 2W
50 250
60 290
70 330
(3) Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any water
body, the extraction area shall be protected from soil
erosion by ditches, sedimentation basins, dikes,
12556 4-25-93
() . _ _,,,
()
Q
§ 125-58 ZONING § 125-58
dams or such other control devices which are
effective in preventing sediments from being eroded
or deposited into such water body. Any such control
device shall be deemed part of the extraction area
for the purposes of Subsection B(2) above.
(4) A natural vegetative screen of not less than fifty (50)
feet in width shall be retained between any facility
intended primarily for public use, excluding
privately owned roads, and the mineral exploration
or extraction activity.
(5) Within twelve (12) months following the completion
of extraction operations at any extraction site, or
when less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of
materials are removed in any consecutive twelvemonth
period, ground levels and grades shall be
established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps and similar material shall be
removed for disposal in an approved location or
shall be buried on-site. Only materials
originating on site may be buried or co~ered on
site.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1)
slope or flatter.
(c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all
disturbed land areas, which shall be reseeded
and stabilized with vegetation native to the
areas. Additional topsoil or loam shall be
obtained from off-site sources, if necessary, to
complete the stabilization project.
(6) In keeping with the purposes of this Part 2, the
Planning Board may impose such conditions as are
necessary to minimize the adverse impacts
associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources, including but not
limited to any reasonable form of performance
guaranty such as a performance bond.
12557 4-25-99
§ 125-58 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-60
C. The following requirements shall apply to topsoil, sand
and gravel extraction in all zones:
( 1) Topsoil shall be considered part of all developments,
except mineral extraction, and shall not be removed
from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads,
parking areas and building excavations.
(2) Extraction shall not be allowed below three (3) feet
above the average seasonal high-water table. No
ditches, trenches, pumping or other methods shall
be used to lower the water table or permit more
gravel extraction than could occur under normal
conditions.
(3) Access roads into and around the pit shall not be
oiled, salted or paved.
(4) The pit shall not be used for storage or dumping of
any substances that could produce a harmful
leachate, both during operation of the pit and
following its permanent closure.
(5) Storage of hazardous materials and petroleum
products in the pit is prohibited.
(6) Refueling and oil changes in the pit are prohibited,
unless adequate protection and containment is
provided.
§ 125·59. Mobile home parks.
Mobile home parks shall conform to the regulations of
Chapter 83, Article I, Mobile Home Parks, of the Millinocket
Code.
§ 125·60. Mobile homes and recreation vehicles.
A. Any mobile home not intended to be a permanent fixture
on the land shall be parked only in a duly authorized
mobile home park, except that a mobile home may be
12558 4-25-93
()
\..... ) _/
()
§ 125-60 ZONING § 125-61
permitted on the site of a construction project for not
more than two (2) consecutive six-month periods,
provided that a special permit is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer for each six-month period. Such
permit may only be issued if the Code Enforcement
Officer is satisfied that:
(1) The mobile home is a necessary convenience for the
construction project and is clearly subordinate to
such project.
(2) No health hazards or problems of sanitation will be
caused by improper disposal of sewage from the
mobile home.
H. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a special
permit for use of a mobile home for a temporary
construction office for up to six (6) months in zones
where offices are permitted or on construction sites
anywhere in the Town of Millinocket.
C. Recreation vehicles shall in no case be used as a
permanent dwelling, and any recreation vehicles in use
as a temporary dwelling shall be stationed only in an
authorized campground or trailer park or on the
premises of a consenting private property owner for use
only by members of the property owner's family or social
guests.
D. Except as specifically permitted by this Article, no
mobile home shall be used for any purpose nor placed on
any lot, except in the Rl, RD, DC, HC and NC Zones or
in an authorized mobile home park.
E. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article,
unoccupied mobile homes may be piaced on a lot for sale
by a dealer where permitted by this Part 2.
§ 125-61. Multiple uses on a single lot.
A. No structure shall hereinafter be erected, altered or
utilized if the effect of such erection, alteration or
12559
§ 125-61 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-63
utilization is to create more than one (1) use on a single
lot unless multiple uses are permitted in the zone in
which such lot is located.
B. More than one (1) use may be permitted in the same
structure in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC),
Downtown Commercial (DC), Highway Commercial (HC)
and Industrial (ID) Development Zones on any lot that is
not a nonconformity.
§ 125-62. Municipal services.
The proposed development shall not have an unreasonable
adverse impact on the municipal services, including municipal
road systems, Fire Department, Police Department, solid waste
program, sewage treatment plant, schools, open spaces,
recreational programs and facilities and other municipal
services and facilities.
§ 125-63. Off-street loading and unloading requirements.
On every lot on which a commercial or industrial use is
hereafter established, space with access to a public street shall
be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of
vehicles:
A. Retail business: one (1) space twelve by fifty-five (12 x
55) feet with a minimum overhead clearance of fifteen
(15) feet for the first five thousand (5,000) square feet or
fraction thereof of floor space, plus one (1) space for any
floor space in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
B. Wholesale business and industrial: one (1) space twelve
by fifty-five (12 x 55) feet with a minimum overhead
clearance of fifteen (15) feet for each eight thousand
(8,000) square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.
C. Truck and bus terminals: sufficient space to
accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks
12560 4-25-83
()
r)
§ 125-63 ZONING § 125-64
that would be stored, loaded and unloaded at the
terminal at any one (1) time.
D. Applicability limited.
(1) The above off-street loading and unloading
requirements do not apply to the conversion of any
existing residential building to a commercial use or
any existing commercial building from one
commercial use to another commercial use or a
permitted industrial use, in the Neighborhood
Commercial Development Zone (NC), Downtown
Commercial Development Zone (DC), Highway
Commercial Development Zone (HC) or Industrial
Development Zone (ID).
(2) The above off-street loading and unloading
requirements do apply to the conversion of any
existing residential building from a residential use
to a permitted commercial use in the Downtown
Residential Zone (Rl) and Rural Development Zone
(RD). [Amended 11-19-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92]
§ 125-64. Off-street parking.
A. Parking space shall be provided as follows:
( 1) No structure shall be erected nor shall any of the
following uses be established unless at least the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces as
specified below is provided. Where a fractional
number of spaces would be called for, at least the
next higher whole number of spaces shall be
required. Each parking space shall measure at least
nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length
and shall have access for vehicles to a public street.
Parking lots for more than five (5) vehicles shall be
so arranged that vehicles can be turned around
within such lots without entering the street. Private
roads, separated from public rights-of-way, but not
12561 4 - 25 - 98
§ 125-64 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-64
allowing for turnaround space, are deemed adequate
for these requirements.
(a) Automobile repair and filling stations: one ( 1)
space for each regular employee, plus one (1)
space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area
used for service work.
(b) Boarding- and rooming houses: one (1) space for
each guest room.
(c) Drive-in restaurants and dairy stands: ten (10)
spaces, plus one (1) additional space for each
person serving or preparing food on the largest
shift employed at least once a week on a
regularly scheduled basis during the peak
season of operations.
(d) Funeral parlors: twenty (20) spaces.
(e) Hospitals and nursing homes: one (1) space for
each five (5) beds, plus one (1) space for each
staff or visiting doctor, plus one (1) space for
each four ( 4) employees.
(f) Hotels: one (1) space for each guest bedroom,
plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees.
(g) Industrial establishments: one (1) space for
each one (1) or two (2) employees, at the
maximum employment level, on the two (2)
shifts of highest employment combined, plus
one (1) space for each company vehicle
operating from the premises.
(h) Fraternal organizations and clubs: one (1) space
for each five (5) members.
(i) Business and professional offices: one ( 1) space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of
working space.
12562 4-25-93
~
\ J ·-
C)
§ 125-64 ZONING § 125-64
(j) Places of amusement or public assembly: one (1)
space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area
devoted to patron use.
(k) Residential: two (2) spaces for each dwelling
unit.
(1) Restaurants, cocktail lounges and bottle clubs:
one (1) space for each four (4) customer seats,
plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees.
(m) Retail business: four (4) spaces for each one
thousand (1,000) square feet of sales area.
(n) Roadside farm stands: four (4) spaces.
(o) Elementary schools: two (2) spaces per
classroom, plus one (1) space for every four (4)
seats of public assembly or ten (10) spaces for
every one thousand (1,000) square feet of
assembly space if there are no fixed seats.
(p) High schools: five (5) spaces per classroom, plus
one (1) space for every four (4) seats of public
assembly or ten (10) spaces for every one
thousand (1,000) square feet of assembly space
if there are no fixed seats.
(q) Banks: one (1) space per one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor area.
(r) Tourist courts and motels: one (1) space for each
accommodation.
(s) Wholesale business: one (1) space for each three
hundred (300) square feet of floor space.
(t) Churches: one (1) space for each five (5) persons'
seating capacity.
(2) For uses not specifically listed in this section, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall prescribe the number which in
no case will be less than an adequate number to provide
for employees, customers and visitors anticipated on the
site.
12563 4-25-93
§ 125-64 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-64
B. Location on other property. If the required automobile
parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot where
the principal use is conducted, the Planning Board can
permit that such spaces may be provided on other offstreet
property, provided that such property lies within
four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to such
principal use and is in the same zone. Such automobile
parking space shall be associated with the principal use
and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon
in any manner; provided, however, that it may serve
different principal uses at different times of day.
C. Parking area shading.
(1) Parking areas shall be shaded by deciduous trees,
eitl).er retained or planted by the developer, that
have or will have when fully mature a trunk at least
twelve (12) inches in diameter. When trees are
planted by the developer to satisfy the requirements
of this subsection, the developer shall choose trees
that are suitable to the site, soils and climate.
(2) Each tree of the type to be used shall be presumed
to shade a circular area having a radius of fifteen
(15) feet with the trunk of the tree as the center, and
there must be sufficient trees so that, using this
standard, twenty percent (20%) of the parking area
will be shaded.
(3) No paving may be placed within twelve and one half
(12112) feet, measured from the center of the trunk,
of any existing tree to be retained, and new trees
planted shall be located so that they are surrounded
by at least two hundred (200) square feet of unpaved
area.
(4) Parking areas shall be laid out and provisions made
to prevent vehicles from striking trees. Vehicles will
be presumed to have a body overhang of three (3)
feet six (6) inches.
12564 4-25-93
()
... ./
/~
'J
0
§ 125-64 ZONING
(5) If space that would otherwise be devoted to parking
cannot be so used because of the planting
requirements above and, as a result, the parking
requirements of this § 125-64 cannot be satisfied,
the number of required spaces may be reduced by
the number of spaces lost, up to a maximum of
fifteen percent (15%) of the required spaces.
D. Applicability limited.
( 1) The above off-street parking requirements do not
apply to the conversion of any existing residential
building to a commercial use or any existing
commercial building from one commercial use to
another commercial use or a permitted industrial
use, in the Neighborhood Commercial Development
Zone (NC), Downtown Commercial Development
Zone (DC), Highway Commercial Development Zone
(HC) or Industrial Development Zone (ID).
(2) The above off-street parking requirements do apply
to the conversion of the existing residential building
from a residential use to a permitted commercial
use, in the Downtown Residential Zone (Rl) and
Rural Development Zone (RD). [Amended
11·19-1992 by Ord. No. 7·92]
§ 125-65. Oil and chemical storage.
A. All storage of petroleum or liquid petroleum products
shall be in conformance with the provisions of 38
M.R.S.A. § 541 et seq., which, among other things,
establishes a ten·year compliance schedule for the
discontinuance and removal of nonconforming
underground oil storage facilities and requires qualified
personnel to oversee the removal of certain underground
facilities.
B. Such storage shall be in conformance with the NFPA
codes applicable to the stored substance.
12565 4-25-93
§ 125-65 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-66
C. When applicable, the applicant shall have the burden of
proof to assure the Planning Board or Code Enforcement
Officer that all provisions of the above statutes have
been met before the issuance of any permits may take
place.
§ 125-66. On-site circulation.
A. Vehicular circulation. The layout of the site shall provide
for the safe movement of passenger, service and
emergency vehicles through the site.
(1) Nonresidential projects shall provide a clear route
for delivery vehicles With appropriate geometric
design to allow turning and backing for all vehicles,
including tractor trailers.
(2) Clear routes of access shall be provided and
maintained for emergency vehicles to all portions of
the site and shall be posted with appropriate
language.
(3) The layout and design of parking areas shall provide
for safe and convenient circulation of vehicles and
prevent their backing out onto a street.
(4) All streets and accessways shall be designed to
harmonize with the topographic and natural
features of the site. The road network shall provide
for vehicular and pedestrian safety, all season
emergency access, snow storage and delivery and
collection services.
B. Pedestrian circulation. The development plan shall
provide for a system of pedestrian circulation within the
development. This system shall connect with existing
sidewalks if they exist in the vicinity of the project. The
pedestrian network may be located within the street
right-of-way or outside of the right-of-way in open space
or recreation areas. The system shall be designed to link
residential units with recreational and commercial
12566 4-215-93
()
0
§ 125-66 ZONING § 125-67
facilities, other common facilities, school bus stops and
existing sidewalks in the neighborhood.
C. Applicability limited.
(1) The above on-site circulation requirements do not
apply to the conversion of any existing residential
building to a commercial use or any existing
commercial building from one commercial use to
another commercial use or a permitted industrial
use, in the Neighborhood Commercial Development
Zone (NC), Downtown Commercial Development
Zone (DC), Highway Commercial Development Zone
(HC) or Industrial Development Zone (ID).
(2) The above on-site circulation requirements do apply
to the conversion of any existing residential building
from a residential use to a permitted commercial
use, in the Downtown Residential Zone (Rl) and
Rural Development Zone (RD).
§ 125-67. Pollution levels.
Any pollutant introduced into soil on the site shall not exceed
a concentration in the groundwater that is greater than the
guideline established for it in the Safe Drinking Water
Standard, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Health
Advisory or National Academy of Science (NA.S) Health
Advisory. Any violation of this standard shall be cause to order
the immediate cessation of the use or activity responsible for
the contamination. The land owner, contractor, occupant or any
other person with authority over the land, structure or activity
responsible for the contamination shall be jointly responsible
for the cost of all remedial actions and damages resulting
therefrom.
12567 4-25-93
§ 125-68 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-69
§ 125-68. Preservation and enhancement of the
landscape.
A. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state
insofar as practicable by minimizing tree removal and
disturbance of soil and retaining existing vegetation
during construction. After construction is completed,
landscaping shall be completed that will define, ·soften or
screen the appearance of off-street parking areas,
buildings and other structures from the public right-ofway
and abutting properties in order to enhance the
physical design of the proposed development and to
minimize the encroachment of the proposed uses on
neighboring land uses.
B. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the
terrain and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have
a visual relationship to the proposed structures, so as to
have a minimum adverse affect on the environment and
aesthetic qualities of the developed and neighboring
areas.
C. Environmentally sensitive areas, such as wetlands, steep
slopes, floodplains and unique natural features shall be
maintained and preserved to the maximum extent
possible. Natural drainage areas shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible.
§ 125-69. Private rights-of-way.
A. No private right-of-way shall be created to satisfy the
frontage requirements· for any lot, any portion of which
abuts a public way.
B. Any new private right-of-way shall be at least fifty (50)
feet in width. No such right-of-way shall be created over
any existing lot or lots so that the balance of any such
existing lot, exclusive of the area occupied by the rightof-
way, would fail to meet any of the requirements of this
Part 2 for lot size, frontage, lot coverage or yard sizes.
12568 4-25 -93
(. .~./
t'",:t1 'J
* 125-70 ZONING § 125-70
~ 125-70. Signs.
A. Conformance of signs. No sign shall hereafter be erected,
altered or maintained within the limits of the Town of
Millinocket, l\tlaine, except in conformance with the
provisions of this section.
B. Signs prohibited. No sign, whether new or existing, shall
be permitted within the Town of l\fillinocket, Maine,
which causes a sight, traffic. health or welfare hazard or
results in a nuisance, due to illumination, placement,
display or obstruction of existing signs.
C. On-premise signs. Owners or occupants of real property
may erect and maintain on-premise signs which
advertise the sale or lease thereof or activities being
conducted thereon, provided that said signs are in
conformance with the regulations set forth below:
(1) The maximum size for each individual sign in a
residential zone (R2) shall not exceed four square
feet. [Amended 8-26-1999 by Ord. No. 5-99;
3-11-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
(2) The maximum aggregate area of all signs for an
individual use in the R2 Zone shall not exceed six
square feet. [Amended 3-11-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
(3) The maximum size for each individual sign in the
Downtown Commercial Development Zone (DC)
shall be determined by the Planning Board on the
basis of the existing character of the area.
(4) The maximum size for each individual sign in the
Highway Commercial Development Zone (HC) shall
be 110 square feet.
(5) The maximum size for each individual sign located
in all other zones, unless otherwise limited or
prohibited, shall not exceed 40 square feet.
12569 03-30-2005

* 125-70 1-IILLINOCKET CODE § 125-70
(6) On-premise signs, other than wall or projecting
signs, shall not extend more than 20 feet above
ground level and shall not have a supporting
structure which extends more than two feet above
such sign.
(7) Projecting signs must be at least nine feet above
pedestrian level and may project no more than three rf
feet from the building. 1
(8) No sign shall be permitted which is erected or
maintained on any tree or painted or drawn upon
any rock or other natural feature or any utility pole.
(9) One sign identifying the name, address and
profession or occupation of a permitted home
occupation or a lawfully existing nonconforming
home occupation is permitted, provided that such
sign does not exceed four square feet in area and is
not internally illuminated.
( 10} Directional signs solely indicating ingress and
egress placed at driveway locations, containing no
advertising material or display area, not exceeding
two square feet and not extending higher than four
feet above ground level are permitted.
D. Temporary signs. The following temporary signs are
permitted, provided that said signs conform to all
standards of this section and all other municipal, federal
and state ordinances, statutes and/or regulations:
(1) Temporary signs giving notice. Signs of a temporary
nature, such as political posters, advertisements of
charitable functions, notices of meetings or other
noncommercial signs of a similar nature, are (_J
permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days,
provided that the persons who posted the signs shall
be responsible for their removal.
(2) Temporary yard sale signs. Temporary yard sale
signs are permitted, provided that they do not
exceed the size standards of Subsection C of this
12570 03-30-2005
(,··~·.· . • , ... ,
\ :~
····-:-,
(". ' \ . . I
... . ........ _,,-
/ ·v·. ·.
\. ··.r.
. . ·•.'·
.. ·1!._ ~
* 125-70 ZONING § 125-70
section and provided that they are removed within
24 hours of the completion of the sale. Yard sales
which extend for more than three consecutive days
are considered a commercial use.
E. Sign requirements. All signs within the limits of the
Town of Millinocket shall meet the following
requirements:
( 1) No sign shall project over a walkway or interfere in
any way with the normal flow of foot or vehicular
traffic. All freestanding signs shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from property lines in all
zones, except in the Downtown Commercial
Development Zone (DC).
(2) No sign shall contain, include or be illuminated by
flashing, blinking, intermittent or moving lights.
(3) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded
nonflashing lights so as to effectively prevent beams
or rays of light from being directed at neighboring
residential properties or any portion of the main
traveled way of a roadway, or if the illumination is
of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause
glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor
vehicle or otherwise interfere with the operation
thereof.
F. Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the
provisions of this section except as otherwise provided
for herein:
(1) Signs erected by a government body.
(2) Traffic control signs, signals and/or devices.
(3) Signs legally in existence prior to the adoption of
this Part 2, or subsequent amendment hereto.
12571 03-30-2005
* 125-71 1'IILLINOCKET CODE ~ 125-72
~ 125-71. Site conditions.
A. During construction, the site shall be maintained and
left each day in a safe and sanitary manner, and any
condition which could lead to personal injury or property
damage shall be immediately corrected by the developer
upon an order by the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized personnel. The developer shall make
provision for disposal of oil and grease from equipment, :1
and the site area should be regularly treated to control
dust from construction activity.
B. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter,
rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and
debris. Excess or scrap building materials shall be
removed or destroyed immediately upon the request of
and to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer
prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy.
§ 125-72. Utilities; sewage disposal; waste disposal; water
supply.
A. Utilities.
(1) Any utility installations remammg above ground
shall be located so as to have a harmonious relation
to neighboring properties and the site.
(2) Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the
installation of the final gravel base of the road.
(3) The size, type and location of streetlights and
utilities shall be shown on the plan and approved by
the Planning Board.
B. Sewage disposal.
(1) Subsurface sewage disposal. No permit shall be
issued for a project with subsurface sewage disposal
unless:
12572 03-30-2005
c.)
* 125-72 ZONING * 125-73
(a) There is an area of sufficient size of suitable
soils, under the Maine State Plumbing Code, to
accommodate the proposed system.
(b) An acceptable plan to construct the absorption
area is prepared in accordance with the Maine
State Plumbing Code.
(2) In lieu of Subsection B(l)(a) and/or (b) above, the
applicant shall demonstrate that any deficiencies of
the soil for purposes of sewage disposal can and will
be overcome by a suitable engineering solution.
C. Waste disposal. The proposed development shall provide
for adequate disposal of solid wastes and hazardous
wastes.
( 1) All solid waste shall be disposed of at a licensed
disposal facility having adequate capacity to accept
the project's wastes.
(2) All hazardous wastes shall be disposed of at a
licensed hazardous waste disposal facility, and
evidence of a contractual arrangement with the
facility shall be submitted.
D. Water supply. The development shall be provided with a
system of water supply that provides each use with an
adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the
State of Maine for drinking water.
ARTICLE IX
Shoreland Standards
§ i25 .. 73. Applicability. [Amended 12-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2-2004]
All land use activities within 250 feet of the normal highwater
line of any great pond or river, within 250 feet of the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland or within 75 feet of the
high-water line of a stream shall conform to the following
12573 03-30-2005
* 125-73 l\HLLINOCKET CODE * 125-74
prov1s10ns, if applicable, except as noted for areas developed
prior to the adoption of this Part 2.
~ 125-7 4. Agriculture.
A. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be
accomplished in conformance with the Maine Guidelines i.'·f
for Manure and Manure Sludge Disposal on Land,
published by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Water Conservation Commission, in
July 1972.
B. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a
river flowing to a great pond classified GPA or within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary
streams or wetlands. Within five years of the effective
date of this Part 2, all manure storage areas within the
Shoreland Protection Zone (SP) must be constructed or
modified such that the facility produces no discharge of
effluent or contaminated stormwater. Existing facilities
which do not meet the setback requirement may remain
but must meet the no-discharge provision within the
above five-year period.
.
C. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater
than 40,000 square feet in surface area or the spreading,
disposal or storage of manure within the Shoreland
Protection Zone (SP) shall require a USDA Soil and
Water Conservation Plan to be filed with and approved
by the Planning Board. Nonconformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a
violation of this Part 2.
D. There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, ~
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from other water bodies; nor within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands.
Operations in existence on the effective date of this
12574 03-80- 200G
(" '.." ·):.··
.( .. -..,
. .
I
'-._,·I
* 125-74 ZONING § 125-76
Part 2 and not in conformance with this provision may
be maintained.
E. After the effective date of this Part 2, newly established
livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within 100
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of other water bodies; nor within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands.
Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities
and which are not in conformance with the above setback
provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is
conducted in accm·dance with a Soil and Water
Conservation Plan.
§ 125-75. Archaeological sites.
The application for any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to
sites listed on or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment at least 20 days prior to
action being taken by the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to
rendering a decision on the application.
§ 125-76. Clearing of vegetation for development.
A. Within a shoreland area zoned as a Resource Protection
Subzone abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting
of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet:
horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water
line, including the removal of safety hazards, without a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Elsewhere in
any Resource Protection Subzone, the clearing of
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for
uses expressly authorized in that district.
12575 03-30-2005
* 125-76 l\ULLINOCKET CODE * 125-76
( 1 > Areas developed prior to adoption of this Part 2 shall
maintain a twenty-five-foot setback from the normal
high-water mark or the average setback of the
adjoining properties, whichever is greater. [Added
12-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004]
B. Buffer strip within 100 feet of great ponds or 75 feet of
other waters.
( 1) Except in areas as described in Subsection A above,
and except to allow for the development of permitted
uses, within a strip of land extending 100 feet,
horizontal distance, inland from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river
flowing to a great pond classified GPA and 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from any other water body,
tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, a
buffer strip of vegetation shall . be preserved as
follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than
250 square feet in the forest canopy as
measured from the outer limits of the tree
crown. However, a footpath not to exceed 10
feet in width as measured between tree tn1nks
is permitted, provided that a cleared line of
sight to the water through the buffer strip is
not created. Adjacent to a great pond classified
GPA or stream or river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, the width of the footpath shall
be limited to six feet.
(b) Selective cutting.
.'J
.1
(l ·.;
[1] Selective cutting of trees within the buffer
strip is permitted, provided that a well tJ
distributed stand of trees and other
vegetation is maintained. For the purposes
of this section, a "well~distributed stand of
trees and other vegetation" adjacent to a
great pond classified GPA or a river or
stream flowing to a great pond classified
12576 03-30-20011
'·l
:'~ ' ~-~ ·.~·:·}
' .. ~./
§ 125-76
().<-- .,, r ...
ZONING ~ 125-76
GPA shall be defined as maintaining a
rating score of 12 or more in any twentyfive-
foot by twenty-five-foot (625 square
feet) square area as determined by the
following rating system:
(Cont'd on page 12577)
12576.1 03-30-2005
rj
t:'
\
(7}
'•.../
§ 125-76
·~ ( )
'~.-./
C)
ZONING
Diameter of Tree at
41/2 Feet Above
Ground Level
(inches)
2 to 4
Greater than 4 to 12
Greater than 12
§ 125-76
Points
1
2
4
[2] Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary
streams and wetlands, a "well-distributed
stand of trees and other vegetation" is
defined as maintaining a minimum rating
score of eight (8) per twenty-five-foot
square area.
[3] Notwithstanding the above provisions, no
more than forty percent (40%) of the total
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in
diameter, measured at four and one-half
( 4112) feet above ground level, may be
removed in any ten-year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife
habitat adjacent to great ponds classified GPA
and streams and rivers which flow to great
ponds classified GPA, existing vegetation under
three (3) feet in height and other ground cover
shall not be removed, except to provide for a
footpath or other permitted uses as described in
Subsection B(l)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches on the bottom onethird
(l/a) of a tree is permitted.
(e) In order to maintain a buITer strip of vegetation,
when the removal of storm-damaged, diseased,
unsafe or dead trees results in the creation of
cleared openings, these openings shall he
replanted with native tree species unless
existing new tree growth is present.
12577 4 - 25-93
§ 125-76 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-77
(2) The provisions contained in this Subsection B shall
not apply to those portions of public recreational
facilities adjacent to public swimming areas.
Cleared areas, however, shall be limited to the
m1n1mum area necessary.
C. At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, from a great pond classified GPA or
river flowing to a great pond classified GPA and seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of any other water body, tributary stream or
the upland edge of a wetland, except to allow for the
development of permitted uses, there shall be permitted
on any lot, in any ten-year period, selective cutting of not
more than forty percent (40%) of the volume of trees four
( 4) inches or more in diameter, measured four and onehalf
( 41/2) feet above ground level. Tree removal in
conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall
be included in the forty-percent calculation. For the
purposes of these standards, volume may be considered
to be equivalent to bas~l area. In no event shall cleared
openings for development, including but not limited to
principal and accessory structures, driveways and
sewage disposal areas, exceed, in the aggregate, twentyfive
percent (25%) of the lot area or ten thousand
(10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land
previously developed.
D. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective
date of this Part 2 may be maintained but shall not be
enlarged, except as permitted by this Part 2.
E. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees or
other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the
provisions of this section.
§ 125~77. Commercial and industrial uses.
The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the Shoreland Protection Zone (SP) adjacent
12578 4-215-93
(~
,./
()
ZONING § 125·78
to great ponds classified GPA and rivers and streams which flow
to great ponds classified GPA:
A. Auto washing facilities.
B. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations,
including body shops.
C. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
D. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or
fertilizers, other than amounts normally associated with
individual households or farms.
E. Commercial painting, wood preserving and furniture
stripping.
F. Dry-cleaning establishments.
G. Electronic circuit assembly.
H. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
I. Metal plating, finishing or polishing.
J. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale,
except storage on the same property as the use occurs
and except for storage and sales associated with
mannas.
K. Photographic processing.
L. Printing.
§ 125-78. Erosion and sedimentation control.
A. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or
other similar activities which result in unstabilized soil
conditions and which require a permit under this Part 2
shall require a written soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board for approval, as
required, and shall include, where applicable, provisions
for:
12579 4-25-93
§ 125-78 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-78
( 1) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(2) Temporary runoff control features, such as hay
bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(3) Permanent stabilization structures, such as
retaining walls or riprap.
B. In order to create the least potential for erosion,
development shall be designed to fit with the topography
and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high
cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours shall be followed as
closely as possible.
C. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply
to all aspects of the proposed project involving land
disturbance and shall be in operation during all stages of
the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of
construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential
for erosion.
D. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or
permanently stabilized within one (1) week from the
time it was last actively worked by use of riprap, sod,
seed and mulch or other effective measures. In all cases,
permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9)
months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
(1) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of
at least one (1) bale per five hundred (500) square
feet and shall be maintained until ~ r.£1.~ch of
vegetation is established.
(2) Anchoring the mulch with netting, : ._· .,,: ·:·:l\111e or
other suitable method may be requi.r"' ... Ln maintain
the mulch cover.
(3) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary
in order to avoid siltation into the water. Such
measures may include the use of staked ha:x bales
and/or silt fences.
12580 4-26-93
()'
"'··
()
(~)
§ 125-78 ZONING § 125-80
E. Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage
outlets shall be protected from erosion from water
flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed
and constructed in order to carry water from a twentyfive-
year storm or greater and shall be stabilized with
vegetation or lined. with riprap.
§ 125-79. Essential services.
A. Where feasible, the installation of essential services
shall be limited to existing public ways and existing
service corridors.
B. The installation of essential services is not permitted in
a Resource Protection Subzone, except to provide
services to a permitted use within said district or except
where the applicant demonstrates that a clear necessity
exists and that there is a lack of a reasonable
alternative. Where permitted, such structures and
facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse
impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including
visual impacts.
§ 125-80. Individual private campsites.
Individual, private campsites not associated with
campgrounds are permitted, provided that the following
conditions are met:
A. One (1) campsite per lot of record existing on the
effective date of this Part 2, or per thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of lot area within the Shoreland
Protection Zone (SP), whichever is less dense, may be
permitted.
B. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area
intended for a tent platform, shall be set back one
hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA and seventy-five (75) feet from the normal
12581 4-215-93
§ 125-81 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-81
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams
or the upland edge of a wetland.
C. Campsites shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad.
D. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of a tent or
similar shelter in a Resource Protection Subzone shall be
limited to one thousand (1,000) square feet.
E. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed
method and location of sewage disposal shall be required
for each campsite and shall be approved by the local
Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written
authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is
required.
§ 125-81. Mineral exploration and extraction.
A. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand
sampling, test boring or other methods which create
minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100)
square feet of ground surface. A permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral
exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All
excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be
immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally
effective measures so as to restore disturbed areas and to
protect the public heal th and safety.
B. Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following
conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with and approved
by the Planning Board before a permit is granted.
Such plan shall describe, in detail, procedures to be
undertaken to fulfill the requirements of Subsection
B(3) below.
(2) Unless authorized pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C, no
12582 4-25-93
()
t)". \, .
§ 125-81
(3)
ZONING § 125-81
part of any extraction operation, including drainage
and runoff control features, shall be permitted
within one hundred (100) feet of the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river
flowing to a great pond classified GPA and within
seventy-five (75) feet of the normal high-water line
of any other water body, tributary stream or the
upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations
shall not be permitted within seventy-five (75) feet
of any property line, without written permission of
the owner of such adjacent property.
Within twelve (12) months following the completion
of extraction operations at any extraction site, which
operations shall be deemed complete when less than
one hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are
removed in any consecutive twelve-month period,
ground levels and grades shall be established in
accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps and similar material shall be
removed for disposal in an approved location or
shall be buried on site. Only materials
generated on site may be buried or covered on
site.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1)
slope or flatter.
(c) Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all
disturbed land areas, which shall be reseeded
and stabilized with vegetation native to the
area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be
obtained from off-site sources if necessary to
complete the stabilization project.
( 4) In keeping with the purposes of this Part 2, the
Planning Board may impose such conditions as are
necessary to minimize the adverse impacts
associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources, including but not
12583 4-25-93
§ 125-81 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-83
limited to any reasonable form of performance
guaranty such as a performance bond.
§ 125-82. Minimum lot standards.
A. All lots in the shoreland area shall contain a minimum of
one (1) acre [forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
( 43,560) square feet] and have a minimum shore
frontage of two hundred (200) feet.
B. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland and land beneath roads
serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included
toward calculating minimum lot area.
C. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road
shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of
land unless such road was established by the owner of
land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
D. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore
frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
E. If more than one (1) residential dwelling unit or more
than one (1) principal commercial or industrial structure
is constructed on a single parcel, all dimensional
requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling
unit or principal structure.
§ 125-83. Parking areas.
A. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline setback
requirements for structures for the zone in which such
areas are located.
B. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed
use and shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff
12584 4-25-93
(~~
\ ·:y
«) ( .· .·· . '··.' .
c' ":"· '.- ]'
..._ ..
§ 125-83 ZONING § 125-84
from flowing directly into a water body and, where
feasible, to retain all runoff on site.
C. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking
facilities, the following shall apply:
( 1) Typical parking space: approximately nine feet wide
and 18 feet long, except that parking spaces for a
vehicle and boat trailer shall be 40 feet long.
(2) Internal travel aisles: approximately 20 feet wide.
§ 125-84. Piers, docks, wharfs and bridges.
Regulations for piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other
structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal highwater
line of a water body or within a wetland are as follows:
A. Access to the shore shall be developed on soils
appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control
erosion.
B. The location shall not interfere with existing developed
or natural beach areas.
C. The facility shall be not larger in dimension than
necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with
existing conditions, use and character of the area.
D. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a
pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the
water as an operational necessity.
E. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier,
dock, wharf or other structure extending beyond the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units
in any district.
12585 03-30- 2005
§ 125-85 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-85
* 125-85. Principal and accessory structures. [Amended
4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-95]
A. All new principal and accessory single- and two-family
residential structures shall be set back at least 100 feet
from the normal high-water line of great ponds classified
GPA and rivers that flow into great ponds classified GPA,
and 75 feet from the normal high·water line of other
water bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a
wetland. All new principal and accessory multiple-family
housing, commercial, industrial and other nonresidential
structures shall be set back at least 150 feet from the
normal high-water line of great ponds classified GPA and
rivers that flow into great ponds classified GPA, and 100
feet from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a
wetland. In addition, the water body or wetland setback
provision shall not apply to structures which require
direct access to the water as an operational necessity,
such as piers, docks and retaining walls, or to other
functionally water-dependent uses.
(1) Principal and accessory single· and two-family
residential structures in existence prior to adoption
of this Part 2 shall maintain a twenty-five-foot
setback from the normal high-water mark or the
avenge setback of the adjoining properties,
whichever is greater. [Added 12-9-2004 by Ord.
No. 2-2004)
B. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of
existing structures which are permitted in the shoreland
area shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision
shall not apply to , structures such as transmission
towers, windmills, antennas and similar structures
having no floor area.
C. The first floor elevation or openings of all buildings and
structures, including basements, shall be elevated at
least one foot above the elevation of the one-hundredyear
flood, the flood of record or, in the absence of these,
12586 03 - 30 - 20015
(:
\
§ 125-85 ZONING § 125-85
the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent
floodplain soils.
D. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other
nonvegetated surfaces within the shoreland area shall
not exceed 20'k- of the lot, or a portion thereof, located
within the shoreland area, including land area
previously developed.
E. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above,
stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils,
provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of
four feet in width; that the structure does not extend
below or over the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland (unless permitted by the
(Cont'd on page 12587)
12586.1 03-30-2005
l
1.J
()
()
' · ....l.r'"
. 0
§ 125-85 ZONING § 125-86
Board of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C);
and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
access alternative exists on the property.
§ 125·86. Roads and driveways.
The following standards shall apply to the construction of
roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts and
other related features:
A. Setback.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one
hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line
of a great pond classified GPA or a river that flows to
a great pond classified GPA and seventy-five (75)
feet from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a
wetland unless a clear necessity exists and there is
a lack of a reasonable alternative as determined by
the Planning Board. If no other reasonable
alternative exists, the Planning Board may reduce
the road and/or driveway setback requirement to no
less than fifty (50) feet upon clear showing by the
applicant that appropriate techniques will be used
to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such
techniques may include but are not limited to the
installation of settling basins and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream or wetland.
(2) On slopes of greater than twenty percent (20% ), the
road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by
ten (10) feet for each five percent (5%), or fraction
thereof, increase in slope above twenty percent
(20%).
(3) This subsection shall neither apply to approaches to
water crossings nor to roads or driveways that
12587 4-25-93
§ 125-86 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-86
provide access to permitted structures and facilities
located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational
necessity.
B. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal
road right-of-way regardless of its setback from a water
body.
C. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource
Protection Subzone, except to provide access to permitted
uses within the district or as approved by the Planning
Board upon a finding that a clear necessity exists and
there is a lack of a reasonable alternative route or that a
location is available outside the district, in which case
the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as
practicable from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland.
D. Road banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2)
horizontal to one (1) vertical and shall be graded and
stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion
and sedimentation control contained in § 125-90 of this
Article.
E. Road grades shall be no greater than ten percent (10%)
except for short segments of less than two hundred (200)
feet.
F. In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly
entering water bodies, roads shall be designed,
constructed and mairitained to empty onto an unscarified
buffer strip at least fifty (50) feet, plus two (2) times the
average slope, in width between the outflow point of the
ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a
wetland. Road surface drainage which is directed to an
unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to
promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize
channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
G. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and
water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in
12588 4-25 -93
.--') { "
\ ./
t)
3
.
t ..
\
§ 125-86 ZONING § 125-86
directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before
the flow in the road or ditches gains sufficient volume or
head to erode the road or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following shall apply:
(1) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated
water turnouts shall be spaced along the road at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following
table:
Road Grade
(percent)
0-2
3-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21 +
Spacing
(feet)
250
200-135
100-80
80-65
60-45
40
(2) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief
culverts only where the road grade is ten percent
(10%) or less.
(3) On road sections having slopes greater than ten
percent (10%), ditch relief culverts shall be placed
across the road at approximately a thirty-degree
angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the
center line of the road.
(4) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and
properly installed in order to allow for effective
functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be
stabilized with appropriate materials, as
recommended by the Penobscot County Soil and
Water Conservation District.
H. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with
roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning.
12589 4-25-93
§ 125-87 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-90
§ 125-87. Septic waste disposal.
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules.
§ 125-88. Signs.
All signs in the shoreland area shall conform to the
provisions of§ 125-70 of this Part 2.
§ 125-89. Soils.
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the
proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained
without causing adverse environmental impacts, including
severe erosion, mass soil movement and water pollution,
whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring
subsurface waste disposal and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses shall require
a soils report, prepared by a state-certified soil scientist or
geologist based on an on-site investigation. Suitability
considerations shall be based primarily on criteria employed in
the National Cooperative Soil Survey as modified by on-site
factors such as depth to water table and depth to refusal.
§ 125-90. Storm.water nmoff.
A. All new construction and development shall be designed
to minimize stormwater runoff from the ~ite in excess of
the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible,
existing natural runoff control features, such as berms,
swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in
order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of
storm.water.
B. Storm.water runoff control systems shall be maintained
as necessary to ensure proper functioning.
12590 4 - 25 -93
C)
(· 3"- .·· ~
0
ZONING § 125-91
§ 125-91. Timber harvesting.
A. Within the strip of land extending seventy-five (75) feet
inland from the normal high-water line in a shoreland
area zoned for resource protection abutting a great pond,
there shall be no timber harvesting, except to remove
safety hazards.
B. Except in areas as described in Subsection A above,
timb.e.r harvesting shall conform with the following provisions:
(1) Selective cutting of no more than forty percent ( 40%)
of the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in
diameter measured at four and one-half (4112) feet
above ground level on any lot in any ten-year period
is permitted. In addition:
(a) Within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a
great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified GPA and within seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams or the upland edge of a wetland, there
shall be· no clear cut openings, and a welldistributed
stand of trees and other vegetation,
including existing ground cover, shall be
maintained.
(b) At distances greater than one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond
classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA and greater than seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of other water bodies or the
upland edge of a wetland, harvesting operations
shall not create single clear cut openings
greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
in the forest canopy. Where such openings
exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet, they
shall be at least one hundred (100) feet apart.
12591 4-2G-93
§ 125-91 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-91
Such clear cut openings shall be included in the
calculation of total volume removal. For the
purposes of these standards, volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
(2) Timber harvesting in excess of forty percent ( 40%) of
the volume may be permitted by the Planning Board
upon a showing, including a forest management
plan signed by a Maine licensed professional
forester, that such exception is necessary for sound
forest management and will be carried out in
accordance with the purposes of 38 M.R.S.A. § 435
et seq.
(3) No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty
(50) feet of the normal high-water line of a water
body. In all other areas, slash shall either be
removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies
on the ground and no part thereof extends more
than four (4) feet above the ground. Any debris that
falls below the normal high-water line of a water
body shall be removed.
(4) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream
channels as travel routes, except when:
(a) Surface waters are frozen; and
(b) The activity will not result in any ground
disturbance.
(5) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge
or culvert, except in areas with low banks and
channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or
similar hard surface which would not be eroded or
otherwise damaged.
(6) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be
located and designed so as to prevent water runoff
from directly entering the water body or tributary
stream. Upon completion of timber harvesting,
tern porary bridges and culverts shall be removed
and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
12592 4-25-93
.. ·-; I' .
..._. ...., __.i
/~ ( _J
(''"':~
............. ·
l. .·. )~·
"·
\ ·.·3. ·
§ 125-91 ZONING § 125-93
(7) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other
sites, where the operation of machinery used in
timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral
soil, the operation shall be located such that an
unscarified strip of vegetation of at least seventyfive
(75) feet in width for slopes up to ten percent
(10%).shall be retained between the exposed mineral
soil and the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland. For each ten percent
(10%), or fraction thereof, increase in slope, the
unscarified strip shall be increased by twenty (20)
feet. The provisions of this subsection apply only to
a face sloping toward the water body or wetland;
provided, however, that no portion of such exposed
mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than
twenty-five (25) feet from the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
§ 125-92. Water quality.
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to
the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or ,in
combination with other activities or substances will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body.
ARTICLEX
Code Enforcement Officer Permits
§ 125-93. Code Enforcement Officer permit required.
[Amended 8-4-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94]
A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required before beginning or undertaking any of the following
activities:
A. Flood hazard areas: All construction or earthmoving
activities or other improvements within the onehundred-
year floodplain designated on the Flood
12593 .2-215- 96
§ 125-93 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-93
Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
B. New construction: New construction of buildings and
structures, including the erection of fences and walls, the
construction of retaining walls and the creation of roads
or driveways and parking areas.
C. Alteration: Alteration of buildings, structures or land, or ; J
parts thereof, including interior renovations for change
in use and the enclosing of unenclosed porches and
decks, for the creation of additional sleeping space or any
activity which increases the existing amount of water
used daily, but not including normal maintenance and
repair activities.
D. Placement of signs: Placement of signs except temporary
signs.
E. Moving or demolition: All buildings or structures,
including mobile homes, which are removed from or
moved onto or moved around within a lot, or demolished.
F. Change of use: The change of any premises from one
category of land use to any other land use under Chapter
125, Part 2, of this Town Code; the change of any
building or structure or part thereof from one use group
classification to any other use group classification listed
in Article III of the BOCA Building Code, including the
reoccupancy of any building, structure or part thereof
being unoccupied for more than twelve (12) calendar
months by one (1) of said use group classifications; or the
change in any building occupancy classification to a
different occupancy classification under the NFPA 101
Life Safety Code. [Amended 11-30-1995 by Ord. No.
5-95]
G. Home occupation: The establishment; operation or
maintenance of a home occupation.
H. Article VII activities: Any activity as requiring Planning
Board site plan review in Article VII, which meets the
definition of a "minor development" under§ 125-100A(2).
12594 2-25-98
(--~
~ _,,,.
§ 125-94 ZONING § 125-94
§ 125-94. Procedure. [A.mended 8-4-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94]
A. Application. All applications for a Code Enforcement
Officer permit shall be submitted in writing in duplicate
to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided for
the purpose, together with such fees as established in
Article XIII.
B. Submissions.
(1) All applications for a Code Enforcement Officer
permit shall be accompanied by a plan, accurately
drawn to scale or showing actual dimensions or
distances, and showing:
(a) The actual shape and dimensions of the lot for
which a permit is sought.
(b) The location and size of all buildings, structures
and other significant features currently existing
on the lot, as well as all water bodies and
wetlands within two hundred fifty (250) feet of
the property boundaries.
(c) The location and building plans of new
buildings, structures or portions thereof to be
constructed.
( d) The existing and intended use of each building
or structure.
(e) Where applicable, the location of soils test pits,
subsurface sewage disposal system, parking lots
and driveways, signs buffer strips and private
wells.
(f) Such other information as may be reasonably
requir~d by the Code Enforcement Officer to
provide for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
(2) Any application for minor site plan review of a
minor development shall include the information
required by§ 125-102A through G.
12595 2-25-98
§ 125-94 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-94
C. To whom issued. No permit shall be issued except to the
owner of record or his authorized agent. Written proof of
authorization shall be required.
D. Compliance. All activities undertaken pursuant to a
permit issued under this section shall comply with all
applicable standards set forth or adopted by reference in
1
this Town Code. [Am.ended 11-30-1995 by Ord. No. .
5-95] 1
E. Deadline for decision. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application,
issue the permit if all proposed construction and uses
meet the provisions of this Part 2, refer the applicant to
the Planning Board for site plan review or deny the
application. All decisions of the Code Enforcement
Officer shall be in writing.
F. Conditions of approval. The Code Enforcement Officer,
upon determination of compliance with applicable
standards of this Part 2, shall issue a permit granting
approval subject to such terms and conditions as are
considered advisable to ensure conformity with such
standards and to protect the public health, safety or
general welfare.
G. Copies. One (1) copy of the application, with the permit
or other written decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer, shall be returned to the applicant, and one (1)
copy, with a copy of the permit or written decision, shall
be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer as a
permanent public record.
H. Posting. The applicant shall cause any permit issued to
he conspicuously posted on the lot where the activity will
occur at a location clearly visible from the street.
I. Commencement and completion of work.
(1) Construction and alteration activities on projects for
which a permit has been granted under this section
shall commence within twelve (12) months of the
date of issuance of the permit and shall be
12596 2-25-98
t)· '• .
~.
·~
( , 1
'··-··
()
§ 125-94 ZONING § 125-95
substantially completed within twenty-four (24)
months of that date.
(2) Activities which are not commenced or substantially
completed within the time limits provided above
shall be subject to new application and the permit
issued under this section shall be considered void.
(3) Activities may be extended for up to twelve (12)
months by the Code Enforcement Officer, for good
cause, if an application for an extension is submitted
not later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of
the prior permit.
J. Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the Code Enforcement
Officer may be taken pursuant to Article XV of this
Part 2.
§ 125-95. Procedural exceptions to activities requiring
site plan review.
Activities requiring site plan review which are classified as a
minor development shall be reviewed by the Code Enforcement
Officer, except as follows:
(Cont'd on page 12597)
12596.1 2-25-96
.I
;·~~
I.. ... /1
(_)
I' '· .. )· ..
• .. !
()·.
....
§ 125-95 ZONING § 125-96
A. If, within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of a
completed application for a minor development, the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that said application
warrants the review of the Planning Board, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall forward such application to
the Planning Board for its review. The Planning Board,
at its next regularly scheduled monthly meeting, shall
review the application and either approve, deny or
schedule a public hearing on the application.
B. Notice.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer, within seven (7)
calendar days of receipt of a completed application
which involves a change of use from one land use
classification to another land use classification, shall
notify the Planning Board and all owners of
property located within seventy five (75) feet of the
property involved.
(2) Any abutter may request, within seven (7) calendar
days of receipt of such notice, that the Planning
Board review such application.
(3) The Planning Board, within thirty (30) calendar
days of the receipt of a request from an abutter,
shall review the application and either approve,
deny or schedule a public hearing on the application.
§ 125-96. Annual report on shoreland activities.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection a
report on shoreland zoning activities, including the number and
type of permits issued, variances granted, violations noticed
and enforcement actions taken. Such reports shall be made by
the Code Enforcement Officer once every two (2) years, with the
first report to be submitted no later than May 1994.
12597 4-25-93
MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-99
ARTICLE XI
Planning Board Site Plan Review
§ 125-97. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan review by the Planning Board is to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare by
requiring Planning Board review of plans for certain uses or
structures which have a significant potential impact on the
neighborhood or the environment but which, when properly
designed with respect to their surroundings, can become uses or
structures that are compatible with the neighborhood and
environment.
§ 125-98. Activities requiring site plan review.
Except as provided in § 125-99 below, site plan review and
approval by the Planning Board shall be required for:
A. Any proposed activity designated in Article VII as
requiring site plan approval from the Planning Board,
not classified as a minor development pursuant to
§ 125-100A(2).
B. The construction of a new building or structure or the
external enlargement of any existing building or
structure devoted to a use not classified as a minor
development pursuant to§ 125-100A(2).
C. Any activity referred to the Planning Board by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to § 125-95.
§ 125-99. Activities not_ requiring site plan review.
Unless specifically required by Article VII, site plan review
by the Planning Board shall not be required for:
A. Uses designated in§ 125-93G as requiring only a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer.
12598 4-215-93
()
()
§ 125-99 ZONING § 125-100
. (2) Any hazardous activity .. identified by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection as exempt
from the definition of hazardous activity in 38
M.R.S.A. § 482, Subsection 2-C, including domestic
and other uses of substances in quantities too small
to present a significant risk of groundwater
contamination.
§ 125-100. Clas~ification of projects.
A. Projects subject to site plan review shall be classified by
the Code Enforcement Officer into one (1) of the
following classes:
(1) Major developments. Projects involving any of the
following shall· be classified by the Code·
Enforcement Officer as a major development:
(a) Any project which contemplates drilling for or
excavating natural resources, including mineral
extraction, on land or under water where the
area affected is in excess of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet.
(b) Hazardous activities involving the
consumption, generation or handling of:
[1] Hazardous wastes as defined In 38
M.R.S.A. § 1303.
(2J Hazardous materials as defined In 38
M.R.S.A. § 1317.
[3] Oil as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. § 542.
[4] Low-level radioactive wastes as defined in
38 M.R.S.A. § 1451.
(c) Any building or buildings on a single parcel
constructed or erected with a fixed location on
or in the ground or attached to something on or
in the ground which occupies a ground area in
excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
12599 4-25 - 93
§ 125-100 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-102
{d) Any project where parking lots, roads, paved
areas or other areas to be stripped or graded
and not to be revegetated causes the total
project, including any buildings, to occupy a
ground area in excess of sixty thousand (60,000)
square feet.
{e) Any project which is a conversion of.an existing
project meeting the description in Subsection
A(l)(c) and (d) above.
(f) Any multiunit housing development involving a
building or buildings built for the purpose of
providing ten (10) or more housing units located
on a single parcel of land.
(2) Minor developments. Projects not classified by the
Code Enforcement Officer as a major development
shall be considered a minor development under this
section.
B. Projects classified as minor developments have to submit
the information specified in§ 125-102A through G below.
Projects classified as major developments, in addition to
submitting the information required of minor
developments, are required to submit the additional
information specified in § 125-103A through M.
§ 125 .. 101. Prohibition.
No activity or use described in § 125-98 shall commence until
the property owner has received site plan approval from the
Planning Board and has received any necessary permits from
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 125·102. Site plan review application.
Applications for site plan review shall be submitted on
application forms provided by the town. The complete
application form, required fees, and the required plans and
12600 4-23-93
l/ ··.,.: ~
'·.Y
()
~· "':\ c.J
§ 125~102 ZONING § 125-102
related information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer who shall forward it to the Planning Board. The
submission shall contain at least the following exhibits and
information:
A. Application form: a fully executed and signed copy of the
application form.
B. Fees: site plan review fees in the amounts established in
§ 125-117.
C. Originals: one (1) original of all maps and drawings on
durable, permanent transparency material.
D. Copies: ten (10) copies of written materials, plus ten (10)
sets of maps or drawings containing the information
listed below. The written materials shall be contained in
a bound report or a three-ring notebook. The maps or
drawings shall be at a scale sufficient to allow review of
the items listed under the criteria for approval.
E. General information: The following general information
is required:
( 1) Name of owner of record and address.
(2) Applicant's name and address if different.
(3) The name of the proposed development.
( 4) Names and addresses of all property owners within
three hundred (300) feet of the edge of the property
line.
(5) Sketch map showing general location of the site
within the town.
(6) Location map shO'wing the boundaries of all
contiguous property under the control of the owner
or applicant regardless of whether all or part is
being developed at this time.
(7) The tax map(s) and lot number(s) of the parcel or
parcels.
12601 4-25-93
§ 125-102 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-102
( 8) A copy of the deed to the property, option to
purchase the property or other documentation to
demonstrate right, title or interest in the property
on the part of the applicant.
(9) The names and addresses and registration numbers,
if registered, of the land surveyor, architect,
engineer and/or.similar professionals assisting with
the preparation of the plan.
F. Information regarding existing conditions: The following
information regarding existing conditions is required:
(1) Zoning classification(s) of the property and the
location of zoning district boundaries if the property
is located in more than one (1) zoning district or
abuts a different district.
(2) The bearings and distances of all property lines of
the property to be developed and the source of this
information, prepared by a registered land surveyor
as a standard boundary survey.
(3) Location and size of any existing sewer and water
mains, culverts and drains on the property to be
developed and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land.
(4) Location, names and present widths of existing
streets and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the
proposed development.
(5) The location, dimensions and ground floor elevations
of all existing buildings on the site.
(6) The location and dimensions of existing driveways,
streets, parking and loading areas and walkways on
the site.
(7) Location of intersecting roads or driveways within
two hundred (200) feet of the site.
(8) Topography of the site at an appropriate contour
interval [one (1) foot, two (2) feet or five (5) feet],
12602 4-26-93
(J '- _./
r·)· .......
()
()•. '. _ ..
§ 125-102 ZONING § 125-102
depending on the nature of the use and character of
the site.
(9) Major natural features on the site and including,
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundaries
of the site, wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains,
groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats
or other important natural features .
(10) Soils information if on-site sewage disposal is
proposed. This information should be detailed
enough to allow those portions of the site not
suitable for on-site disposal systems to be identified.
( 11) The location of open drainage courses, wetlands,
significant stands of trees and other important
natural features, with a description of such features
to be retained.
(12) The direction of existing surface water drainage flow
across the site.
( 13) The location and dimensions of existing signs.
(14) The location and type of all existing exterior
lighting.
(15) A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions, if any,
as are intended to cover all or part of the tract. Such
covenants or deed restrictions shall be referenced on
the plan.
G. Information regarding proposed development activity:
The following information regarding the proposed
development activity is required:
(1) The location of all building setbacks, yards and
buffers required by this Part 2.
(2) The location, dimensions, including heights and
b'Tound floor elevations, of all proposed buildings on
the site.
(3) The location and dimensions of proposed driveways,
parking and loading areas and walkways.
12603 4-25-93
§ 125-102 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-103
( 4) The location and dimensions of all proposed water
supply and wastewater disposal systems.
( 5) The direction of proposed surface water drainage
flow across the site.
(6) Location, fron~ view and dimensions of proposed
signs.
(7) Location and type of proposed exterior lighting.
(8) Proposed landscaping and buffering.
(9) A schedule of construction, including anticipated
beginning and completion dates.
§ 125-103. Additional information required of major
developments.
Applications for major developments shall include the
following additional information:
A. Existing and proposed topography of the site at one- ,
two- or five-foot contour intervals, or such closer interval
as the Planning Board may determine.
B. A stormwater drainage and erosion control program
showing:
( 1) The existing and proposed method of handling
stormwater runoffs.
(2) The direction flow of the runoff through the use of
arrows.
(3) The location, elevation and size of all catch basins,
dry wells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins
and storm sewers.
( 4) Engineering calculations used to determine
drainage requirements based upon the twenty-fiveyear
twenty-four-hour storm frequency, if the
project will significantly alter the existing drainage
pattern due to such factors as the amount of new
12604 4 -215-93
()
()
(;):·, • •• J
',
(_)
§ 125-103 ZONING § 125-103
impervious surfaces (such as paving and building
area) being proposed.
(5) Methods of controlling erosion and sedimentation
during and after construction.
C. A groundwater impact analysis prepared by a
groundwater hydrologist for projects involving common
on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities with a
capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons or more per day.
D. A utility plan showing, in addition to provisions for
water supply and wastewater disposal, the location and
nature of electrical, telephone and any other utility
services to be installed on the site.
E. A planting plan and schedule keyed to the site plan and
indicating the general species and sizes of trees, shrubs
and other plants to be planted on the site.
F. A traffic impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the
proposed project on the capacity, level of service and
safety of adjacent streets.
G. A written statement from the Millinocket Water
Company as to the adequacy of the water supply in
terms of quantity and pressure for both domestic and fi.r'e
flows, if public water supply is to be utilized.
H. The location, width, typical cross section, grades and
profiles of all proposed streets and sidewalks.
I. Construction drawings for streets, sanitary sewers and
water and storm drainage systems, designed and
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Maine or a person who has demonstrated
competence in the eyes of the Planning Board.
J. The location of any pedestrian ways, lots, easements,
open spaces and other areas to be reserved for or
dedicated to public use and/or ownership. For any
proposed easement, the developer shall submit the ·
proposed easement language with a signed statement
certifying that the easement will be executed upon
12605 4-25-93
§ 125-103 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-103
approval of the development. In the case of any streets or
other ways dedicated to public ownership, the developer
shall submit a signed statement that he will maintain
such streets or ways year round until such time as they
may be accepted by the town.
K. Written offers of dedication or conveyance to the
municipality, in a form satisfactory to the Town
Attorney, of all land included in the streets, highways,
easements, parks or other open space dedicated for
public use, and copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which spaces, title to which is
reserved by the developer, are to be maintained.
L. If the development is a condominium or a clustered
development, evidence that all requirements relative to
establishment of a homeowners' association or
condominium owners' association have been met. If the
development is a clustered development, evidence shall
be presented that all other requirements of this Part 2
pertaining to clustered development have been met. The
submission shall include copies of the bylaws of any
homeowners' or condominium association charged with
maintaining common spaces and lands. Homeowners'
associations or condominium documents shall clearly
state that the association or condominium shall properly
maintain private roadways serving the development
after the developer has · legally relinquished that
responsibility and until such time as the town may
accept them as public ways.
M. Cost of the proposed development and evidence of
financial capacity to complete it. This evidence should be
in the form of a letter from a bank or other source of
financing indicating the name of the project, amount of
financing proposed and its interest in financing the
project.
12606 4-25-93
.... ·-, $ .
\ .
··,_,;:/
()
(~)
C)
§ 125-104 ZONING § 125-104
§ 125-104. Review procedures.
The procedures for site plan review are as follows:
A. Step 1: submission of completed application to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall submit the
requisite number of copies of his/her application and
supporting information required by§ 125-102.
B. Step 2: Code Enforcement Officer classification and
·review.
(1) Dated receipt. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue the applicant a dated receipt.
(2) Classification. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
review the application and classify it as either a
major or minor development in accordance with the
provisions of§ 125-100. If the proposal is classified
as a major development, the applicant shall be
required to submit the additional information
required in§ 125-103 of this.Article.
(3) Fees submitted. After classification, the applicant
shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with the
applicable fees established in § 125-117.
(4) Review for completeness. The Code Enforeement
Officer shall initially review the application and
determine whether or not it is complete.
(5) Notice of incomplete application. If the application is
found to be incomplete, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall, within ten (10) days, notify the
applicant in writing of the information needed to
complete the application. Upon the applicant's
submission of such additional information, Steps 1
and 2 shall be repeated.
(6) Application forwarded. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall forward copies of the application and
supporting documents to the Town Planner, if the
town has retained the services of a Town Planner,
and the members of the Planning Board and place
12607 4-25-93
§ 125-104 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-104
the project on the agenda of the next regular
Planning Board meeting occurring not less than
fourteen (14) days later.
(7) Incomplete applications will not be acted upon.
Applications forwarded to the Planning Board which
are incomplete shall not be acted upon by the Board
until the meeting following the determination by the
Code Enforcement Officer that the application is
complete.
(8) Notice to abutters. Abutting property owners shall
be notified by mail by the town of all pending
applications for site plan review. This notice shall
indicate the timet date and place of Planning Board
consideration of the application.
C. Step 3: Town Planner review. If the town has retained
the services of a Town Planner, upon receipt of the
application and supporting documents, the Town
Planner shall review the material and determine
whether or not the application is complete with regard
to:
(1) Complete application: whether or not the
information has been submitted required by
§ 125-102 and, if applicable, § 125-103.
(2) Compliance with land use standards: whether or riot
the proposed development meets the requirements
of the applicable land use standards contained in
Article VIII of this Part 2.
(3) Criteria of approval: whether or not the applicant
has adequately addressed the site plan review
criteria contained in§ 125-111 of this Article.
D. Step 4: Planning Board review. At the meeting of the
Planning Board at w~ch the proposed development is
scheduled to be reviewed, the Planning Board shall
perform the following:
12608 4-25-93
0
§ 125-104 ZONING § 125-104
(1) Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) and Town Planner
reports. The Planning Board shall hear any reports
of the Code Enforcement Officer and, if the town has
retained the services of a Town Planner, the report
of the Town Planner regarding the proposed
development.
(2) Applicant's response. The Planning Board shall hear
any comments of the applicant regarding the Code
Enforcement Officer's and Town Planner's report.
(3) Request for waivers. The Planning Board shall hear
any requests from the applicant for waivers
pursuant to§§ 125-112 and 125-113.
( 4) Determination of completeness. The Planning Board
shall determine whether or not the application is
complete.
(5) Notice of incompleteness. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the Board shall inform
the Code Enforcement Officer of the information
required to make the application complete. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall, within ten (10)
days, inform the applicant, in writing, of the
additional information required by the Planning
Board. Upon the applicant's submission of such
additional material, Steps 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall be
repeated.
(6) Deciding on public hearing.
(a) If the application is determined to be complete,
the Board shall deem the application pending
and shall determine whether or not to set the
matter to public hearing. If a public hearing is
set, such hearing shall take place within fortyfive
(45) days of the Planning Board's
determination that the application is complete.
This deadline may be extended by mutual
agreement of the Board and the applicant,
12609 4-25-93
§ 125-104 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-104
either in writing or orally, on the record at a
public meeting.
(b) If the proposed development has been classified
as a major development, such public hearing
shall be mandatory. If the proposed
development has been classified as a minor
development, such public hearing shall be held
at the discretion of the Planning Board.
(c) Public hearings held for the purpose of hearing
testimony regarding proposals requiring site
plan approval under this Part 2, and notice
thereof, shall be governed by§ 125-105.
E. Step 5: Planning Board deliberation and decision.
(1) Deliberation. Within thirty (30) days after the public
hearing on an application, or within thirty (30) days
of a determination of completeness by the Board, if
no hearing is held, the Planning Board shall
deliberate to determine whether the proposed site
plan complies with all applicable land use standards
set forth in Article VIII and meets the site plan
review criteria set forth in § 125-111. This deadline
may be extended by mutual agreement of the Board
and the applicant, either in writing or orally, on the
record at a public meeting.
(2) Decision. If the Planning Board finds that the
proposed site plan complies with all such standards,
it shall issue an order granting site plan approval
subject to such terms and conditions as the Board
considers advisable to ensure conformity with site
plan review standards and criteria of this Part 2 or
to protect the public's health, safety or general
welfare. If the Planning Board finds that the
proposed site plan does not comply with all
applicable review standards, it shall issue an order
denying site plan approval. In either case, the
Planning Board shall, within ten (10) working days
after the completion of its deliberations, issue
12610 4-2~ -93
( ,')
' . ./
(", ' ').. :
' .
(.)
§ 125-104 ZONING § 125-105
specific written findings of fact supporting its
decision.
F. Step 6: CEO building permit. If the Board shall vote to
approve the site plan application, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a building permit, provided that, in
his/her opinion, all other requirements of this Part 2
have been met.
§ 125·105. Public hearing procedures.
Site plan review public hearings and notice thereof shall
comply with the following procedures:
A. Published notice. Notice of said hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town of Millinocket at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing date.
B. Mailed notice. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
date, written notice of said hearing shall also be mailed
to the applicant, to the owners of all property within
three hundred (300) feet of the property in question and
to the Chairperson of the Millinocket Town Council. The
owners of property shall be considered to be those shown
on the town's tax list as the persons against whom taxes
are assessed. The Planning Board shall, in each case,
maintain a list of property owners so notified. Notice
shall be deemed received if mailed to an owner's last
known address according to the town tax records. Failure
of any property owner to actually receive notice shall not
necessitate another hearing or invalidate any actions of
the Planning Board.
C. Content of notice. Notice of said hearing shall identify
the applicant and the property involved, describe the
specific nature of the proposal, state the date, time and
place of the hearing and explain how the recipient of the
notice may attend and present evidence.
12611 4-25-93
§ 125-105 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-106
D. Rules. Said hearings shall be conducted according to
rules adopted by the Planning Board.
E. Representation. At any hearing a party may be
represented by an agent or attorney; provided, however,
that, if any party is not present, any person acting as
that party's agent or attorney shall provide written
evidence of such authority.
F. Continuation. Any hearing may be continued or recessed
to another time for good cause shown or upon written or
recorded agreement of the Board and the applicant.
§ 125-106. Professional review.
A. Additional studies. The Planning Board may require the
applicant to undertake any additional studies which it
deems reasonable and necessary to ensure that the
requirements of this Part 2 are met. The cost of all such
studies shall be borne by the applicant.
B. Independent technical review.
(1) The Planning Board may require that an
independent consultant(s) review one (1) or more
submissions of an application. The independent
consultant(s) shall report to the Planning Board as
to the project's compliance or noncompliance with
the applicable provisions of this Part 2 and
recommend, if appropriate, those actions which will
result in compliance. Such consultants shall be fully
qualified to provide the required information and
shall be mutually acceptable to the town and the
applicant and may include:
(a) An attorney;
(b) A registered professional engineer;
(c) A registered architect;
(d) A registered landscape architect;
12612 4-25-93
... , ( :" }
' .. .../
{ --\
,...._ _ _,.,,,
§ 125-106 ZONING
(e) A registered geologist;
(f) A licensed soil scientist;
(g) A registered land surveyor; or
§ 125-108
(h) Any other registered/licensed professional or
independent expert witness deemed fully
qualified and mutually acceptable to the town
and the applicant.
(2) The consultant(s) selected shall estimate the cost of
such review, and the applicant shall deposit with
the town the full estimated cost which the town
shall place in an escrow account in accordance With
§ 125-117.
§ 125-107. Failure to act.
A. Failure of the Planning Board to act within two (2)
weeks after any of the time requirements set forth
herein shall constitute a denial of the application, unless
a time extension has been mutually agreed to, in writing,
by the applicant and the Planning Board.
B. Failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to act withiri
thirty (30) days from receipt of a complete application
shall constitute a denial of the application, unless a time
extension has been mutually agreed to, in writing, by the
applicant and the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 125-108. Expiration of approvals.
All site plan approvals shall expire within eighteen (18)
months of the date of issuance unless work thereunder is
commenced within eighteen (18) months from the date of
issuance. If work is not completed within two (2) years from the
date of issuance, a new application may be required. The
expiration date may be extended upon request.
12613 4-25-93
§ 125-109 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-111
§ 125·109. Other permits.
The granting of site plan approval does not relieve the
applicant from the need to obtain any other permits or
approvals required prior to the commencement of any activity
or use. Such other required permits or approvals may include
but are not limited to subdivision approval, building, plumbing
and electrical permits, licenses granted pursuant to 38
M.R.S.A., Subsection 1022, Maine Department of Environmental
Protection and United States A.rμiy Corps of Engineer's
approvals, subsurface wastewater disposal permits, sewer
connection permits, Maine Department of Transportation
approvals and the like. The fact that the applicant may have
obtained or may have been granted such permits or approvals
prior to site plan review may be considered by the Planning
Board as evidence as to the plan's compliance with applicable
review standards but shall not be deemed conclusive evidence
as to compliance.
§ 125·110. Access to site and records.
The town shall have access to the site at all times to review
the progress of the work and shall have the authority to review
all records and documents related to the project. The applicant,
by accepting a building permit, waives any objection to the town
having access to the site to review the progress of the work or to
review all records and documents related to the project.
§ 125-111. Site plan review criteria.
The Planning Board, in reviewing projects requiring site plan
approval under this Part 2, shall make positive written findings
that the applicant has submitted clear and convincing evidence
that:
A. Adequate provision has been made for off-street parking
and loading.
B. Adequate provision has been made for traffic movement
of all types, including pedestrian, into, out of and within
12614 4-25-93
.... ,
( .·. I
. ./
()
(0 ··.~J
()
§ 125-111 ZONING § 125-111
the proposed project. The Board shall consider traffic
movement both on site and off site in making its
determination under this criteria.
C. Any traffic increase attributable to the proposed project
will not result in unreasonable congestion or unsafe
conditions on a road in the vicinity of the proposed
development.
D. The proposed project will be built on soil types which are
suitable to the nature of the project and that adequate
provision has been made to avoid erosion, contamination
of ground- or surface waters, interference with adjacent
land, overburdening of natural or artificial drainage
systems and/or any other adverse effects of inadequate
drainage.
E. Adequate provision has been made to locate and design
proposed outdoor display and/or storage areas so as to
avoid any safety hazard to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic on and off the site.
F. Adequate provision has been made to avoid any hazard
to travel on public or private ways or any glare or other
nuisance to the use of adjoining public or private
property.
G. Adequate provision has been made with regard to
buffers, screening, landscaping and the preservation and
enhancement of significant natural features.
H. Adequate prov1s1on has been made to avoid
unreasonable adverse effects on the scenic or natural
beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, rare and
irreplaceable natural areas, existing uses, air quality,
water quality or other natural resources within the town
or in neighboring towns.
I. Whenever a project is situated, in whole or in part,
within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river
or within two hundred fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland or
12615 4-25-93
§ 125-111 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-112
within seventy five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the
norm.al high-water line of a stream, adequate provision
has been made to conserve shoreland vegetation, visual
points of access to waters as viewed from public facilities
and actual points of public access to waters.
J. Adequate provision has been made to prevent any
significant adverse effect upon the public health, safety
or general welfare of the neighborhood or community.
K. Adequate provision has been made to prevent any undue
adverse effect upon the property values of adjacent or
nearby properties.
L. Adequate provision has been made to avoid any undue
burden on municipal services.
M. Adequate provision has been made to assure the proper
operation of the proposed business(es) or activity(ies) on
the site through the provision of adequate and
appropriate utilities, drainage, water supply, sewage
disposal, solid waste disposal, access, parking and
loading and other necessary site improvements.
N. Adequate provision has been made to assure that the
proposed development conforms in all respects with the
provisions of this Part 2.
0 . The applicant has adequate technical and financial
capability to carry out the project as proposed and to
meet any conditions of approval applied by the Planning
Board.
§ 125-112. Waiver of submissions requirements.
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown and only
upon the written request of an applicant specifically stating the
reasons therefor, waive any of the application requirements set
forth in § 125-102 and 125-103 of this Article, provided that
such waiver will not unduly restrict the review process. The
Planning Board may condition such a waiver on the applicant's
compliance with alternative requirements. Good cause may
12616 4-25-93
(_)
(' •'). ·._... ·
l. ,,. _.
§ 125-112 ZONING § 125-114
include the Board's finding that particular submissions are
inapplicable, unnecessary or inappropriate for a complete
review. Notwithstanding the waiver of a submission
requirement, the Planning Board may, at any later point in the
review process, rescind such waiver if it appears that the
submission previously waived is necessary for an adequate
review. A request for a submission previously waived shall not
affect the pending status of an application.
§ 125-113. Waiver of review criteria.
The Planning Board may, upon the written request of an
applicant specifically stating the reasons therefor, waive any of
the review criteria set forth in§ 125-111 when it finds that such
waiver is reasonable and that the public health, safety or
welfare would not be adversely affected by such a waiver.
ARTICLE XII
Certificate of Use and Occupancy
[Amended 11-30-1995 by Ord. No. 6-95]
§ 125-114. Certificate required before use and
occupancy.
A. A certificate of use and occupancy shall be obtained from
the Code Enforcement Officer whenever required by
Section 119 of the BOCA Building Code as adopted as
Chapter 48 of the Town Code.
B. No building or part thereof requiring a certificate of use
and occupancy shall be used or occupied until a
certificate has been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. A certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued only
after a final inspection has been conducted and the Code
Enforcement Officer has determined that the building
part thereof is in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Part 2 of the BOCA Building Code
12617 2-25-98
§ 125-114 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-115
adopted by reference pursuant to Chapters 48 and the
NFPA Life Safety Code adopted by reference pursuant to
Chapter 49 of the Town Code, and any conditions of
approval attached by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement
Officer to any applicable permits or plan
approvals.
D. Temporary occupancy may be permitted, upon request of
the holder of a permit and the issuance of a temporary
and conditional certificate of use and occupancy by the
Code Enforcement Officer, provided that the Code Enforcement
Officer has determined that the building or
portion thereof can be occupied safely prior to full
completion of the building without endangering life or
public welfare.
ARTICLE XIII
Administrative Fees
[Amended 7-1-1993 by Ord. No. 3-93;
9-8~1994 by Ord. No. 5-941
§ 125-115. General provisions.
A. Applications considered incomplete until payment of
required fee. Applications for any of the permits,
approvals or certificates specified below which are not
accompanied by a check in the amount of the required
fee shall be considered incomplete, and no action will be
taken on said application until a check for the required
amount has been received by local officials.
B. Check to be made payable to town. All fees shall be paid
in the form of a check made payable to the Town of
Millinocket, and the purpose of the fee shall be clearly
indicated on the check.
12618 2-215 -98
()
§ 125-116 ZONING § 125-116
§ 125-116. Code Enforcement Officer permit fees.
A. Code Enforcement Officer permit applications. All
applications for permits issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer under this Part 2 shall be accompanied by a check
in the amount required below:
(Cont'd on page 12619)
12618.1

·~ ( .,,,
''-, __ _,., /
§ 125-116 ZONING § 125-116
§ 125-116. Code Enforcement Officer permit fees.
[Amended 8-22-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
A. Code Enforcement Officer permit applications. All
applications for permits issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer under this Part 2 shall be accompanied by a check
in the amount required below:
(1) Flood hazard areas.
(a) Minor construction improvements: $25 per unit.
(b) Flood proofing nonresidential structures: $50
per structure.
(c) Major construction/substantial improvements:
$50 per unit.
(2) New residential buildings and structures.
(a) New single- and multi-family dwelling units:
$50 per unit.
(b) New residential accessory structures: $10 per
structure if 200 square feet or less; $25 per
structure if over 200 square feet.
(3) New commercial and institutional buildings and
structures.
(a) New commercial and institutional buildings
with a floor area of 1,000 square feet or less:
$50 per building.
(b) New commercial and institutional buildings
with a floor area greater than 1,000 square feet:
$50 plus $0.03 per square foot for each square
foot over 1,000 square feet.
(c) New commercial and institutional accessory
structures with a floor area of 200 square feet
or less: $10 per structure.
(d) New commercial and institutional accessory
structures with a floor area greater than 200
square feet: $10 for the first 200 square feet,
12619 03-30-2005
§ 125-116 l\HLLINOCKET CODE * 125-116
plus $1 for each additional 10 square feet over
the first 200.
(4) New industrial/transportation/public utility
buildings and structures.
l
(a) New industrial/transportation/public utility
buildings with a floor area of 1,000 square feet
or less: $200 per building. ;j
(b) New industrial/transportation/public utility
buildings with a floor area greater than 1,000
square feet: $200, plus $0.05 per square foot
over 1,000 square feet.
(c) New industrial/transportation/public utility
accessory structures with a floor area of 200
square feet or less: $25 per structure.
(d) New industrial/transportation/public utility
accessory structures with a floor area greater
than 200 square feet: $25 per structure plus
$0.05 per square foot for each square foot over
200 square feet.
(5) Alterations to existing buildings and structures.
(a) Alterations to existing residential buildings:
(1) Up to $1,000 in value: $10 per alteration.
[2) In excess of $1,000 in value: $25 per
alteration.
{b) Alterations to existing commercial and
institutional buildings and structures: $25 per
alteration.
(c) A 1 t e r a t i o n s t o e x i s t i n g ~
industrial/transportation/public utility
buildings and structures: $100 per alteration.
(6) Placement of signs: $5 per sign.
(7) Change of use permit.
12620 03-30- 2005
,<·v ( . \,:·\ .
' . - "":· ~ .
' -
( "·.··)';.
' ..... - -· . --~-
r -;.~-
'-·. ·.·· ..v ) .
§ 125-116 ZONING *125-116
(a) Change of use with a floor area less than 1,000
square feet: $25 per change.
(b) Change of use with a floor area more than 1,000
square feet: $25 plus $0.03 per square foot for
each square foot over 1,000 square feet.
(8) Moving or demolition permit. Moving or demolition
of principal buildings or structures, not including
mobile homes: $5 per move/demolition.
B. Electrical permits.
(1) Residential: $5.
(2) Commercial: $25.
C. Residential buildings only (summary and explanation of
charges).
(1) Alteration permit.
(a) Up to $1,000 in value: $10.
(b) Over $1.000 in value: $25.
(c) This application is for changes to the structure
that is already built, such as building a second
story on top of a one-story home or changing a
porch into living space.
(2) New accessory structure.
(a) For structures up to 200 square feet: $10.
(b) For structures greater than 200 square feet:
$25.
(c) This application is for adding portions to the
property, such as adding a deck, garage, shed,
etc.
(3) New principal structure: $50. This application is for
building a new house, or placing a brand new mobile
home or modular home on a lot.
12620.1 03 - 30 - 2005
* 125-116 l\!IILLINOCKET CODE * 125-116
(4) Sign permit; residential/home occupation $5 per
sign.
(5) l\foving or demolition: $5. This is for moving a
building or mobile home in or out of Town. In the
case of a mobile home, if it is brand new, it must
have a new principal structure permit, not a moving
permit. All real estate taxes must be paid prior to
moving a mobile home out of Town. Send people to 1J
the Tax Collector for tax payment. The demolition
permits are for anything that is being torn down.
Make sure that they are told to talk to the
Supervisor at the transfer site and that they are
given a copy of the letter which is also filed in the
demolition file.
(6) Fence(s)/retaining walls: $5 for location of a new
fence that did not exist before.
(7) Electrical: $5 residential. They must contact the
Electrical Inspector for the inspection.
(8) General information. A permit is not required for
normal maintenance and repair. As long as
everything is being built the same size and place, a
permit is not required. For example, if the fence is
the same length and height and is put in the same
location as the old fence, no permit is required or if
the deck is the same size as the old deck and is in
the same location, no permit is required. No permit
is required to reroof or re-side a structure.
I' u •
D. Where a permit is not obtained until after construction
begins, the above fee shall be doubled. This double fee is
in addition to any fine or penalty imposed for violRting
this Part 2 by failing to obtain a building permit prior to 11
starting construction.
12620.2 03-30-2005
.. ~ ( 7
/) \ . :
(--.?
.. _,,
-r~
(·" ) -
()
Ordinance
No.
1-98
6-98
8-98
5-2005
1-2006
6-2006
ZONING
Table of Zoning Map Amendments
Millinocket. ME
Adoption Description/
Date Zone Change
5-14-1998 Lot 3 (3-1 through
3-27) from R2 to
RD
11-5-1998 Huber property and
additional adjacent
land from CF to ID
12-3-1998 Rice farm from ID
to RD
12-8-2005 Part of Medway Road
from RI to NC
3-9-2006 Part of Bates Street
and all of Kelley's
Trailer Park located
just off Bates Street
from R-1 to NC
12-14-2006 Tax Map UOS, Lot 004.
from NC to R-2
07-25-2007
• . l
8..
§ 125-117 ZONING § 125-117
§ 125-117. Site plan review fees.
A. Application packet fee. The application packet fee
required to cover printing costs for copies of the
application form and copies of this Part 2 are as follows:
(1) Copies of site plan review applications. The
nonrefundable fee for copies of the site plan review
application form is $5 per copy .
(2) Copies of Part 2. The nonrefundable fee for copies of
this Part 2 is $10 per copy.
B. Application processing fees. The application processing
fees required to cover the administrative handling costs
associated with site plan review under this Part 2 are as
follows:
(1) Minor developments. The nonrefundable fee to
accompany the application for minor developments
is $150.
(2) Major developments. The nonrefundable fee to
accompany the application of major developments is
$300.
C. Technical review account.
(1) The technical review fee, if required, shall be paid
prior to the start of the Planning Board's review of
any application for site plan review.
(2) This fee shall be paid in the form of a check made
payable to the Town of Millinocket, and the purpose
of the fee shall be clearly indicated on the check. The
Town shall deposit this fee in a special account.
(3) Any balance in the account remaining after the
completion and inspection of required improvements
shall be returned to the applicant.
12620.3 03-30-2006
§ 125-118 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-118
§ 125·118. Zoning Board of Appeals administration fees.
A. Application for administrative appeals and variances. All
applications for administrative appeals and the approval
of variances by the Zoning Board of Appeals under this
Part 2 shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of
$50.
.J
(Cont'd on page 12621) ~
12620.4 03-30-2005
.. ·
§ 125-119 ZONING § 125-119
ARTICLE XIV
Enforcement
§ 125-119. Enforcement procedure.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to
enforce the provisions of this Part 2. If the Code
Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision is
being violated, he or she shall notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct it, including discontinuance of the illegal use of
land, buildings or structures or work being done,
removal of illegal buildings or structures and abatement
of nuisance conditio~s. A copy of such notices shall be
submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as
a permanent record. Any such notice is not a
prerequisite to bringing any legal action noted in
§ 125-120 below, and failure to give notice shall not in
anyway affect such legal action.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site
inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable laws
and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints
of alleged violations of this Part 2.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete
record of all essential transactions of the office, including
applications submitted, permits granted or denied,
variances granted or denied, revocation actions,
violations investigated, violations found and fees
collected. In the case of violations within two hundred
fifty (250) feet of the normal high-water line of any great
pond or river, within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland or within seventyfive
(75) feet of the high-water line of a stream, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall, on an annual basis, submit a
summary of this record to the Director of the Bureau of
Land Quality Control within the Department of Environmental
Protection.
12621 4-21-93
§ 125-120 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-122
§ 125-120. Legal action.
The Town Council or its authorized agent, upon notice from
the Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby directed to institute
any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable,
including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of
fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Part 2 in the name of the municipality. The
Town Council, or its authorized agent, is hereby authorized to
enter into a consent agreement for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this Part 2 and recording fines without court
action. Such agreements should not allow an illegal structure or
use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence
that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as
a direct result of erroneous advice given by an -authorized
municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted
in bad faith.
§ 125-121. Fines.
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner's agent or a contractor, who orders or conducts any
activity in violation of this Part 2 shall be penalized in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
ARTICLE XV
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 125-122. Establishment. [Amended 11-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 7-92]
A Zoning Board of Appeals, consisting of five (5) regular
members and two (2) alternates, is hereby created in accordance
with the provisions of 30A M.R.S.A. § 4353. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, recording the
vote of each member on all matters coming before the Board.
The minutes of that Board and all correspondence shall be a
public record. Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for conducting a meeting and taking action, and the
12622 4-25-93
§ 125-122 ZONING § 125-123
concurring vote of at least three (3) members is necessary to
grant any variance request or reverse any action of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board. The Zoning Board of
Appeals is governed by the procedures set forth at 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 2691 and in this Part 2. In addition, the Board may
adopt any procedural rules not in conflict with Title 30-A or this
Part 2, which it deems necessary or proper for the conduct of its
business. The members of the existing Board of Appeals
established under Chapter 5 of the Town Code are hereby
appointed to the Zoning Board of Appeals for their respective
terms as remain to them on the Board of Appeals.
§ 125-123. Powers and duties.
A. Administrative appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have
the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that there is an error in any order, requirements,
decision or determination made by, or failure to act by,
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board in
the enforcement or administration of this Part 2. When
errors of administrative procedures or interpretation are
found, the case shall be remanded back to the Code
Enforcement Officer for correction.
B. Variance appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the
power to authorize variances upon appeal, within the
limitations set forth in this Part 2.
(1) Dimensional variances may be granted only from
dimensional requirements including frontage
(including shore frontage), lot area, lot width,
height, percent of lot coverage and setback
requirements.
(2) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of
any uses otherwise prohibited by this Part 2.
(3) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds
that:
12623 4-211 - 98
§ 125-123 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-123
(a) The proposed structure or use would meet the
performance standards of this Part 2, except for
the specific provision which has created the
nonconformity and from which relief is sought;
and
(b) The strict application of the terms of this Part 2
would result in undue hardship. The term
"undue hardship,, shall mean all of the
following:
[1] That the land in question can not yield a
reasonable return unless a variance is
granted.
[2] That the need for a variance is due to the
unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood.
[3] That the granting of a variance will not
alter the essential character of the locality.
[ 4] That the hardship is not the result of
action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
( 4) The Board may grant a variance to a property owner
for the purpose of making that property accessible to
a person with a disability who is living on the
property. The Board shall restrict any variance
granted under this subsection solely to the
installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the
property by the person with the disability. The
Board may impose conditions on the variance,
including limiting the variance to the duration of
the disability or to the time that the person with the
disability lives on the property. For the purposes of
this subsection, a disability has the same meaning
as a physical or mental handicap under 5 M.R.S.A.
§ 4553.
12624 4-25-93
f'·

··j)· I • \:·
ttft
~
§ 125~123 ZONING § 125-124
(5) The Board shall limit any variances granted as
strictly as possible in order to ensure conformance
with the purposes and provisions of this Part 2 to
the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance shall
comply with any conditions imposed.
(6) In areas subject to the Mandatory Sboreland Zoning
Act, a copy of each variance request, including the
application and all supporting information supplied
by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the
municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least
twenty (20) days prior to action by the Board. Any
comments received from the Commissioner prior to
action by the Board shall be made part of the record
and shall be taken into consideration by the Board.
§ 125-124. Appeal procedure.
A. Time limit. An administrative or variance appeal may be
taken to the Board by an aggrieved party from any
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer. Such appeal
shall be ta.ken within thirty (30) days of the date of the
decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that
the Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the
thirty-day requirement.
B. Written notice. Such appeal shall be made by filing with
the Board a written notice of appeal which includes:
(1) A concise written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why it should be granted; and
(2} A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of
existing buildings and structures and other physical
features of the lot pertinent to the relief requested.
C. Record of case. Upon being notified of an appeal, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit to the Board all
12625
§ 125-124 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-124
of the papers constituting the record of the decision or
action being appealed.
D. Notice to abutters. Abutting property owners shall be
notified by mail by the town of all notices of appeal
received by the Board pursuant to Subsection B above.
The notice to abutters shall indicate the time, date and
place of any public consideration of the appeal.
E. Public hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing on
the appeal within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of
any appeal request.
F . Decision by the Board.
(1) Quorum. A majority of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
(2) Majority vote. The concurring vote of at least three
(3) members is necessary to reverse an order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board in their
administration of this Part 2, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter on which it is required
to decide under this Part 2, or to affect any variation
in the application of this Part 2 from its stated
terms. [Amended 11-19-1992 by Ord. No. 7-92)
(3) Burden of proof. The person filing the appeal shall
have the burden of proof.
( 4) Action on appeal. Following the public hearing on an
appeal, the Board may reverse the decision or
failure to act of the Code Enforcement Officer only
upon a finding that the decision or failure to act was
clearly contrary to specific provisions of this Part 2.
(5) Time frame. The Board shall decide all appeals
within thirty-five (35) days after the close of the
hearing and shall issue a written decision within
seven (7) days of the Board's decision.
(6) Board decisions shall only be made by voting at a
public meeting. All decisions shall become a part of
12626 4-25-93
§ 125-124 ZONING § 125-127
the record and shall include a statement of findings
and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis
therefor and the appropriate order, relief or denial
thereof.
G. Reconsideration. The Board may reconsider any decision
reached within thirty (30) days of its prior decision. The
Board may conduct additional hearings and receive
additional evidence and testimony.
§ 125·125. Appeal to Superior Court.
An appeal may be taken by any aggrieved party to Superior
Court in accordance with state laws within thirty (30) days
from the date of any decision of the Board.
ARTICLE XVI
Performance Guaranties
§ 125-126. Required improvements.
Applicants whose developments are subject to site plan
review shall provide performance guaranties sufficient to insure
that the site is environmentally stable in the event that the
project is not completed. An environmentally stable condition
shall mean that the ground cover has been restored so that
there is no erosion from the site, public safety hazards have
been removed or otherwise protected and partially completed
buildings are not a health or safety hazard.
§ 125-127. Contents of guaranty.
The conditions and amount of a performance guaranty shall
be determined by the Planning Board with the advice of the
Town Manager and/or the 'lbwn Attorney.
12627 4-25-98
§ 125-128 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-128
§ 125-128. Types of guaranties.
A performance guaranty may take any one (1) of the
following forms:
A. Escrow account. A cash contribution to the establishment
of an escrow account may be made by either a
certified check made out to the town, the direct deposit
into a savings account or the purchase of a certificate of
deposit. For any account opened by the developer, the
town shall be named as owner and the consent of the
town shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest
earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the
developer unless the expenditure of the interest by the
town is necessary in order to complete the required
improvements.
B. Performance bond. A performance bond shall be
provided, issued by a surety company approved by the
Town Council, made payable to the town. A performance
bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method
for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the
developer and the procedures for collection by the town.
The bond documents shall specifically reference the
development for which approval is sought.
C. Irrevocable letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit,
issued by a financial institution approved by the Town
Council or the Town Manager, may establish funding for
the development from which the town may draw if
construction is inadequate. An irrevocable letter of credit
shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the
construction of the development and may not be used for
any other project or loan.
D. Conditional agreement. In the case of a subdivision, the
Planning Board, at its discretion, may provide for the
developer to enter into a binding agreement with the
town in lieu of other performance guaranties. Such an
agreement shall provide for approval of the final plan on
the condition that no lots may be sold or built upon until
either:
12628 4-25-93
•
§ 125-128 ZONING § 125-131
(1) It is certified by the Planning Board, or its agent,
that all of the required improvements have been
installed in accordance with this Part 2 and the
regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
(2) A performance guaranty, acceptaJ?le to the town, is
submitted in an amount necessary to cover the
completion of the required improvements at an
amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the
portions of the required improvements already
installed. Notice of the agreement and any
conditions shall be on the final plan which is
recorded at the registry of deeds.
§ 125-129. Release of guaranty.
Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy/use, the
performance guaranty shall be released. In the event that the
project is not completed, the balance that has not been used to
stabilize the site shall be released.
§ 125-180. Default.
If, upon inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee finds that any of the required improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications
filed as part of the application, he/she shall so report in
writing to the Town Council, the Planning Board and the Town
Manager. The Town Council shall take any steps necessary to
preserve the town's rights .
ARTICLE XVII
Definitions
§ 125-131. Construction of language.
A. In this Part 2, certain terms or words should be
interpreted as follows:
12629 4-21-98
§ 125-131 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
(1) The word "person" includes a firm, association
organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual.
(2) The present tense includes the future tense, the
singular number includes the plural and plural
includes the singular.
(3) The word "shall" is mandatory.
(4) The word "may" is permissive.
(5) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended," "designed" or "arranged to be used or
occupied."
(6) The word "dwelling" includes the word "residence."
B. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this Part 2 and any map or
illustration, the map shall control.
C. Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary
meaning.
§ 125-132. Definitions of words.
For the purpose of interpreting this Part 2, the following
terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein:
ABUTTING - Having a common border with or being
separated from such common border by an alley or
easement. ·
ACCESS - A means of approach or entry to or exit from
property.
ACCESS DRIVE - A private roadway primarily
intended to transport vehicles from a public or private
way to a point within private property.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE - A use or
structure which is incidental and subordinate to the
12630
(·.:· ..- -·
Ie
~ -
<])
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
principal use or structure. "Accessory uses," when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the
lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure
or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof
or a common wall is considered part of the principal
structure.
ACRE - A measure of land containing forty-three
thousand five hundred sixty ( 43,560) square feet.
AGGRIEVED PARTY - An owner of land whose
property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting
or denial of a permit or variance under this Part 2; a
person whose land abuts land for which a permit or
variance has been granted; or any other person or group
of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a
result of the granting or denial of such permit or
variance.
AGRICULTURE - The production, keeping or
maintenance for sale or lease of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to forages and sod crops, grains
and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products,
poultry and poultry products, livestock, fruits and
vegetables and ornamental and greenhouse products.
Agriculture does not include· forest management and
timber harvesting activities or the construction, creation
or maintenance of land management roads.
ALTERATION - As applied to a building or structure, a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the
moving from one location or position to another.
APPEAL - A means for obtaining review of a decision,
determination, order or failure to act pursuant to the
terms of this Part 2 as expressly authorized by the
provisions of this Part 2.
ATTIC - That part of a building which is immediately
below, and wholly or partly within, the roof framing.
12631
§ 125-132 MILLINOC~T CODE § 125-132
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT - A lot arranged, designed
or used for the storage and display for passenger
automobiles and trucks up to three-fourths (3/4) ton in
size and where no repair work is done except minor
incidental repair of automobiles or trailers displayed and
sold on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (FILLING
STATION)- Any premises used for supplying gasoline
and oil at retail, direct to the customer, including the
sale of minor accessories and minor services for
automobiles.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE - A place where, with or
without the attendant sale of engine fuels, the following
services may be carried out: general repair, engine
rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender
straightening and repair; overall painting and
undercoating of automobiles.
BASEMENT - The substructure of a building that is
partially or wholly below ground level which may or may
not be used for living space.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY- A facility designed
primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft
and which may include an access ramp, docking area and
parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
BUFFERS - Units of land, together with a specified
type and amount of vegetative planting thereon and any
structures which may be required between land uses to
eliminate or minimize conflicts between them.
BUILDING:
A. BUILDING - Any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering for any use or occupancy.
Where independent units with separate entrances
are divided by walls, each unit is a "building."
12632 4-25-93
ZONING § 125·132
B. BUILDING, ACCESSORY - A building which is
subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the
principal building or use served, which is located on
the same lot as the principal building or use served
except as otherwise expressly authorized by the
provisions of this Part 2 and which is customarily
incidental to the principal building or use. Any
portion of a principal building devoted or intended to
be devoted to an accessory use is not an "accessory
building."
C. BUILDING, PRINCIPAL - A building (structure)
in which is conducted or in which is intended to be
conducted the main or primary use of the lot on
which it is located.
BUILDING FRONT LINE - Line parallel to the front
lot line transecting that point in the building face which
is closest to the front lot line. This face includes porches
whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include
steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT- · The vertical distance between
the mean elevation of the finished grade of the building
and the highest point of the roof. For those structures
with multiple roofs, each roof shall be considered in
relation to the finished grade upon which that part of the
structure rests.
CAMPGROUND - Any land area specifically designed
and developed, containing two (2) or more individual
campsites which accommodate that segment of the
traveling public seeking temporary . camping
accommodations for tents, recreational vehicles and/or
towed travel trailers for compensation. Accessory uses,
subject to a site plan review, include camper services and
facilities, such as shower and laundry facilities,
electricity, fresh water, propane and gas sales, ice, outlet
for camping supplies and equipment, recreational
services, etc.
12633
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
CHURCH - A building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, where people regularly assemble for
religious worship and which building, together with its
accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public
worship.
CLINIC - An establishment where patients who are not
lodged overnight are admitted for examination and/or
treatment by a physician or dentist or by a group of
physicians or dentists.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT - The development,
according to an approved plan, of a large tract of land
where three (3) or more buildings are constructed on lots
smaller than· normally required in the zone where
located, provided that the overall density of the
development of the tract does not exceed the density or
requirements of the zone and land not built upon is
permanently preserved as common open space. The term
also refers to a planned unit development.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - A person
appointed by the municipal officers to administer and
enforce this Part 2. Reference to the Code Enforcement
Officer may be construed to include Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and the like
where applicable.
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX (SHOPPING MALL) -
Commercial premises owned or managed as a single
entity, which accommodates more than one (1) retail or
service business, including professional offices and which
contains more than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
of gross floor area, including department stores and
grocery stores with more than twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
COMMERCIAL USE - The use of lands, buildings or
structures, other than a home occupation, defined below,
the intent and result of which activity is the production
of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
12634 4-21-93
•
r \•
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings
and/or dwelling units.
A. COMMERCIAL INDOOR RECREATION USE -
Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following commercial uses: arcades, bowling alleys,
indoor sports, arenas, tennis courts, race tracks,
indoor animal exhibits, etc.
B. COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION USE -
Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following commercial uses: golf courses, tennis
courts, amusement and theme parks, water slides,
zoos and animal parks, race tracks, speedways,
motorcycle tracks, riding stables, etc.
CONDOMINIUM - As defined in the Maine
Condominium Act of 1983, means real estate, portions of
which are designated for separate ownership and the
remainder of which are designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions under a
declaration, . duly recorded pursuant to this Act. A
"condominium" is a legal form of ownership, not a land
development type. Real estate is not a "condominium"
unless the undivided interests in the common elements
are vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION - A building that at
any time before creation of the condominium was
occupied wholly or partially by one (1) or more persons
other than purchasers and persons who occupy with the
consent of the purchasers.
CONGREGATE HOUSING - A private, licensed establishment
operated for the purpose of providing
domiciliary care for a group of persons who, by reason of
age or physical condition, do not desire to, but are
financially capable of, providing such care for themselves
and who are not in need of medical or nursing treatment
except in the case of temporary illness.
12635
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) - A
measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter
of its trunk measured at four and one-half (4112) feet
above the natural grade.
DAY-CARE FACILITY - As defined in 22 M.R.S.A
§ 1673, a house or other place in which a person or
combination of persons maintains or otherwise carries
out a regular program, for consideration, for any part of
a day, providing care and protectj.on for three (3) or more
children under the age of sixteen (16) unrelated to the
operator, not to include nursery schools, summer camps,
formal public or private schools and further defined by
the Department of Human Services as follows:
A. DAY-CARE CENTER - A day-care facility as
defined in state statutes for thirteen (13) or more
children on a regular basis.
B. DAY-CARE HOME - A day-care facility as defined
in state statutes for three (3) to twelve (12) children
on a regular basis.
DECK - An accessory attachment to a principal
structure. It shall be constructed primarily of wood and
shall not be enclosed. It shall not have a roof, canopy or
awning, nor shall it have framed or screened walls. It
shall be supported above the ground on posts or beams
and shall not have a foundation. It may contain railings
with screening and gates to enclose pets or children.
DEDICATION - The transfer of property interests from
private to public ownership for a public purpose. The
transfer may be fee-simple interest or of a less-than-feesimple
interest, including an easement.
DEVELOPER - The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot
or parcel of any land proposed for inclusion in a
development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, tenant, contractor, development
corporation or entity.
12636 4-21-93
\dJAY
(a
~-
®. .
..•
'•'•
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
DEVELOPMENT - Any activity requiring a permit
pursuant to this Part 2.
DRAINAGE - The removal of surface or ground water
from land by drains, grading or other means. "Drainage"
includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after development and
includes the means necessary for water supply
preservation and prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVEWAY - A vehicular accessway fewer than five
hundred (500) feet in length serving two (2) lots or fewer.
DWELLING:
A. DWELLING - A building or portion thereof used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including
single-family, two-family and multi pie-family
dwellings.
B. DWELLING UNIT - A room or group of rooms
designed and equipped exclusively for use as living
quarters for only one (1) family, including provisions
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating .
C. DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED - A
dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than
one (1) family and having no roof, wall or floor in
common with any other dwelling unit. The term
shall include manufactured and prefabricated
homes.
D. DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY- A detached or
semidetached building used for residential
occupancy by two (2) families living independently of
each other.
E. DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY- A building or
portion thereof used for residential occupancy by
three (3) or more families living independently of
each other and doing their own cooking in the
building, including apartments, group houses and
row houses.
12637 4-25-93
,,.
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
EASEMENT- Authorization by a property owner of the
use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any
designated part of his property.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS - Include operations
conducted for the public health, safety or general
welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement and operations to
res.cue human beings and livestock from the threat of
destruction or injury.
ENLARGEMENT or TO ENLARGE - An addition to
the floor area of an existing building, an increase in the
size of any other structure or an increase in that portion
of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. "To
enlarge" is to make an enlargement.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - The construction, alteration
or maintenance of gas, electrical or communication
facilities; steam, fuel or water transmission or
distribution systems; collection, supply or disposal
systems. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories, but· shall not include buildings which
are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE - An increase in the
floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions, such as but not limited to attached decks,
garages, porches and greenhouses.
EXPANSION OF USE - The addition of weeks or
months to a use's operating season, additional hours of
operation or the use of more floor area or ground area
devoted to a particular use.
EXTENSION or TO EXTEND - An increase in the
amount of existing floor area used for an existing use
within an existing building. "To extend" is to make an
extension.
12638 4-215-93
r·'-D~
.......
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
FAMILY - One (1) or more persons occupying a
premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
FLOODPLAIN - May be either riverine or inland
depressional areas. Riverine floodplains are those areas
contiguous to a lake, river, stream or stream bed whose
elevation is greater than the normal water pool elevation
but equal to or lower than the projected one~hundredyear
flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains, not
associated with a stream system, are low points to which
surrounding lands drain.
FLOOR AREA - The sum of the horizontal surface
areas of a structure enclosed by exterior walls, plus the
horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure,
such as porches and decks.
FLOWING WATER- Surface water within a stream
channel that has a ' perceptible flow and is substantially
permanent in nature. Such waters are commonly
referred to as "rivers," "streams" and "brooks."
A. MAJOR FLOWING WATERS - Flowing water
downstream from the point where such water drains
fifty (50) square miles or more.
B. MINOR FLOWING WATERS - Flowing water
upstream from the point where such water drains
less than fifty (50) square miles.
FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY- A place housing any
operation which changes the chemical composition or
physical properties of food materials for human
consumption. An example would be a creamery where
dairy products, such as butter, cheese and ice cream, are
mada. The term does not include slaughterhouses nor
does it include restaurants where food is prepared and
sold at retail.
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES - Timber
cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
management planning activities, insect and disease
control, timber stand improvement, pruning, timber
12639 4-25-93
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
harvesting and other similar associated silvicultural
activities, but not the construction or creation of roads.
FORESTED WETLAND - A freshwater wetland
dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
or taller.
FOUNDATION - The supporting substructure of a
building or other structure, including but not limited to
basements, slabs, sills, posts or frost walls.
FRESHWATER WETLAND:
A. Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas which are:
(1) Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres or of less
than ten (10) contiguous acres and adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any river, stream
or brook, such that, in a natural state, the
combined surface area is in exc~:=:P of ten (10)
acres; and
(2) Inundated or saturated by smtact.: or ground
water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support and which, under normal
circumstances, do support a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils.
B. Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream
channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to
the criteria of this definition. (See "wetlands
associated with great ponds and rivers" below.)
C. "Freshwater wetlands" do not include forested
wetlands.
FRONTAGE, ROAD - The continuous linear distance,
measured along the lot line which separates the lot from
a public or private way.
FRONTAGE, SHORE - The horizontal distance,
measured in a straight line, between the intersections of
12640
•
ti.~ 'fjl
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
the side lot lines with the shoreline at normal high-water
elevation. "Shore frontage" may be measured in running
linear feet instead of the method herein proposed,
provided that such measurement is made by a licensed
professional surveyor and is submitted to the Board
under the seal of such surveyor at the expense of the
applicant .
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL - A structure used for
parking or storage of motor vehicles, generally available
to the public and involving payment of a charge for such
parking or storage. A garage used solely in conjunction
with a multiple-family dwelling or hotel shall not be
construed to be a commercial garage, but rather a
permitted accessory structure and use, even though not
on the same premises as the multiple-family dwelling or
hotel.
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL - An accessory building for
parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles belonging
to residential occupants of the premises or a part of the
residence usually occupying the ground floor area of
principal one- or two-family dwellings. Not more than
one (1) space may regularly be used by the private
passenger automobile of a person not resident on the
premises.
GRADE - In relation to buildings, the average of the
finished ground level at the center of each wall of a
building.
GREAT POND - Any inland body of water which in a
natural state has a su'rface area in excess of ten (10)
acres and any inland body of water artificially formed or
increased which has a surface area in excess of thirty
(30) acres, except, for the purposes of this Part 2, where
the artificially formed or increased inland body of water
is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner.
GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA- Any great pond
classified GPA pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 465-A. This
12641 12- 10-94
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
classification includes some but not all impoundments of
rivers that are defined as great ponds.
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL - An enclosed
building, permanent or portable, which is used for the
growth and sale of plants either wholesale or retail or for
business purposes.
GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL - An accessory
building to a residence designed or used for the growth of
small plants.
GROCERY STORE - A small neighborhood establishment
retailing food and related commodities, as
distinguished from a supermarket, defined as a "major
retail outlet."
GUEST ROOM - A room in a hotel, motel, tourist home
or bed-and-breakfast residence offered to the public for
compensation, in which room no provision is made for
cooking.
HOME OCCUPATION - The use of a legally existing
residential property as defined in § 125-54C of this Part
2. [Added 8-4-1994 by Ord. No. 4-94)
HOSPITAL - An institution providing health services
primarily for inpatients and medical or surgical care of
the sick or injured, including, as an integral part of the
institution, such related facilities as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central
service facilities and staff offices.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - Surfaces which do not
absorb water, specifically all buildings, parking areas,
driveways, roads, sidewalks_ and any areas of concrete or
asphalt. In the case of lumberyards, areas of stored
lumber constitute "impervious surfaces."
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITE - An area of land
which is not associated with a campground but which is
developed for repeated camping by only one (1) group not
to exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site
12642 12-10-94
(
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
improvements which may include but not be limited to
gravel pads, parking areas, fireplaces or tent platforms.
INDUSTRIAL - The assembling, fabrication, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods or the
extraction of minerals.
INDUSTRY - Use of a premises for assembling,
fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or
processing. These include but are not limited to assembly
plants, laboratories, power plants, pumping stations and
repair shops.
JUNKYARD:
A. AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD - A yard, field or
other area used as a place of storage for three (3) or
more unregistered, unserviceable, discarded, wornout
or junked automobiles. This provision does not
apply to serviceable, but unregistered vehicles
offered for sale by a state-licensed automobile
dealer.
B. JUNKYARD - A yard, field or other area used as a
place of storage for discarded, worn out or junked
plumbing or heating supplies, household appliances,
furniture, discarded scrap and junked lumber, old or
scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper
trash, rubber debris, waste and scrap iron, steel and
other ferrous and nonferrous material, including
garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary landfills.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL - Any place in or at which
any number of dogs or cats are kept for the purpose of
sale or in connection with boarding, care, training or
breeding, for which a fee is charged.
KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL -An accessory building
to a residence designed or used for the accommodation of
dogs or cats owned by the occupant of the residence.
LAKES and PONDS - Natural or artificial bodies of
water which retain water year round. Artificial "ponds"
12643 1~- 10-94
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
may be created by dams or may result from excavation.
State regulations apply to any body of water which has a
surface area in excess of ten (10) acres, except a manmade
body of water completely surrounded by land held
by a single owner.
LEVEL OF SERVICE - A qualitative measure that
incorporates the collective factors of speed, travel time,
traffic interruptions, freedom to maneuver, safety,
driving comfort and convenience and operating costs
provided by a highway facility under a particular volume
condition, as established by the Institute of
Transportation Engineer's Transportation and Traffic
Engi~eering Handbook, Second Edition.
LOADING SPACE - An off-street space or berth on the
same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of
buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials and which abuts upon a street, alley or other
appropriate means of access.
LOT - A parcel of land undivided by any street or public
road and occupied by, or designated to be developed for,
one (1) building or principal use and the accessory
buildings or uses incidental to such building, use or
development, including such open spaces and yards as
are designed and arranged or required by this Part 2 for
such building, use or development.
LOT AREA - The area of land enclosed within the
boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two
(2) lots.
LOT, CORNER - A lot abutting two (2) or more streets
at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE - The percentage of the lot covered by·
the footprints of buildings and structures. [Amended
2-17-1994 by Ord. No. 2-94)
12644 12-10-94
;11,"..A
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines, measured within the lot
boundaries.
(Cont'd on page 12645)
12644.1 12-10-94

§ 125-132 ZONING
LOT LINE - A line bounding a lot which divides one lot
from another or from a street or any other public or
private space, as defined below:
A. FRONT LOT LINE - In the case of a lot abutting
only one ( 1) street, the lot line separating such lot
from such street; in the case of a double-frontage lot,
each lot line separating such lot from a street shall
be considered to be the "front lot line," except where
the rear yard requirement is greater than the front
yard requirement, in which case one (1) of two (2)
opposing yards shall be a rear yard. In the case of a
lot with no road frontage, the "front lot line" shall be
consic;lered to be the line parallel to the front of the
building.
B. REAR LOT LINE- That lot line which is parallel
to and most distant from the front lot line of the lot;
in the case of an irregular, triangular or gore-shaped
lot, a line twenty (20) feet in length, entirely within
the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible
distance from the front line shall be considered to be
the "rear lot line." In the case of l.ots which have
frontage on more than one (1) road or street, the
"rear lot line" shall be opposite the lot line through
which the lot takes access to a street.
C. SIDE LOT LINE - Any lot line other than a front
or rear lot line.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING - A structural unit or
units designed for occupancy and constructed in a
manufacturing facility and then transported by the use
of its owri chassis, or placed on an independent chassis,
to a building site. For purposes of this Part 2, three (3)
types of manufactured housing will be referred to:
A. NEWER MOBILE HOMES - Those units
constructed after June 15, 1976, which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance
with the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development standards and comply with the
12645 4-211-98
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.,
which, in the traveling mode, are fourteen (14) body
feet or more in width and are seven hundred fifty
(750) or more square feet and are constructed on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation.
B. OLDER MOBILE HOMES - Those units
constructed before June 15, 1976, and not in
compliance with the Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 197 4,
which are constructed on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a
permanent foundation, but does not include those
smaller units commonly called "travel trailers."
. C. MODULAR HOMES-. Those units which the
manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance
with the state's Manufactured Housing Act and
regulations, meaning structures, transportable in
one (1) or more sectfons, which are not constructed
on a permanent chassis and are deigned to be used
as dwellings on foundations when connected to
required utilities, including the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning or electrical systems contained
therein.
MARINA - A business establishment having frontage
on navigable water within the town and providing for
hire offshore mooring or docking facilities for boats and
accessory services and facilities, such as boat sales,
rental and storage, marine supplies and equipment,
marina engine· and hull repairs, construction and
outfitting for pleasure craft, fuel and oil, electricity, fresh
water, ice, shower and laundry facilities and on-premises
restaurant.
MINERAL EXPLORATION - Hand sampling, test
boring or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal
12646
,~~.·.·.· ~
.. ·~ ..
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
disturbance to the land and which include reasonable
measures to restore the land to its original condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION - Any operation within any
twelve-month period which removes more than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, rock, peat or other like material from its
natural location and transports the product removed
away from the extraction site.
MOBILE HOME PARK-A parcel of land under unified
ownership approved by the Town of Millinocket for the
placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes.
MOTOR VEHICLE- Every vehicle which is selfpropelled
and designed for carrying persons or property
or which is used for the transportation of persons.
MOTOR VEHICLE, UNSERVICEABLE - Any motor
vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, cannot be operated
legally on any Maine public highway or which is not
being used for the purpose for which it was
manufactured .
MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL - A residential structure
containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES - Buildings or land which is
owned by the Town of Millinocket and operated under its
supervision.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE - That line which is
apparent from visible markings, changes in the
character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or
changes in vegetation and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. In the case of wetlands adjacent to rivers and great
ponds, the "normal high-water line" is the upland edge of
the wetland and not the edge of the open water.
N9RMAL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR - Any work
necessary to maintain an improvement or structure in
its original or previously improved state or condition.
12647 4-211-93
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
"Normal maintenance and repair" shall not include
reconstruction, change in design, change in structure,
change in uses, change in location or change in size or
capacity.
NURSERY, COMMERCIAL - An enterprise which
conducts the retail and wholesale sale of plants grown on
the site, as well as accessory items (but not power
equipment, such as gas or electric lawnmowers) and
farm implements directly related to their care and
maintenance. The accessory items normally sold are clay
pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides, hanging
baskets, rakes and shovels.
NURSING HOME - A facility for the care of the aged or
infirm person or a place of rest for those suffering bodily
disorders, but not including facilities for surgical care or
institutions for the care and treatment of mental illness,
alcoholism or narcotics addiction.
OPEN SPACE USE - A use which does not disturb the
existing state of the land except to restore this land to a
natural condition.
OWNER - The person or persons having the right of
legal title to, beneficial interest in or a contractual right
to purchase a lot or parcel of land
PARKING LOT-An open area other than a street used
for the parking of more than four motor vehicles and
available for public use whether free, for compensation
or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE - A surfaced area, not less than nine
(9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long, enclosed or
unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one motor vehicle
and permit ingress and egress of that vehicle without the
necessity of moving any other motor vehicle.
PERSON - An individual, corporation, governmental
agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership
association, two or more individuals having a joint or
common interest or other legal entity.
12648 4-25-93
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS, BRIDGES AND OTHER
STRUCTURES AND USES EXTENDING OVER OR
BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE OR
WITHIN A WETLAND:
A. TEMPORARY- Structures which remain in or
over the water for less than seven (7) months in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
B. PERMANENT- Structures which remain in or
over the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - See "cluster
development."
PORCH- An accessory attachment to a principal
structure. It shall be constructed primarily of wood and
have a roof, canopy or awning and may have framed or
screened walls. It shall be supported above the ground
on posts, beams or by a foundation. It may contain
railings with screening and gates to enclose pets or
children.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE - A building other than one
which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory
to the use of another building or use on the same
prermses.
PRINCIPAL USE - A use other than one which is
wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same premises.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING - A building in
which there is located the office of a professional, such as
an architect, accountant, dentist, doctor of medicine,
lawyer, etc., or in which a business conducts its
administrative, financial or clerical operations, but not
including any other manufacturing, commercial or
industrial activity.
PUBLIC FACILITY- Any facility, including but not
limited to buildings, property, recreation areas and
12649
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
roads, which are owned, leased or otherwise operated or
funded by a governmental body or public entity.
PUBLIC UTILITY - Any person, firm, corporation,
municipal department, board or commission authorized
by the Maine Public Utilities Commission to furnish gas,
steam, electricity, communication facilities or
transportation of water to the public.
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS - The following soil
series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial
Charles
Cornish
Fryeburg
Hadley
Limerick
Lovewell
Medomak
Ondawa
Podunk
Rumney
Saco
Suncook
Sunday
Winooski
RECONSTRUCTION - The restoration, remodeling or
rebuilding of a structure, whether necessitated by
deterioration, obsolescence, casualty or other occurrence,
where the costs of such work equal or exceed the value of
the property in its existing condition.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY - A place designed and
equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities
and other customary and usual recreation activities,
excluding boat launching facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle or an
attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed and
12650 4-211-93
(Ii.'. +·:-.
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for
one (1) or more persons and which may include a pickup
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer and
motor home.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM - A sewage disposal system
intended to replace:
A. An existing system which is either malfunctioning
or being upgraded with no significant change of
design flow or use of the structure; or
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge
system.
RESEARCH FACILITY- A building or part of a
building devoted to scientific inquiry and ancillary
functions. No manufacturing is conducted on the
premises except, as related to the scientific research
being conducted.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT- A room or group of
rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal or temporary living quarters for
only one (1) family. The term shall include mobile homes
but not recreational vehicles.
RESTAURANT- An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of food and/or beverages to
consumers in a ready-to-consume state and whose
principal method of operation includes one ( 1) or more of
the following characteristics:
A. Customers normally provided with an individual
menu and are served their food and beverages by a
restaurant employee at the same table or counter at
which food and beverages are consumed.
B. A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages
generally are consumed within the restaurant
building.
12651 4-211-93
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
C. A carry-out or delivery service, drive-in service and
service or consumption outside a fully enclosed
structure.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT - Any business, housed in
a permanent structure, engaged primarily in the sale of
goods and services to the consumer for direct
consumption and/or use, but not for resale.
RIPRAP - Rocks, irregularly shaped and at least six (6)
inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil
stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2)
units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
RIVER - A free-flowing body of water, including its
associated floodplain wetlands, from that point at which
it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25)
square miles to its mouth.
ROAD - A thoroughfare or way consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated
passage of motorized vehicles.
A. PRIVATE ROAD - A thoroughfare or way
designated for private use and maintained by a
property owner or group of property owners.
B. PUBLIC ROAD - A public thoroughfare, way or
easement permanently established for passage of
persons or vehicles.
ROADSIDE STAND - A roadside stand selling at retail
on the premises only farm produce, camp firewood or
garden, greenhouse or nursery products and, between
Labor Day and Christmas, cut Christmas trees,
garlands, wreaths and wreath materials primarily
produced on the property.
SCHOOL, MUNICIPAL - A publicly owned facility
within which educational classes for any grades,
kindergarten through twelve (12), are conducted
12652 4-25-93
.,ca
t.e/I
{;:
g
) I · 1 l-~ ' .
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
pursuant to a program approved by the· State Board of
Education or similar governmental agency.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE - A privately owned facility within
which instruction is provided for a fee.
SERVICE DROP - Any utility line extension which
does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body, provided that:
A. In the case of electric service:
(1) The placement of wires and/or the installation
of utility poles is located entirely upon a
roadway right-of-way; and
(2) The total length of the extension is less than
one thousand (1,000) feet.
B. In the case of telephone service:
(1) The extension, regardless of length, will be
made by the installation of telephone wires to
existing utility poles; or
(2) The extension requiring the installation of new
utility poles or placement underground is less
than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
SETBACK- The nearest horizontal distance from the
normal high-water line or road right-of-way to the
nearest part of a structure, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
SHORELAND AREA- The land area located within
two hundred fifty (250) feet of the normal high-water line
of any great pond or river, within two hundred fifty (250)
feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland or within
seventy-five (75) feet of the high-water line of a stream.
All distances shall be measured as horizontal distances.
SIGN ITEMS:
A. SIGN - A device, model, banner, pennant, insignia,
flag or other representation which is used as or is in
12653 •-211-93
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
the nature of an advertisement, announcement or
direction.
B. BILLBOARD - Anything designed, intended or
used for advertising a product, property, business,
entertainment, service, amusement or the like, and
not located where the matter advertised is available
or occurs.
C. FREESTANDING SIGN - A sign supported by one
(1) or more uprights or braces permanently affixed
into the ground.
D. PORTABLE SIGN - A sign not designed or
intended to be permanently affixed into the ground
or to a structure.
E. ROOF SIGN - A sign which is attached to a
building and is displayed above the eaves of such
building.
F. TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign of a temporary
nature, erected for less than ninety (90) days,
exemplified by the following: political poster,
charitable signs, construction signs, carnival signs,
garage sale signs, lawn sale signs, rummage sale
signs, all signs advertising sales of personal
property and for-rent signs.
G. WALL SIGN- Any sign painted on or attached
parallel to the wall surface of a building and
projecting therefrom not more than six (6) inches.
H. WINDOW SIGN- Any on-premise, nontemporary
sign visible from the exterior of the building or
structure which is permanently painted, attached,
glued or otherwise affixed to a window.
I. AREA OF A SIGN:
(1) The exposed surface of the sign, including all
ornamentation, embellishment, background and
symbols but excluding the structure which does
12654 4-23-93
, .• ; ti_
·~-
{;1'
\5;11
\It ·".~ .~:· t ' .
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125·132
not form a part of the message of the sign,
measured in square feet.
(2) The sign area of a sign composed of characters
or words attached directly to a uniform building
wall surface or window surface (wall sign or
window sign) shall be the smallest rectangle
which encloses the whole group or message.
(3) The aggregate sign area for a premises shall be
taken to mean the sum of the area of all signs
visible from public streets, sidewalks, parks,
etc., and includes wall signs, window signs,
freestanding signs, roof signs and small signs
attached to the principal sign for a premises.
Examples of the latter are exemplified by small
signs attached to the principal sign indicating
":fireplaces," "swimming pool," "Master Card,
Diners Club or American Express accepted." If
the shape of a sign is convoluted or irregular,
then the area is to be taken as the smallest
rectangle which encloses the sign.
STREAM - A free·flowing body of water from the outlet
of a great pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial
streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a
United States Geological Survey, seven·and-one-halfminute
series topographic map, or, if not available, a
fifteen-minute series topographic map, to the point
where the body of water becomes a river or flows to
another water body or wetland within the Shoreland
Protection Zone (SP).
STREET-Any public way.
STRUCTURE - Anything built for the support, shelter
or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any
kind, together with anything constructed or erected with
a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences.
The term includes structures temporarily or
permanently located, such as decks, raised walkways,
handicapped access ramps and satellite dishes.
12655 4-25-93
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
SUBDMSION - The division of a tract or parcel of
land into three (3) or more lots within a five-year period,
whether accomplished by sale, lease, development,
buildings or otherwise, and as further defined in state
statutes, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401.4, as amended.
SUSTAINED SLOPE - A change in elevation where the
referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or
exceeded throughout the measured area.
TEMPORARY USE - A use established for a fixed
period of time with the intent to discontinue such upon
the expiration of such time. Such uses do not involve the
construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
TIMBER HARVESTING - The cutting and removal of
trees from their growing site, and the attendant
operation of harvesting machinery, but not the
construction of roads. "Timber harvesting" does not
include the clearing of land for approved construction for
which a lawful permit has been issued in accordance
with state and local codes, ordinances, statutes, rules
and regulations.
TOWN - The Town of Millinocket, Maine.
TRANSIENT - A nonresident person residing within
the town less than thirty (30) days.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS I (also referred to as
"bed-and-breakfast") - Includes buildings where
accommodations are provided for compensation as a
business in the private year-round residence of the host
family, consisting of a maximum of three (3) guest rooms
and six (6) guests at any one (1) time, not including
children of the paying guests under twelve ( 12) years of
age. Breakfast is the only meal, if any, to be provided for
compensation.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS II (also referred to
as "small inns and boardinghouses") - Includes
buildings where accommodations are provided for
compensation, where a maximum often (10) guest rooms
12656 4-215-93
(..' !~fl
f<Z:.
~
\~·0Jf
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
are provided at any one (1) time and meals, if provided,
are provided to guests only.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS III (also referred to
as "motels, hotels and inns") - Includes buildings where
accommodations are provided for compensation, where a
maximum of twenty-five (25) guest rooms are provided at
any one (1) time and no meals are provided .
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS IV (also referred to
as "motels, hotels and inns")- Includes buildings where
accommodations are provided for compensation, where a
maximum of twenty-five (25) guest rooms are provided at
any one (1) time and meals are provided to guests only.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS V (also referred to
as "motels, hotels and inns") - Includes buildings where
accommodations are provided for compensation, where
twenty-five (25) or more guest rooms are provided at any
one (1) time and meals are provided for guests. Accessory
uses, such as restaurants, cocktail lounges, gift shops,
conference rooms and recreational facilities, such as
swimming pools and game rooms, may be included on
the premises. This type of accommodation and its
accessory uses are subject to site plan review.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES - Structures and
grounds used for transportation service activities, such
as ticket booths and waiting shelters for bus, taxi or
touring van.
TRIBUTARY STREAM - A channel between defined
banks created by the action of surface water, whether
intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by
the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic
vegetation and by the presence of a bed containing
waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or
bedrock, and which flows to a water body or wetland, as
defined. This definition does not include the term
"stream" ·as defined elsewhere in this Part 2 and only
applies to that portion of the tributary stream located
12657 4-211-93
§ 125·132 MILLINOCKET ·CODE § 125·132
within the Shoreland Protection Zone (SP) of the
receiving water body or wetland.
UNDERTAKING ESTABLISHMENT - A dwelling or
other structure used and occupied by a professional
licensed mortician for burial preparation and funeral
services.
USE - The purpose or activity for which land or any
building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for
which it is occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE - A relaxation of the terms of this Part 2
where such a variance would not be contrary to the
public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to
the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of this Part 2 would
result in unnecessary or undue hardship.
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE - The volume of all
portions of a structure enclosed by a roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of
these walls and roof.
WAREHOUSING AND STORAGE FACILITY - A
structure for the storage of merchandise or commodities,
including bulk storage and bulk sales outlet.
WATER BODY -Any great pond, river or stream.
WATER CROSSING - Any project extending from one
bank to the opposite bank of a river or stream, whetl;ler
under, through or over the watercourse. Such projects
include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges,
culverts, water lines, sewer lines and cables, as well as
maintenance work on these crossings.
WATER-RELATED STRUCTURE - Includes piers,
docks, wharves, floats, cribs, pilings, boathouses,
breakwaters, causeways and similar structures
projecting into water bodies.
WETLANDS ASSOCIATED WITH GREAT PONDS AND
RIVERS - Wetlands contiguous to or adjacent to a great
12658 4-25-93
•
!~
\fl
§ 125-132 ZONING § 125-132
pond or river and which, during normal high-water, are
connected by surface water to the great pond or river.
Also included are wetlands which are separated from the
great pond or river by a berm, causeway or similar
feature less than one hundred (100) feet in width and
which have a surface elevation at or below the normal
high-water line of the great pond or river. "Wetlands
associated with great ponds or rivers" are considered to
be part of that great pond or river.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT- Any
business, housed in a permanent structure, engaged in
the sale of goods in large amounts to retailers or jobbers,
rather than directly to consumers.
WILDLIFE - All vertebrate species (animals with
backbones), except fish.
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT PRACTICES - Activities
engaged in for the exclusive purpose of management of
wildlife populations by manipulation of their
environment for the benefit of one (1) or more species.
Such practices may include, but not be limited to,
harvesting or removal of vegetation, controlled burning,
planting, impounding water, controlled hunting and
trapping, relocation of wildlife, predator and disease
control and installation of artificial nesting sites,
provided that such activities are specifically controlled
and designed for the purpose of managing such species.
YARD - The area of land on a lot not occupied by
buildings.
A. FRONT YARD - The open, unoccupied space on the
same lot with the principal building between the
front lot line and the nearest part of any building on
the lot and extending the entire width of the lot.
B. REAR YARD - The open, unoccupied space on the
same lot with the principal building between the
rear lot line and the nearest part of any building on
the lot and extending the entire width of the lot.
12659
§ 125-132 MILLINOCKET CODE § 125-132
C. SIDE YARD - The open, unoccupied space on the
same lot with the principal building between a side
lot line and the nearest part of any building on the
lot and extending from the front yard to the rear
line.
ZONE - A specified portion of the town, delineated on
the Official Zoning Map, within which certain
regulations and requirements, or various combinations
thereof, apply under the provisions of this Part 2.
12660 4-21-93
(f) ' .
ZONING
Table of Zoning Map Amendments
Millinocket, ME
Ordinance Adoption Description/
No. Date Zone Change
1-98 5-14-1998 Lot 3 (3-1 through
3-27) from R2 to
RD
6-98 11-5-1998 Huber property and
additional adjacent
land from CF to ID
8-98 12-3-1998 Rice farm from ID
to RD
5-2005 12-8-2005 Part of Medway Road
.from RI to NC
1-2006 3-9-2006 Part of Bates Street
and all of Kelley's
i) Trailer Park located
just off Bates Street \
from R-1 to NC
6-2006 12-14-2006 Tax Map U08, Lot 004,
from NC to R-2
07 - 25- 2007
t
.
l
.Jo
.·1 "· ' • 41:
· ..
(
Zoning Map
Town of Millinocket
o'
November 1 9, 1 ~
-·
-- Actl'Vlties
l. Noneommerclal Recreational ActlYltles !Amended 4-13-1195 by Ord. No. 1-951
L Primitive reerHtional 1198, locludin« flBhing. hiking. hu11tiftt. .wllife tmHly and
photosraphy, wild crvp unestinr, trapplnr. honebaclt ridinc. tent and •helter campinr.
c.wnoe oorta.i- c:ro111M:c1UntrY eldinl' and •ncnnhoeilll'
b. Tniils. p1"ided tut they are~ and 11laintsinecl "° u tn • ...,id lll!dimentation of
water bodies
c. Motori•d vehicular trafrlc on meds end tnill end •-obilillf!
d. Primitiw camDllttes and a-nmnt.
e. Nonoermanent doclrlnl! and •oorintr atnzcture.
1. Pennanent docki-or ........._ nnn:tura
r:. Accessarv uset1 a11d •tntctuns th•t are ,,_ntial for the exen:iae of Uh!tl listed above
2. Resource Mana-...ent Ac:t1Yltles
a. Wildlife and f1Sh""' manaf:l!111mt 111n1c:tk:a
b. Emerpncy oi-ratJont condtlded m Ille public he81th, nl'ety or sener-1 -uare, such ..
re90\lrc. -"'n law ellforeement and M!8rch and rescue oDentions
c. SurttYin11 and other - analnla
d. Fott11t manqement aetlvitie9, not inr.t.dlll( timber hane1ting, pet1ticide and fertiliRr
ap111icatfon
e . A....;..u}tural aa11nH,._nt lldivi.._ llClt inc'lollilw -tidde and l'ertili•r aool.ication
f. Mineral exploration to disawer or ~rify the exiltence of mineral deposite, including the
removal ohpec:i-m or trace quantitiea, pl'Ovided that •~h exploration is aceompliahed by
methods of hand umpling, inch1dio1 panning, hand !Mt~. diftUlp snd other
nonmechanized methods, which create 111inimal dillt,.rba11Cf! and take reuonable mu1ure1
to reat.on the disturlied atn to its orimlal condition
g. Noncommercial 1tructures for ecienttric, educational or nature observation purpcmee, •hich
are not of a aiae Of nature which would advenely afJl!Ct the -rceA pt0~d by the
district in •hich it is loeated
b. s; .... other than thase lilted as ne.....t in Articles VIII and IX
i. Aa:esaory uses and •trvdures that are enential for the nerc:Ue of uses lilted above
3. Resource Extraction Aeil.ttles !Amended 4-13-1995 b.,. Ord. No. 1-951
a. Commercl.ll timber hanesti1111
b. Production or commercial •-"'•ltunl llllNl.ucts
c. Mineral extnction for road - onlY. aG'-'-an area ofleea than 2 8Cft in abe
d. MinP.ntl ntnction -Uona for •nv -.-•"-'"• an area 2 ac:ret1 or l"l'l!ater in size
e. FilllQC. gradi11c, dnininc. dredg:ing or alteration of-ter table or wat..r il!ftl. llOt includi~
indlvidu1l -lls
l Aa:eAOrY uaes and structures that are eaential fM the exercise or uses 1181.ed a bow
... Residential Actlvitlea IAmended M-1994 by Ord. No. 4-H; 4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-
951
a. Sin11:le·fllmilv detached d-llinir
b. Sin1de-famllv mobile bomn
c. MultilamilY dweWnr. 2-fllmi!T duolexes
d. Multifamily dwelllnr: 3 or mo"" ramiliea, includinr: apartments. crouped houn• and raw
houen
e. Mobile home varb
t Subdlviliona
"'· Nurainl'lc:onnlescent home -te '-!Ill' and boardin" care facilitiee
h. H11me occ:unatio1111
l Aa:nsorv uses .ad 1tru<turea that are -•ml for the exerci9e or ueea listed •hove
NOTES:
Town orMUlinocket
Schedule oru ...
... - --- - ~,
RI R! RD
y y y
y y y
y y y
N N s
N N N
. N N N
y y y
y y y
y y y
y y y
y y y
y y y
-
y y y
y y y
y y y
y y y
N N y
N N y
s s y
N N s
s s s
y y y
y y y
y N y
y y N
s N N
s N N
s s s
s N N
s s s
y y y
Distric:U
DC I HC NC ID AD I OR WP SP1 CFA .
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
N s N x N s N s s
N N N x N N N N N
N N N .X N N N N N
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y N N y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
y y y y y y y y y
N s N s s s s s y
N s s s s N N N y
N s s y s s N N y
N s s s s N N N s
s s s s s s N N s
y y y y y y y y y
-·
y y y N N N N N N
y y y N N N N N N
y y y N N N N N N
s s s N N N N N N
N s s N N N N N N
s s s s s s N N N
s s s N N N N N N
s s s N N N N N N
y y y N N N N N N
7-10-95
I '" noodplainlflood ......... mus. beyond OM hundftd ( 100) ,_ r.- tbr -· hi1li-ww1e1 liK of Ille -ltt bodies ..,...;r...i in ' 12S-JJK(2Xa). beyund -.iy-f-(7$) reec '"""the ftClftnal high-water line of the,_, speeificd in§ 12Sll!
C{2)(b). beyond ~fin (7$) rm orlhe upland edge or Ille_, ...... specified in I I 2.S.llK{2Xe) and lieyund IWO hundm:l lifty (2$0) feet ofthr oplond edge of !he high· qr modent•.,,•luc wctlud wildlife habitlib !lpCCified m § J 2.s.
llK(2)(d) of lhis Pert 2, qsn llld Ktiviftes shall be goomncd lty the p<OVisions or lhe Floodplain Maftl~cnl On!in....., (Choplcf 61 afllte T°""' Code).
1 IAdded t-l:J...1995 by Ord. Ne. 1-951
I
Ac:tlvltlq
&. lnatltutt ... t Actlvld• !Amended "-lJ-lfftl lw Ord. No. 1-9$1
a. a-and medical cllDic
b. ~racnitlft and.--
c.hbUc~
d. Private achooi. <under 111 •tudenlll\
e. Dav-care eenten
C. Churchn
... Cemh.
Fraterwalordera .nd .efYiee chahs
i Summer -th camos
i.Muan••
k. Conlen-eentera
I. Re1nrch and d-lonment l'a""-
m. ...,. and etructuree tbat an1 -tlal lor the ~ ar u.ea listed abaft
&.. Cormnerdal Acti.ttles IAmead-t 1-S0-1994 by Ord. No. 1-94; 4-13-1995 by Ont Ne.
1-911
a. Motor wh.ide ftCftlltlon w"""- aiftnl\ and mobile ~•lea and l'entam
h. Molor wlUde recreatkm whicle and mobile hatae Hl'VXI! 1t11tioft and -air nran
c. Conuwen:ial par!rin"' ..,. .. _.marldnir: lot
d.G ......... andvarieh'stoni
e. Lllundrvldrv~eanin"' l!!ltabliah-111
C.Licr~mton
•. Reata11rant
h. Cocttall --
i. Upholstery'"""'
i. Bottle and can redem-'- r.cilltls
k. Veterinal'Y dinlc
I. Proret1aional office• and offie» lMrildinE
111. Hftlalr aeni~ Cother than .uto)
n. Commercial art tralle..,. craft•- etc..
o. Funeral_ .......
D. CJeneniJ m.t..- .._..__ 1nd ulumhhw
q, Coia-tda1 ftMnhDUH 11ardem and nu199riea
t. TllU-t fbod nnleea
a. Commerdal ~mul~ te.•. sho-i-111allsl
l Theiler
u. Gnin a&d reed atotta
v. Pet ato<ft
,,._ He.Ith-• 6~ chaba ---n.- etc.
x. Com-ma! outdoor ~at.ion adi-ritiell and Wies. not elsewhere listed. and u definei
herein
y. Com•en:ial indoor recnation aetivltiea and u-, not !'i.ewnel'e liated, and u defi.necl
herain
z.. Banlca credit unlom and 1h11il1r linamei11 institute•
aa. Furniture and annlU.nce ••lea
bb. Mobile home end rec:rHtional ft'hide uletl Iota
cc. Hardware stores and nonindustrial lmnberTUda
dd. Tra ... ient Accommodationt1 I: bed-and-breakrut
ee. Transient Att.ommodation• II: motels, hotels and Inns, maximum of 10 roonu/no meals
8el'V9d
ToW1' of Mllllnoelr.t
Sched•le oFUses
(hrt 2)
Rl l RI l RD
s . N N
s N s
s N N
s N N
s N N
s s N
s N N
s N s
N N s
s N s
s N s
s N s
y y y
N N N
N N N
N N N
s N s
N N N
N N N
N · N s
N N s
N N N
N N N
N N s
s N s
s N s
s N s
s N N
N N s
N N s
N N s
N N N
N N N
N N s
N N N
s N s
N N s
N N s
N ·N N
N N N
N N N
N N N
s N s
s N s
Districts
DC I HC I NC ID I
s s s s
s s s x
s s s s
s s s x
s s s s
s s s x
s s s x
s s s s
s s s x
s s s x
s s s x
s s s s
y y y y
s s s 1'
s s s s
s s s x
s s s ~
s s s N
s s s !':
s s s s
s s s N
s s s x
s s s s
N s s N
s s s s
s s s s
s s s ?\
s s s N
s 8 s s
s s 8 s
s s s s
s s N N
s s s N
s s s N
s s s N
s s s s
s s 8 s
s s s N
s s 8 s
s s s N
s s s N
s s s N
s s s · N
s s s N
NOTES: .
AD OR WP sp1 CF~
N N N N N
8 s s s N
N s N N N
N s N N N
N s N N N
N N N N N
s N N N N
N N N N N
N s N N N
s s N N N
N N N N N
s N N N N
y y y y N
s N N N N
N N N N N
s N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
8 N N N N
s N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
s N N N N
s N N N N
s N N N N
8 s N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N -N
s s N s N
N N N N N
s N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
N N N N N
s N N N N
7-10-95
I In lloodplahllllood ha.vd-, _,_d UR hundred ( 100) feel,_ Goe'*"'"' !i.lp-llM flf IM - bodies specified hi f l2'-33K(2)(a), beyolld ~ (7') fee\fram the nonnal ....._,er line of Ole lft'etlllS ~led in ' ·~,.
33Kl.. ~_,-.live (75) feet otthe wpl.,,. edp ol'Cht _,.,. tptClflcd 111112'-llK(Z)(c) _. beyoad C- ~ flfty<l'O) fftt of Ille uplllnd ed&eoflhe lligh· 0< l'ftOCLerar..vaJ11ewetlond wildlife h•bitm specified in I 1
JJK 1hhk hn 2. _, llld ocrivitieuhall be g..-ncd by the ,..mo;-or cht floodplain M.....,_. Ontinana. .tu 61 of Ille Ta.n Code).
2 IA·~-"' '-13-19'5 bf Onl. No, 1-951
.. ·-- Distrlcu
·-····-
Acd.tdes Rl R2 RD DC HC NC ID AD OR WP SP1 CFl
n: Transient Meouimodations Ill: motela, hotels and inN, 111axim1.1m of 25 roomsfno meals
-~d N N s s s s N s N N N N
n. Tranirietlt Aceominodatioae IV: mot.elll, hvtelll and Inna, maximum of 25 rooll\tl/serving
meals to netta oalv N N s s s s N s N N N N
hh. Transient Accommodationa V: motei., hotels and innl, 25 nr mon rooms/serving meals to
nesta onl• N N s s s N N s N N N N
ii. Transient Acconunodatiom VI: cam-nda N N s N s s N N s N N N
ii Retail establialnnenta or--&lnia !..llOO ·-an - Ml listed •bo•-.t N N n s s s N s N N N N
kk. Retail establiab-.nt9 on-than Z.600 mntaft i!et. not listed 1bove N N s s s s N s N N N N
ll Access....,, 1t1e11 and ittTucturn that are eaential Cot' the eserci!ie of uses liated above y N y y y y y y y N y N
'I. Industrial Actl¥ftle1 IAmended M-1994 by Ord. No . .&-94; 4-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1-
951
a. Ltlmberyanl HwmW and 1111111 mW N N N N N N s N N N N N
b. Trans-.tion Caeilihl and terminal -nr. N N N N s N s s N N N N
c. B1.1llt oil 1111d f1.1el tank ltorap (ht_. or SO ptlom). exc.pt for on-aite heating and cooking
N N N N s N s s N N N N
d. Faod ...-..int and frenin• N N N N s N s s N N N N
e. J1.1nltvwnl1 N N N N s N s N N N N N
r. Litrht manafaeturinr .-nihlY olant N N N N N N s s N N N N
111. Newspaner and ..nntinl!JacililY N N N s s s s s N N N N
h.Otber and manuC.ctuintr f'acilitin N N N s s N s s N N N N
i. Warehuusilw 11nd eton.ini l1cilit:Y N N N s s s s s N N N N
i. Wholeaale i..int1111 faeilitv N N N s s s s s N N N N
k. Dia-•1or90lid waste N N N N N N s s N N N N
L Solid wmst.e tnMfer 1tatkm N N s N N N s s N N N N
m. Di!moaal olhazardcnilllleaehahle materials N N N N N N s N N N N N
n. Sewmire lft•tment lacilitis N N N N N N s s N N N N
o. Acee•......., - and atraeturea that are ftllelltial for the exercise of u1ea liated above N N y y y y y y N N N N
8. Tn.ns-tion and Utilities
11. Land mana.-..ent road1 and -ter a-inn of minor II-1n1: waten y y y y y y y y y s s
b. Land manapment road• and water r:rouinp or atancling .-.ten and or major flowing
-ten s s s s s s s s s s s y
c:. Road m1111truciloft projeetl, otJier tha11 land 1Hnap!!llent roads, and not part of a project
_,.,,,frinir a Pla11nim Board. -it y y y y y y y y y y y s
d. Road C.O llltl'uction prnjec:ta, other than land man11gement roads, which are part or projectl Plannint: Board review s s s s s s s s s s s s
e. Minor ulllilY facilfti- htdudintr aemce dro111 y y y y y y y y s s s s
r. MJtjor lltilitr facili~ 1111ch aa tnnsmillion line., w1ter eupply and sewage treatm11nt
facilitiff, bat not lncbtdinw aerrice d...- N N s N s s s s s s s -B
1:. Aimort terminal baildiM and attendant .;-.et N N N N N N N s N N N N
h. uaee and atnletula that are .-ntiaJ for the exercise of utee listed above y y y y y y y y y y y y
7- 10-9S
NOTES:
I In Ooodpflinlflood lw.ard ueu, beyond one lntndftd (100) feet frmn the nonnal higlt-wmr line orlhc: wmr bodies spec1ried in § t2S-3JK(2X•), beyond seventy-five (75) feet from Ille normal high-w.ier line of the me.mi specified in § 12S...
33K(2)(b). beyond leftbty-frvc (7S) feet or die upland edge: of die Mtlancls specified in § I 2.5·33K(2)(c) and beyond ""° hundred fifty (2SO) feet of the upland edge of the high· or moderate-value: wetland wildlife habitats specified in § 125·
33K(2Xd) afthis Part 2, uses .ud activities shmll be govmied by the provisions oflhe Floodplain Managr:ment Ordinance: (t"hlpter 69 oflhe Town Code).
2 (Added 4-IJ-1995 by Ord. No. 1-9SI
\~.-;:;,
® ' .
APPENDIX

§ A127-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § A127-l
Chapter A127
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
§ A127-1. Town of Millinocket Affirmative Action Plan.
[HISTORY: Approved by the Maine Human Rights Commission
12-15-81. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penonnel policy - See Ch. A 128.
§ Al27-1. Town of Millinocket Affirmative Action Plan.1
ARTICLE III AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN
Sec. 2-301 Equal employment opportunity policy.
The Town Council reaffirms its desire that the town employ,
without discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, ancestry, physical or mental handicaps or age or
veteran's status, qualified persons who are available at the salary and
wage levels established fort.own employment
The Town Council recognizes its obligation to comply with the
provisions of the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 (P.L.
261), amending Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C.A.
§ 2000 et seq.) and the Maine Human Rights Act of 1972 (5 M.R.S.A.
§ 4551), as amended, which prohibit such discrimination in
employment
The Town Council further recognizes its obligation t.o comply with
the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352),
being a recipient of federal financial assistance, which prohibits
1 Editor's Note: The Affirmative Action Plan baa been included In this chapter in its original
numbering and formaL
A12701 2 . 25 . 89
MILLINOCKET CODE § Al27-1
discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin with
respect to the enjoyment of such assistance.
Therefore, the Town Council desires that the town take such
affirmative action as is necessary t.o enforce and promote the Town
Council's policy of equal employment opportunity by implementing a
continuing program which will:
Prevent any unlawful discrimination in advertising, recruitment,
hiring, layoff, termination, upgrading, demotion, transfer,
compensation or other terms, conditions or privileges of town
employment
Determine whether any qualified applicants or employees are
being subjected t.o unlawful discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, physical or mental
handicap, age or veteran's status and provide for appropriate
corrective action.
Identify and correct those techniques, procedures and result.s of
personnel actions which have or may have an adverse effect upon
the employment opportunities or status of such applicant.s or
employees.
Achieve the fullest and most effective utilization of skills which
may be identified and developed among all town employees for the
purpose of rendering better service to the resident.s of the Town of
Millinocket
Sec. 2-302 Assignment of responsibilities.
In order to ensure full implementation of the plan, department
directors, managers, supervisors and employees must fully support
the plan and and know their responsibilities in designated areas.
1. The Town Manager holds primary responsibility for the
operation and success of the Affirmative Action Program. This
responsibility may be delegated to the Personnel Director or
other executive to act as the Affirmative Action Officer (as of
5/81).
2. The Affirmative Action Officer's responsibilities will include
but not be limited to the following:
A12702
,,;a
~
§ A127-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § A127-1
(a) Develop policy statements, affirmative actio:Q
objectives and internal and external
communication techniques.
(b) Assist in the identification and resolution of
problem areas.
(c) Design and implement reporting and
monitoring systems.
( d) Evaluate the effectiveness of the plan and the
degree to which goals and objectives have been
attained.
(e) Indicate the need for remedial action.
(f) Keep all employees informed of the latest
developments in the equal employment
opportunity (EEO) area.
(g) Report the status of the Affirmative Action
Program(s) and his/her recommendations at
regular intervals.
(h) Maintain and utilize employees' skills inventory
forms to promote employee advancement.
(i) Ensure compliance with the town's sexual
harassment policy and procedures.1 [Added
1-30-1992]
3. Each department director, manager and supervisor
1s responsible for the application of the equal
employment opportunity/affirmative action
(EEO/ AA) policy within each specific department or
section. This includes supporting programs and
practices designed to develop understanding,
acceptance, commitment and-compliance within the
framework and intent of the" town's EEO/AA policy.
Specifically, they shall be responsible to the Town
Manager for:
1 Bclitor'1 Note: See Ch. Al29, Snual Haruament.
Al2703
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § A127-1
(a) Prevention of unlawful discrimination and
enforcement of the Town Council's equal
employment opportunity policy.
(b) Identifying and reporting to the Affirmative
Action Officer problem areas in interpreting or
applying policy guidelines and reporting any
charges or grievances involving alleged
discrimination and the manner in which they
were remedied or dismissed.
(c) Review of job descriptions, selection techniques
and employment practices as necessary to
ensure that all individuals are afforded working
conditions free of discrimination.
4. Employees are expected to support and enforce the
town's EEO/AA policy, explained in departmental
workshops in teri:ns of acceptable employment
practices and behavior in the work setting.
Sec. 2-303. Communication of Affirmative Action Plan.
·To ensure that this policy is understood by all current and
potential employees of the town and to announce the Town
Council's full commitment to equal employment opportunity,
this policy should be given the widest possible exposure.
1. Internal dissemination.
(a) The Town Manager will issue a written
statement to all supervisory personnel
reaffirming this policy and announcing a
personal commitment to its enforcement.
(b) Notice of this policy will be posted in
conspicuous places, published and prepared for
distribution.
(c) All personnel in charge of the screening,
selection, hiring and promotion of applicants or
employees will be expected to operate within
Al2704 4-25-93
(~
\Ji'
§ Al27-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION §A127-1
these guidelines to ensure uniform compliance
with this policy.
(d) The cooperation of all collective bargaining
units will be solicited in achieving adherence to
the nondiscrimination clause in our labor
agreements via the Affirmative Action Program.
(e) Specific implications of this policy will be
discussed periodically at departmental staff
meetings.
(f) New employees will receive information
regarding the town's policy and acceptable
employment behavior within the framework of
EEO.
(g) Periodic departmental workshops will be
conducted to inform employees of their
responsibilities to follow the town's EEO policy.
(h) The Affirmative Action Plan will be made
available to any and all employees.
(Cont'd on page A12705)
A12704.1

§ Al27-l AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
2. External dissemination.
(a) All public and privat.e employment agencies will be given
notice of this policy with any requests for referral of
applicants.
(b) All contractors, suppliers and other services doing
business with the town will be given notice of this policy
with respect to any contractors involving federal and state
financial ~istance.
(c) Notice of this policy will be sent to any secondary school
and college or university placement services who desire
information on available job openings with the town.
(d) Notice of this policy will be sent t.o local chapt.ers of
regional or national minority and women's organizations
who may desire to refer applicants for specific positions
with the town.
(e) All advertisements for job .openings not filled in house
will be placed in a local newspaper of general circulation
with the statement "an equal opportunity/affirmative
action employer" included in such advertisements.
Sec. 2-304 Personnel procedures.
A. Recruitment. Recruitment procedures are the responsibility of
the Personnel Officer. In job categories where under
representation is evident, extensive outreach recruitment will
ensure that applicant lists submitted for resume screening will
contain a representative number of women and minorities;
specifically:
(1) When deemed necessary and prior to advertising, job
descriptions will be reviewed and revised to ensure that ~
the employment qualification requirements are jobrelated
and do not discriminate by title or unnecessary
distinctions.
(2) A current list of organizations serving women and
minorities will be utilized and maintained by the
Affirmative Action Officer. The different groups will be
Al2705
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § A127-1
notified of all vacancies within the 'lbwn of Millinocket at
the same time the vacancy is announced to in-house
employees.
(3) All employment advertising will include the words "equal
opportunity/affirmative action employer" and will reflect
the minimum qualifications necessary for that ~ition.
( 4) The application form will collect, along with voluntary
EEO-related data, information relative t.o the applicant's
knowledge, skills and abilities based upon previous
employment, training and education. See the appendix
for a sample of the application form.2
(5) Periodic reviews of applicant.s' confidentially maint.ained
EEO information will serve as a monit.oring tool of the
town's recruitment efforts.
B. Selection. Developing selection procedures is the overall
responsibility of the Personnel Officer. He/she will ensure that
the formal process, including resume screening, testing and
interviewing, complies with the town's EEO/ AA policy;
specifically:
(1) The vacancy will be announced to minority/women's
groups and t.o in-house employees for a period of no less
than five (5) days. before newspapers are notified.
(2) Int.erviews for all management/department head positions.
are conducted by the Personnel Officer and the
Town Manager. Interviews for positions within each
department are conducted by the Personnel Officer and
the appropriate department head.
Questions are formulated by the department head, the
Town Manager (if involved in the interview) and the
Personnel Officer. The Personnel Officer reviews all
questions prior to the int.erview and selects and eliminates
questions and items for discussion according t.o appropriateness,
clarity and relevance to the position. All position
requisites reflect the knowledge, skiJls and abilities
actually needed for the job in question. ---- 2 Editor's Note: The application form la on file In the offtee of the Pl'rsonnel Officer.
A12706 2-25 - 89
•
,:,:A
~
t~
.Jj/
§ A127-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § A127-1
Each interviewer has a copy of the questions being asked
and keeps an evaluative record of the responses. Following
the interviews, the interviewers discuss their ratings
of the applicants' responses.
At the time of the int.erview, the applicant is offered the
opportunity to ask questions about the position. Salary
and fringe benefits, contracts and/or the personnel policy
are explained and discussed.
(3) Records will be maintained on applicants, interviewees
and new hires as a monitoring tool of the town's selection
process.
(4) Testing is used in the selection process in both the Fire
and Police Departments. [General aptitude tests from the
International Personnel Management Association (IPMA)
are used for entry-level fire fighter, entry-level police
officer, Fire Chief and Police Chief positions. The exams
are used as criteria for advancing t.o the interview phase
of the selection process. To justify their validity, the
Association will provide information on the job analyses,
t.est development and validation research for each exam.
Aside from the statistical evidence, IPMA's specified
rules and regulations regarding rental of tests minimize
the influence of exterior and administrator biases.]
(Reserved herein is the right t.o use other accept.able
validat.ed tests and/or testing organizations.)
(5) New fire fighters and police officers will be required to
have a physical exam, paid for by the town.
(6) Applicants applying for clerical positions are given a fiveminute
typing exercise. Accuracy and skill are judged.
Sec. 2·305 Upgrading and upward mobility.
The Town of Millinocket encourages its personnel to participate in
in-house training as available and educational programs and seminars
directly related t.o their field of work. Maine Municipal ~iation
sponsored programs, training at the Maine Criminal Justice
A12707 Z·25·89
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § A127-1
Academy, emergency medical training and University of Maine
workshops are some of the sponsors of programs utilized by personnel.
Attendance at training sessions, seminars, workshops, et.c., will be
encouraged and support.eel. To show its support, the town will incur
related expenses, or parts thereof, whenever possible.
All departments within the system provide varying amounts of inhouse
training for improved performance in present jobs and to
provide the opportunity for advancement to a higher classification of
employment where that is possible.
Promotions and Transfers
Vacancies within the Town of Millinocket system are announced to
all personnel through an advertisement of the position opening posted
for a period of no less than five (5) working days. The announcement
of the position opening informs the employee of the specific steps to be
taken to apply for the position.
It is the policy of the Town of Millinocket to interview all qualified
in-house applicants and qualified applicants/respondents from the
resource list before outside advertising. The intention of this
procedure is to promote qualified employees and protected cl~
before outside . recruitment/hiring is considered. If there are no
qualified and/or suitable applications, then outside advertising is
conducted.
The opportunity for vacancies to be filled internally is available for
every position within the system. The selection process is constant for
all vacancies, and the potential for promotion is never disregarded.
The skills inventory form will be offered to all in-house applicants
when they apply for positions. New employees will also be asked if
they would be interested in completing a form. It is the intention of
the town to keep and maintain accurate and useful information about
employees in order tD further their professional advancement.
Sec. 2-306 Grievance procedure.
A. The following grievance procedure is established with respect
to complaint.s of discrimination. [NOTE: For specific reason(s),
the employee may desire to commence grievance action with
A12708 2 - 25 - 89
§ Al27-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § A127-1
the department head or the Affirmative Action Officer. The
specific reason must be in writing with the Affirmative Action
Officer.]
(1) The employee shall submit his/her grievance in writing to
the immediate supervisor within five (5) days of the
alleged discriminatnry act.
(2) The immediate supervisor shall, within five (5) days of the
receipt of the grievance, discuss the grievance with the
employee.
(3) If the difficulty is not resolved, the grievance may be
discussed directly with the department head.
( 4) If the grievance is not resolved with the department head,
the employee may then request to discuss his/her
grievance with the Affirmative Action Officer. This
request must be in writing to establish the date
present.eel.
(5) The Affirmative Action Officer will, within ten (10) days
of receipt of the request, hold a meeting t.o discuss the
matter with the employee and his/her department head.
(6) If this meeting fails to resolve the issue, the employee
may, within five (5) working days from the above
meeting, request in writing a meeting between the
employee, the department head, the Affirmative Action
Officer and the Town Manager.
(7) The Town Manager will hold the meeting within ten (10)
days from receipt of the written request The decisions of
the Town Manager shall be final as pertaining to the
t.own.
B. Along with the above in-house procedures, the employee can
file a complaint with the Maine Human Rights Commission
any time within six (6) months of the date of the alleged
discrimination.
Al2709 2-25 · 89
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al27-1
Sec. 2"307 Description of EEO categories applicable to utilization
analysis.
Officials and Administrators: characterized by occupations
requiring administrative personnel who set broad policies. exercise
overa11 responsibility for those policies and direct individual
departments. Included in this category are the Town Manager, Public
Works Director, Assistant Public Works Director, Police and Fire
Chiefs, Recreation Director, Librarian, Personnel Officer and Welfare (
Director.
Professionals: occupations which require specialized and theoretical
knowledge usually acquired through college training or work
experience and other relevant training which provides comparable
knowledge. Included are the Health Nurse and the Wastewater Plant
Operator.
Technicians: includes occupations requiring technical knowledge,
skills and abilities which could be obtained through specialized post
secondary school education or through equivalent on-the-job training.
Included are the Town Clerk, Assistant Wastewater Plant Operator,
Police Detective, Assistant Fire Chief, Police Sergeant and Tax
Assessor.
Protective Service: occupations in which workers are entrusted with
public safety, security and protection from destructive forces.
Included are patrol officers and fire fight.era.
Office and Clerical: occupations in which workers are responsible
for int.ernal and external communication, recording and retrieval of
data and/or information and other ·paperwork required in an office.
Included are bookkeeper, executive secretary, dispatcher, children's
librarian, general/clerical clerk and a librarian t.echnician/secretary.
Skilled Craft: occupations in which workers perform jobs requiring
manual skill and a thorough and comprehensive knowledge of the
processes involved. Knowledge is acquired through on-the-job training
and experience or through apprenticeship or other formal training
programs. Included are operators and leadman/mechanics.
Service-Maint.enance: occupations in which workers perform duties
which result in or contribut.e to the comfort, convenience, hygiene or
safety of the general public or which contribute to the upkeep and
Al2710 2. 25 - 89
• '
.
§ A127-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § A127-1
care of buiJdings, facilities or grounds. Included are truck drivers and
laborers/custodians.
Sec. 2-308 Program evaluation.
An annual report of this Affirmative Action Plan will be submitted
t.o the Town Manager on January 1 of each year by the Affirmative
Action Officer. (NOTE: The Personnel Officer has been delegated the
Affirmative Action Officer.) This report will cont.ain at least the
following information:
A. An updated utilization analysis based upon the most recent
EE0-4 report.
B. Applicant flow data for all positions advertised during the
previous year.
C. A copy of the affirmative action file and a review of its effect
on the town's affirmative action efforts.
D. A copy of all new job descriptions and those which have been
revised since the last annual report.
E. A record of all hiring, t.erminations, promotions, transfers,
demotions and layoffs by name, dat.e, sex and race in order to
review the impact on the t.own's affirmative action efforts.
F. An annual review of the wage scales for both union and
nonunion employees.
Sec. 2-309 Affirmative action steps.
Recruitment Responsibility
All Town of Millinocket Personnel Officer
advertising will contain the
words "equal opportunity/
affirmative action employer"
A12711
Target Date
Upon approval of
AA plan and continuing
2 - 25 - 89
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § A127-1
Recruitment
Position vacancies involving
external recruitment will
be announced to current
agencies, colleges and organizations
serving women,
minorities and the handicapped
and veterans
Employment qualification
requirements will be jobrelated
and will not be
written in such a manner
as to discriminate by title
or unnecessary distinctions
Selection
Job descriptions shall be
reviewed prio~ to filling a
vacancy to assure accurate
reflection of necessary
work requisites. (All job
descriptions are maintained
at the Personnel Office,
and employees are
entitled and encouraged to
review and make suggestions
for their job descri ptions.)
Responsibility Target Date
Personnel Officer
Town Manager,
Personnel Officer
and department
directors
Responsibility
Personnel Officer
and department
directors
Immediate and
continuing
Immediate and
continuing
Target Date
Immediate and
continuing
All interviewers will be Personnel Officer Immediate and
briefed by the Personnel continuing
Officer regarding the legal
and ethical considerations
of interviewing
A12712 2 - 25. 89
§ Al27-l AFFIRMATIV~~ ACTION § Al27-1
Selection
Appropriate t.ests, where
used, steps in the testing
process and selection criteria
shall be determined
and recorded for each distinct
position to ensure uniformity
of proc~ when
filling vacancies
Promotions and
Transfers
All position vacancies t.o be
filled from within or outside
the Town of Millinocket
syst.em will be
announced t.o all staff by
an in-house posting. The
announcement will specify
the st.eps to be taken for
interested persons to make
application for consideration.
Job descriptions and job
specifications will undergo
the same review where vacancies
are to be filled int.
ernally as is required
when outside recruiting is
planned
Responsibility Target Date
Personnel Officer
and department
direct.ors
Responsibility
Personnel Officer
Personnel Officer
and department
directors
A12713
To occur prior t.o
the filling of any
vacancy; t.o be reviewed
as vacancies
occur
Target Date
Immediate and
continuing
Irnmediat.e and
continuing
2. 25 - 89
§ A127-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § A127-1
Compensation and Benefits
Responsibility Target Date
A review of the salaries of Personnel Officer August 1 of each
union and nonunion employees
will ensure that the
compensation levels do not
discriminate against minorities
and women
Employee Development
Encourage supervisors t.o
identify and recommend
women and minorities t.o
more-responsible positions
Organize and conduct departmental
affirmative action
workshops to ensure
that employees are aware
of the Town of Millinocket's
affirmative action
policy
Training Recruitment
Staff
The Personnel Officer and/
or the Town Manager will
attend training in personnel
administration made
available and sponsored by
t~e Maine Municipal Asso-ciation
and the Bureau of
Public Administration
Responsibility
Personnel Officer
Personnel Officer
Responsibility
Personnel Officer
and Town Manager
A12714
year
Target Date
To occur as positions
become
available
To occur periodically
and as
needed
Target Date
As frequently as
possible, in order
to remain informed
of changes
and to solidify the
town's commitment
toward AA
and EEO
2 . 25. 89
((t~i
§ A127-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § Al27-1
Training Recruitment
Staff
In-house training t.o heads
and/or other staff will be
conduct.ed by the Personnel
Officer on selection procedures,
affirmative action
and other relat.ed issues
Responsibility Target Date
Personnel Officer Immediate and
and Town Manag- continuing; to
er achieve 4 training
sessions per year
NOTE: Clarifying and/or implementing formats are available for
review at the Personnel Office and may be seen during normal
business hours. These items are subject to change periodically.
Al2715 2 - 25 - 89
I
(
PERSONNEL POLICY
Chapter Al28
PERSONNEL POLICY
§ Al28-l.
§ Al28-2.
§ Al28-3'.
§ A1284.
§ A128-5.
§ Al28-6.
§ Al28-7.
§ A128-8.
§ A128-9.
Purpose; administration; amendments.
Definitions.
Employment and promotion.
Probationary employees.
Disciplinary procedures.
Holidays.
Vacations.
Sick leave.
Call-in.
§ Al28-10. Bereavement.
§ A128-ll. Absence from work.
§ A128-12. Termination of services.
§ A128-13. Leave of absence without pay.
§ A12S.14. Military leave and jury duty.
§ A128-15. Grievances.
§ A128-16. Overtime.
§ Al28-l 7. Benefits.
§ A128-18. Relationship to union contracts.
§ A128-19. Training and career development.
§ Al28-20. Business and travel reimbursement.
§ A128-21. Computer usage.
A12801 '7 - 5-20M
§ Al28-l MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-1
[filSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 1-10-1987; amended in its entirety effective
t.;.J-2002. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel Appeal• Board - See Charter I C1009
Administration of (Overnment - See Cb. 3.
Affirmative action - See Cb. A127.
Sesual harassment - See Ch. Al29.
Family medical leave policy~ See Cb. A131.
§ A128-1. Purpose; administration; amendments.
A. Statement of intent. This policy is intended as
informational guidance only, and the Town reserves the
right to interpret, delete, or amend the provisions
contained herein with reasonable notice to employees.
This policy and its contents should not be interpreted as
promises of specific treatment or as contractual rights for
any employee.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of these rules and regulations
to provide a uniform and standard system of personnel
administration and to inform fully the nonunion
employees of the Town of Millinocket of the conditions of
work~
C. Administration. These rules shall be administered by the
Town Manager. He/She may, through the department
heads and supervisors, specify procedure for the administration
of this policy to ensure a minimum of
disruption of Town operations. However, in no way are
the administrative procedures to alter or dilute the
meaning or intent of this policy in the application of said
procedures.
D. Nondiscrimination. It is the policy of the Town of
Millinocket not to discriminate on the basis of race,
creed, color, national origin, or sex in the hiring and
promotion of employees.
A12802 7-5-2002
@ . .
.
§ A128-1 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128-2
E. Amendments. Amendments to these rules shall be by
order of the Town Council. The Town Council reserves
the right to amend, repeal, or modify this policy from
time to time as deemed necessary. The personnel policy
shall be reviewed annually by the Manager and a
delegate of the nonunion employees. Revisions shall be
submitted to the Town Council for consideration.
§ A128-2. Definitions.
As used in these rules, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings indicated below:
DEPARTMENT HEAD or ASSISTANT DEPARTMENT
HEAD- One who works in a supervisory capacity,
manages budgets, and performs other administrative
work for a fixed sum per scheduled workweek but does
not receive compensation for extra hours worked,
including: Town Manager, Assessor, Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Public Works Director, Assistant Public Works
Director, Personnel/General Assistance Director, Town
Clerk, .Tax Collector, Librarian, Recreation Director,
Wastewater Chief Operator, Wastewater Assistant Chief
Operator, and Deputy Treasurer.
EMERGENCY WORK - That work deemed by the
Manager, department heads, or supervisor (as delegated
by the department head) necessary in the best interests
of the Town to be carried out immediately.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE - One who works a fortyhour
workweek.
HOURLY WAGED EMPLOYEE - One whose wage is
based on a fixed hourly rate.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE - A person hired to fill a
position involving less than a full-time schedule (i.e., less
than 40 hours per week).
A12803 7-IS-2002
§ A128-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al28-3
REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEE - An employee
who works between 30 to 39 hours a week.
SEASONAL EMPLOYEE - One who is employed to
work, including a full.time equivalent workweek when
required, certain months or seasons of the year.
TOWN MANAGER - The Chief Executive and Chief
Administrative Officer of the Town or his/her designee. 'f
§ A128-3. Employment and promotion.
A. The Town shall employ, within the provision of the
Millinocket Affirmative Action Plan, 1 qualified persons
who are available at a negotiated level of compensation,
the maximum of which shall be established by the Town
Council.
B. The normal working hours for department managers and
other employees covered by this policy shall be 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with one hour
being allowed for lunch. Any variances from these hours
must be approved by the Manager.
C. Present employees shall be given every opportunity for
advancement within the department and shall generally
be given first consideration for filling a vacancy, provided
that minimum qualifications are met and the employee
has a good history of work performance and performance
evaluations.
D. New employees are to be hired at a rate consistent with
Subsection A above and will be advanced according to
such pay schedule as may be in effect from time to time,
but in no instance will a pay increase be made until the
employee has completed a probationary period of six
months.
1 Editor'• Note: See Ch. A127, Affirmative Action.
A12804 7-5-2002
§ A128-3 PERSONNEL POLICY §A128-4
E. Such salary and wage schedules as may he put into effect
by the annual budget shall remain for the fiscal year.
F. In the event of layoff of a regular full- or part-time
position, the employee with the least seniority within the
classification shall be laid off first. Employees offered
reemployment shall be reemployed within the department
by classification in the order of their earned
seniority, and no new employee shall be hired until all
laid-off employees have been given an opportunity to
return to work within their classification. An employee
shall retain laid-off privileges no longer than six months
after layoff notice.
G. Seasonal employees shall be carried as seasonal
employees if hired for seasonal purposes. Such
employees will not establish seniority rights, nor will
they be eligible for vacation, sick leave, or any other
• benefits that the Town offers.
H. Part-time or seasonal employees currently employed at
the time of a vacancy are to be given consideration as an
in-house applicant for an opening in the regular service
before new employees are hired.
§ A128 .. 4. Probationary employees.
A. All employees are subject to dismissal without recourse
for a trial period of six months from date of employment.
At the end of 60 days for full-time employees, all
vacation, sick leave, and floating holidays will commence
and be retroactive to the date of hire.
B. Application for insurance will be done within 30 days
from the date of employment. New full-time employees
will be eligible for health insurance upon filing of the.
proper application and completion of the waiting period
required by the insurance plan.
A12805 '7-5-2002
§ A128-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-5
§ Al28-5. Disciplinary procedures.
A. Discipline may be imposed by the Town. Any employee
covered under this policy shall not be terminated,
however, except for just cause. Probationary employees
are exempt from the just cause requirement.
B. Examples of just cause may include, but not be limited
to, the following:
(1) Reporting for duty impaired by or under the
influence of alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs
and/or misuse of prescription medications.
(2) Bringing intoxicants or drugs to work or having
them at work.
(3) Destruction or unauthorized removal of Town
property.
( 4) Refusal to comply with Town rules and personnel
and affirmative action policies.
(5) Giving or taking a bribe of any nature as an
inducement to obtaining work or retaining a
position or other municipal favors.
(6) Insubordination.
(7) Failure to use safety appliances or observe safety
rules.
(8) Unauthorized absenteeism, tardiness, or excessive
demonstrated abuse of sick leave.
(9) Theft, embezzlement, or filing of false
reimbursement forms.
(10) Sexual harassment or other harassment found to be
offensive to other employees or customers. 2
(11) Behavior toward customers that is offensive and
that :flagrantly disregards the interests of the Town.
2 Editor'• Note: See Ch. A129, Sexual Hara•sment.
A12806 7-5-2002
(
I~": j..) .· 1 ·, . - ·- · ··- PERSONNEL POLICY §Al28-6
(12) Abuse of computers or other media (i.e., sending or
downloading of obscene material, erasure or
alteration of Town records without permission,
excessive non-work-related use of equipment, etc.).
(13) Causing jeopardy to self or others in the workplace.
(14) Possession, display, or use of explosives, firearms, or
other dangerous weapons, while on duty or on Town
property, except for police officers and other
authorized employees in the performance of their
duties.
§ A128-6. Holidays.
A. Holidays which will be observed are as follows:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Washington's Birthday
Memorial Day
Fourth of July
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Patriot's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas
1 floating holiday
B. A recognized holiday that falls on a Saturday will be
observed on the preceding Friday. A recognized holiday
that falls on a Sunday will be observed on the following
Monday. Holiday pay will not be granted unless the
employee has worked or was paid sick leave or vacation
pay the last workday before the holiday and worked the
first scheduled workday after the holiday.
C. Administrative time off and/or floating holidays shall be
taken so as not to interfere with the operation of the de-
A12807 7-5-2002
§ A128-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al28-7
partment and are subject to approval by the Manager.
Administrative time off shall be at the discretion of the
Manager. Floating holidays may not be carried forward
into the next year, nor be paid as additional
compensation, if not taken by the end of the year they
were to be used.
D. Regular part-time people will be paid for the same 12
holidays as full-time employees receive prorated to
correspond with their regular schedule of work (New
Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Patriot's Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Day after Thanksgiving, Christmas).
§ Al28-7. Vacations.
Pr. All full-time employees are entitled to earned vacation.
B. The vacation year shall run from January 1 to December
31 annually, and vacation entitlement shall be
determined as of the first day of the vacation year as
follows:
(1) Employees with less than one year of continuous
service shall earn one day per full month worked,
not to exceed 10 days.
C. Employees will be credited, for vacation purposes only,
for longevity they had in their immediate past position
based on their continuous full-time employment with the
Town.
D. The following vacation schedule shall apply to eligible
employees:
A12808 7-5-2002
1
•.
a •
§ A128-7 PERSONNEL POLICY
Years of
Continuous Service
1to5
6to10
11to15
16 to 20
21 or more
§ A128-7
Number of
Weeks Per Year
2
3
4
5
6
E. When any full-time employee is entitled to two or more
weeks of vacation, he/she will have the option to accrue
l/2 of his/her yearly vacation entitlement up to maximum
accrual that is equal to his/her yearly vacation
entitlement. Example: The maximum amount of
vacation that a Town employee is entitled to is six weeks.
An employee with six weeks' vacation entitlement can
place up to three weeks per year into their accrual, not to
exceed six weeks. The accrual does not include the
vacation entitlement credited them on January 1 of that
year. The most a person could have is 12 weeks on
January 1. In that event, six wee.ks would need to be
used within that calendar year or the employee would
lose them, without additional compensation.
F. Department heads are to schedule vacations so that the
work of the department will not be impaired. In case of
conflict, vacations shall be granted in order of seniority.
G. All employees shall schedule vacation so as not to
interfere with department operations. All are subject to
approval by the Manager.
H. Vacations will be extended to compensate for holidays
occ~g during an employee's vacation.
I. Unused but earned vacation time, and unused accrued
vacation time, shall be paid to the employee upon
termination.
A12809 7 - 5 - 2001
§ A12B-B MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-8
§ Al28-8. Sick leave.
A. Full-time employees shall be entitled to 1 I/2 days sick
leave per month, commencing after a period of 60 days,
retroactive to the first day of employment. Sick leave is
not to be considered a right, which an employee may use
at his/her discretion, but rather a privilege not to be
abused. Sick leave may accumulate up to 120 days.
B. At the discretion of the Town Manager, consecutive sick
leave of up to five days may be granted. Sick leave pay
greater than five days must be requested in writing, and
a doctor's certificate may be required. Up to five days of
any accumulated sick leave may be used for a family
sickness at the request of the employee and approval of
the Town :hi-Ianager .. (Immediate family is considered to
be father, mother, children, spouse, brothers and sisters.)
C. Any employee who has been absent from work for a
period exceeding two weeks due to illness or injury that
is non-work-related will provide, at the request of the
Town Manager, a medical statement from a doctor
certifying him/her be in good health upon his/her return.
D. Sick leave shall be reported to the Personnel Officer and
approved by the department head. The Town Manager
has the right to review and question any and all sick
leave.
E. Full-time employees hired on or before July 1, 2000,
including full-time employees as of July 1, 2000, who are
subsequently promoted to a department head position
after that date, upon separation from service after five
years of continuous service with the Town, shall receive
lf2 day's pay for each day of vested sick leave.
F. Full-time employees hired on or before July l, 2000,
including full-time employees as of July 1, 2000, who are
subsequently promoted to a department head position
after that date, upon retirement or separation, with 15
years of continuous service shall receive 3/4 day's pay for
each day of vested sick leave; employees with 25 or more
Al2810 7-5-2002
(·
§ A128-8 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128-10
years of continuous service shall receive full pay for
unused sick leave, not to exceed 120 days.
G. For the purpose of calculating the sick leave payout at
termination, the amount of sick leave earned by the
eligible employee as of the date January 1, 2002, shall
serve as the cap on the amount of time eligible for
payout.
H. Any employee completing 120 consecutive working days
in a calendar year without using any sick leave shall be
entitled ·to one extra :floating holiday for that year.
I. An employee covered by disability insurance must, after
six calendar days of sickness or injury (non-job-related),
apply for bis/her disability coverage. The Town, in turn,
will continue to pay the weekly salary but will become
the beneficiary of the disability insurance. At the end of
the illness or injury the employee must present a fit-toretum-
to-work slip from his/her doctor.
~ § A128-9. Call-in.
Overtime work must have the prior approval of the respective
department head.
§ Al28-10. Bereavement.
A. An employee may receive up to three working days off
with pay when a death occurs in his or her immediate
family. The "immediate family" shall be defined as the
employee's parents, husband or wife, children, brothers,
sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepparents, and
stepchildren.
B. Any employee may receive one working day off when a
death occurs to an aunt or uncle.
C. The authorized days may only be the employee's
regularly scheduled working days following the date of
Al2811 '7-5-2002
§ A128-10 MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-12
death up to and including the date of the funeral. One
extra day may be granted when extra travel time is
required, at the discretion of the Town Manager.
§ A128-ll. Absence from work.
In case an employee is detained on account of sickness or any
other good cause, he/she shall notify the Town Manager or
respective department head promptly or as soon as reasonably
possible.
§ A128-12. Termination of services.
A. An employee, upon two weeks' notice to the Town
Manager for a non-department head and four weeks'
notice for a department head, may terminate his/her
service with the Town. The employee shall be subject to
an accounting and return of equipment, records, funds,
etc., that were entrusted to him by the position the
employee held.
B. Pay in proportion to the employee's normal wages shall
be granted the employee for his/her unused earned
vacation days at the time of the employee's termination.
C. Any employee hired on or after July 1, 2000, shall not be
entitled to the benefit of payout of accumulated sick time
at retirement or termination of services with the Town of
Millinocket, except as noted in § A128-8, Subsections E
andF.
D. Notwithstanding § Al28-8, Subsections E and F,
employees dismissed involuntarily for cause shall not be
eligible for the payout of accumulated sick leave.
E. The rate of pay used to calculate the termination payout
shall be the employee's ending rate.
A12812 7-5-2002
(~.··,_~
~---
®.
.
§ A128-13 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128-15
§ Al28-13. Leave of absence without pay.
A full-time employee may be granted a leave of absence
without pay by the Town Manager, but not for a period greater
than 60 days. Failure of an employee to return to work at the
expiration of the leave without having arranged for an
extension will be deemed a resignation. Full seniority rights
shall be maintained during the approved absence, but they
shall not accrue vacation, sick leave, or PTO days during the
leave. The Manager will advise the Council on granted leaves of
absence.
§ Al28•14. Military leave and jury duty.
The Town will supplement the employee's military or jury
duty pay for up to but not exceeding the pay received by the
employee for working a normal workweek while he/she is away.
Supplemental payments will only be for a two-week period for
annual training.
§ Al28-15. Grievances.
A. Any employee aggrieved because of some condition of
his/her employment may file a grievance in writing to his
immediate supervisor and/or the Personnel Officer. The
Supervisor and/or Personnel Officer shall make an effort
to settle the grievance within 10 working days after its
presentation, said settlement to be in writing.
B. If a satisfactory settlement cannot be reached and the
employee wishes to appeal the decision, the employee
may appeal to the Town Manager, who shall schedule a
hearing within five working days. The employee may be
represented by any person of his/her choosing.
C. The Town Manager will consult freely with the employee
on matters affecting employer-employee relationships.
D. The decision of the Town Manager is final, except that
said decisions may be appealed to the Personnel Appeals
A12813 7-5-2002
§ A128-15 MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-17
Board within 30 calendar days of the date of the Town
Manager's written decision. The Personnel Appeals
Board may:
(1) Confirm the Manager's decision; or
(2) Modify and/or set aside the decision if the discipline
was too severe and remand to the Town Manager for
recommended lesser discipline. ;f
E. Discipline shall generally be by progressive steps: oral
reprimand, written reprimand, suspension and
termination, but not necessarily in that order, depending
on the gravity of the offense.
F. Offenses shall be documented as to the exact nature of
the offense and the disciplinary measures taken.
§ A128-16. Overtime.
Any overtime work is to be authorized in advance by the
respective department head or the Town Manager. When it
becomes necessary for employees to work overtime, they shall
not be laid off during regular working hours to equalize the
time. Overtime will be distributed equally with adaptability of
employees to do the work to be considered. Local record of
overtime shall be kept by the Personnel Director.
§ A128-17. Benefits.
A. The Town is a participating member of the Maine State
Retirement System.
B. The Town offers a life insurance and group
hospitalization plan with which the employees should
become familiar. This plan is presently a part of the
Maine Municipal Employees Health Trust. The Town
reserves the right to discontinue this benefit or to change
coverage and providers from time to time as well as the
portion 'of the premiums paid by the Town and its
employees with or without prior notice. Until July 31,
Al2814 7-5-2002
!~~•.:'.s>
§ A128·17 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128·17
1999, the Town shall pay the premium for employee and
dependent coverage. As of August 1, 1999, the Town
shall pay 90% of the premium for employee and
dependent coverage and the employee shall pay 10% of
such premium. Employee premium contributions shall
be paid in advance by the employee or by duly authorized
payroll deduction. The Town shall be under no obligation
to pay the employee's portion of such premium if the
employee fails to pay it.
C. The Town shall increase the life insurance benefits to an
amount equal to the employee's salary to the nearest
thousand.
D. Group hospitalization plan.
(1) Employees hired prior to June 10, 1999, other than
School Department employees, shall continue as
members of the Town's group hospitalization plan,
provided that:
(a) The employee retired from Town service and
qualified for retirement or disability benefits
under the Maine State Retirement System; and
(b) The employee was a member of MSRS on or
prior to January 1, 2002, and maintained such
membership to the time of retirement without
interruption or became a member upon the
employee's first employment anniversary date
immediately following January 1, 2002; and
(c) The employee is vested in MSRS at the time of
retirement; and
(d) The employee has at least 15 years of
continuous service with the Town of Millinocket
immediately prior to retirement; and
(e) The employee retires from the Town of
Millinocket.
(2) The Town shall also provide coverage for the former
employee's spouse if the employee so elects. The
Al2815 7-S-2002
§ A128-17 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al28-17
Town shall pay the premium for the former
employee, spouse, and legally dependent children as
defined in the plan. This benefit extends only to the
spouse and dependents of the employee at the time
of retirement, but the spouse will lose coverage in
the event of a divorce, separation, or remarriage. For
those receiving MSRS disability payments, this
benefit extends only to those former employees who
continue to qualify to receive disability benefits from
the Maine State Retirement System until normal
retirement age and then qualify for and receive a
retirement benefit from the Maine State Retirement
System. If a former employee who receives this
benefit ceases to qualify, his or her spouse shall no
longer qualify for this benefit. The Town reserves
the right to change providers and coverage from
time to time as well as the portion of premiums paid
by the Town and former employee with or without
prior notice. This benefit will apply in the following
manner:
(a) For employees who have retired prior to
January 1, 2002, this benefit will be provided by
the Town at 100% of its cost.
(b) For employees who were employed full-time by
the Town on or before June 10, 1999, and who
become eligible for retirement after January 1,
2002, those employees will make a contribution
to their health insurance benefit (co-payment)
at the same rate as that for current employees.
(c) Unionized employees hired prior to August 8,
1991, and not retired prior to January 1, 2002,
shall be eligible for this benefit as described in
Subsection D(2)(b) above.
(d) For employees hired into full-time positions on
or after June 10, 1999, this retirement benefit
shall not be available.
A12816 7-5-2002
e '
.
§ A128-17 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128-19
E. When an individual becomes eligible for Medicare,
he/she must sign up for Medicare B (major medical
portion). Medicare A (hospitalization portion) will be
automatic when the employee becomes eligible for Social
Security. The Medicare premium is automatically taken
out of the Social Security check. This makes Medicare
the employee's primary insurance and the Town's
insurance secondary. This includes the employee's
spouse and dependents. Failure to comply will result in
ineligibility for health insurance under the Town of
Millinocket.
F. The Town is covered under the Federal Insurance
Contribution Act (social security tax and Medicare
hospital insurance). The required contributions from
both the Town and the employee will be paid in
accordance with federal law.
§ Al28-18. Relationship to union contracts.
Union personnel will be governed solely under their
respective union contracts, while nonunion personnel shall be
governed solely under the personnel policy.
§ Al28-19. Training and career development.
A. Requests for training.
(1) Education courses. Education courses may be
granted upon recommendation of the Town Manager
if approved by the Town Council.
(2) Workshops. Employees may request to attend
workshops or training sessions they feel may benefit
them or the Town.
(3) Procedure for requesting training. The employee
must submit the request to his/her immediate
supervisor on the request-for-training form. The
request will be reviewed on the following basis:
A12817 7-1-2002
§ A128-19 MILLINOCKET CODE § A128-19
(a) The course or workshop is in the same or a
closely related field to that of the employee, and
it can be reasonably expected that completion of
the training will directly improve the
performance of regular duties. Training
requests that are to improve performance of an
employee's current duties are to be given
highest priority.
(b) Sufficient funds are available to cover costs of
training.
(c) The course or workshop, while not expected to
directly relate to performance of current duties,
can be expected to improve the potential of the
employee to be qualified for work of a higher
level in the Town's service. Courses totally
unrelated to the employee's occupational field or
to the Town's service will not be approved
unless required to obtain a degree.
(4) A supervisor or department head may request
training for a group of employees using the same
procedures.
(5) If a department head is unable to determine if the
requested training is sufficiently related to the
employee's work and/or the benefit of Town service,
he/she may request the Personnel Officer to review
the request.
(6) Approved requests for training must be submitted to
the Personnel Officer in order to make necessary
arrangements for training, doctiment the employee's
file and keep records of the costs of training.
B. Identifying training needs. At the time of the
semiannual employee evaluation discussion, the
supervisor and employee should discuss areas where
training is needed or desirable for performance in the
employee's present job or would be helpful in developing
additional skills for growth into other positions in the
Al2818 7-5-2002
A
~
§ Al28-19 PERSONNEL POLICY § A128-20
Town's service. Specific training and/or courses to be
taken should be identified then, if possible.
§ A128-20. Business and travel reimbursement.
A. Employees are eligible for reimbursement of reasonable
expenses incurred while on business and/or travel for the
Town. All such expenses must be preapproved by the
respective department head or Town Manager.
Employees are responsible for making their own travel
arrangements.
B. Reimbursible expenses include, but are not limited to,
the actual costs of travel, meals, gratuities, lodging, tolls,
and fares. Unless otherwise approved, alcoholic
beverages are not allowed. Employees are expected to
limit expenses to reasonable levels. Abuse of such
reasonable limits or the filing of false travel reports shall
be a matter for disciplinary action.
C. Mileage will be reimbursed at a rate as set by the Town
Council from time to time.
D. Receipts for all expenses are to be submitted with the
travel expense form for reimbursement. Travel expenses
should be submitted within one week of the employee's
return.
E. Should an employee be involved in an accident or other
incident while on Town business, the event is to be
reported as soon as possible to his/her immediate
supervisor. The supervisor is to notify the Town Manager
as soon thereafter as possible.
F. Vehicles owned, leased, or rented by the Town of
Millinocket are not to be used for personal use without
approval.
A12819 7-S-200I
MILLINOCKET CODE
§ A128~21. Computer usage.
A. Computers, computer files, the e-mail system, and
software furnished to employees of the Town of
Millinocket are the property of the Town and intended
for business use. All work performed on the Town's
computers is to be considered the property of the Town.
Personal use is to be occasional in nature and is not to
otherwise violate the terms of this policy.
B. The Town retains the right to monitor computer and email
usage to ensure compliance with this policy.
C. The unauthorized use, installation, copying, or
distribution of copyrighted, trademarked, or patented
material on the Internet is expressly forbidden.
D. Violation of this policy is subject to disciplinary action.
Such action may be taken for, but not be limited to, the
- following:
(1) Sending or posting discriminatory, harassing,
pornographic, slanderous, libelous, or threatening
communications or enticing others to do so.
(2) Copying, pirating, or downloading copyrighted,
trademarked, and patented materials or sending or
posting confidential information from Town files
without proper authorization.
(3) Jeopardizing the security of the Town's electronic
communications system, sending anonymous e-mail
messages, or engaging in any other illegal activities.
A12820 7-5-2002
(.
.. A
~
'I.r: .~·
\:'•'I.' "¥·. ..
§Al29-1 SEXUAL HARASSMENT §Al29-2
Chapter A129
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ Al29-1. Purpose.
§A129·2. Sexual harassment defined.
§ Al29-3. When prohibited.
§A121M. Reporting.
§A129-6. Protection.
§A12S..8. Duties of implementation.
§ A129-7. Penalties for noncompliance.
[WSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 1-30-1992. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peraonnel policy - See Ch. A128.
§ A129-1. Purpose.
The Town of Millinocket finds sexual harassment creates an
illegal and undesirable working environment, the town resolves
to prevent such activity. It is the policy of the Town of
Millinocket to maintain a working environment which is free of
sexual harassment. Sexual harassment violates federal and
state law, and such conduct will result in disciplinary action up
to and including dismissal.
§ Al29·2. Sexual harassment defined.
The Town of Millinocket adopts the following definition of
sexual harassment:
A12901 -'-21-93
§ A129-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § A129-2
A. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors
and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature
constitute sexual harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly
or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's
employment.
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for employment
decisions affecting such individuals.
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of
substantially interfering with an individual's work
performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
B. Any of the following activities, when combined with the
above conditions, is sexual harassment:
(1) Unwelcome sexual advances.
(2) Requests for semal favors.
(3) Other verbal and physical conduct, such as:
(a) Offensive sexual flirtations, advances or
propositions.
(b) Unwanted hugs, touches, kisses.
(c) Touching, patting, pinching.
( d) Subtle pressure or requests for sexual activity.
(e) Forced sexual relations.
(f) Verbal abuse of a sexual nature.
(g) Sexual jokes.
(h) Sexually suggestive remarks or innuendos.
(i) Persistent remarks about another person's
clothing, body or sexual activities.
(j) Off-color humor.
Al2902
§ Al29-2 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § A129-4
(k) Graphic verbal commentaries about an
employee's body.
(l) Sexually degrading words used to describe
employees.
(m) Display in the work place of sexually suggestive
objects or pictures.
(n) Insults or degrading sexual remarks or conduct
used to abuse the dignity of another employee.
(o) Threats, demands or suggestions that
employees' work status depends on their
tolerance of sexual advances.
(p) Retaliation against employees who complain
about sexually offensive behavior.
C. Sexual harassment does not mean compliments and
conversations of a socially acceptable nature. Sexual
harassment means unwelcome sexual advances or
propositions, requests for sexual favors and other verbal
or physical conduct which offends employees, harms
morale or interferes with any employee's working
environment.
§ Al29-3. When prohibited.
The Town of Millinocket prohibits sexual harassment at all
levels of employment at all times, and especially whenever it
directly or indirectly threatens a term or condition of
employment, affects an employment decision, interferes with
any employees' work performance or creates an intimidating,
hostile or offensive work environment.
§ Al29-4. Reporting.
A. Employees who believe they have been sexually harassed
may contact their supervisor, the Town Affirmative
Action Officer, the Town Manager and/or the Maine
A12903
§ A129-4 MILLINOCKET CODE § A129-4
Human Rights Commission at State House Station 51,
Augusta, Maine 04333; (207)289-2326.
B. The following procedure is established with respect to
complaints of sexual harassment:
(1) The employee shall submit his/her complaint in
writing to his or her immediate supervisor, the
Affirmative Action Officer and/or the Town Manager
within five (5) days of the alleged sexual
harassment. The Town Manager, supervisor and/or
Affirmative Action Officer shall make an effort to
intervene and investigate within ten (10) working
days of receipt of a complaint, and all facets of the
investigation are to be in writing. The employee may
also file a complaint with the Maine Human Rights
Commission any time within six (6) months of the
date of the alleged sexual harassment. ·
(2) Upon a finding that an employee or employees have
engaged in conduct -which constitutes sexual
harassment, the town shall take immediate and
appropriate corrective action which shall include, at
a minimum, disciplinary action, appropriate under
the circumstances, in accordance with the Personnel
Policy or union contract.1
(3) All sexual harassment complaints received by
employees or supervisors will be immediately
brought to the attention of the Affirmative Action
Officer and Town Manager. Any immediate
corrective action shall be considered preliminary
and not final pending investigation and final
decision by the Affirmative Action Officer with the
consent of the Town Manager.
( 4) Any complaint involving the Affirmative Action
Officer alleging sexual harassment shall be·
investigated and resolved by the Town Manager.
1 Editor'• Note: See Ch. A128, Pel'llOnnel Policy.
Al2904 4 - 25-93
r1A7
§ A129-4 SEXUAL HARASSMENT §A129-6
(5) Any complaint involving the Town Manager alleging
sexual harassment shall be investigated and
resolved by the Chairman of the Town Council with
final action being approved by the Town Council.
(6) Refusal to answer questions or to cooperate during
an investigation of alleged sexual harassment shall
he an independent ground for discipline.
§ Al29·5. Protection.
The Town of Millinocket will protect the privacy of those
employees involved in a sexual harassment investigation to the
extent possible. The town shall also ensure that employees who
file a complaint of sexual harassment are protected from illegal
retaliatory actions. Sexual harassment complaints will be taken
seriously. All involved employees shall be treated fairly and
with dignity.
• § A129 .. 6. Duties of implementation.
•
.", .- •.. .
\ _·
A Affirmative Action Officer.
( 1) The Affirmative Action Officer will provide all
employees with annual written notification as to the
illegality of sexual harassment commencing before
April 1, 1992. This notice shall:
(a) Define sexual harassment under state and
federal law and describe sexual harassment
utilizing examples.
(b) Explain the internal complaint procedure
available to employees and the legal recourse
and complaint procedure available through the
Maine Human Rights Commission (MHRC).
(c) Explain how to contact the MHRC.
( d) Describe the protection against retaliation
under the Maine Human Rights Act.
A12905 4-25-93
§ Al29-6 MILLINOCKET CODE §Al29-6
(2) The Affirmative Action Officer shall provide the
above information to all new employees within one
( 1) year of their dates of hire. This information will
be provided in writing and, if necessary, by
employee educational programs.
(3) The Affirmative Action Officer will also conduct
training for supervisory and managerial employees
within one (1) year of their date of hire. Such
training will include the methods supervisory and
managerial employees must use to ensure
immediate and appropriate corrective action
addressing sexual harassment complaints.
( 4) The Affirmative Action Officer will conduct periodic
review of job descriptions, selection techniques and
employment practices as necessary to ensure that
all individuals are afforded working conditions free
of sexual harassment.
(5) The Affirmative Action Officer shall ensure that
~otice of the town's sexual harassment policy is
posted in conspicuous places, published and
prepared for distribution. The Affirmative Action
Officer will ensure that the town posts in all its
workplaces a poster · which defines sexual
harassment, using examples; which state such
conduct is illegal; and which outlines the complaint
process through, and ways to contact, the Maine
Human Rights Commission.
B. Departmental directors, managers and supervisors.
(1) Each departmental director, manager and
supervisor is responsible for prevention of sexual
harassment and promotion and enforcement of the
town's sexual harassment policy. Supervisory or
managerial employees who receive a complaint of
sexual harassment occurring in the workplace will
immediately report such a complaint to the
Affirmative Action Officer and/or the Town Manager
so an immediate investigation and appropriate
A12906 4-21-93
§ Al29-6 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § A129-6
action can be undertaken. Supervisory and
managerial employees shall take such immediate
corrective action as is necessary pending
investigation and disposition of a complaint.
(2) Each departmental director, manager and
supervisor is responsible for identifying and
reporting to the Affirmative Action Officer and/or
'lbwn Manager problem areas in interpreting or
applying policy guidelines and reporting any
complaints of sexual harassment and the manner in
which they were remedied or dismissed.
(3) Each departmental director, manager and
supervisor is responsible for periodically discussing
specific implementation of this policy at
departmental staff meetings. All managerial or
supervisory employees will attend educational
programs, within one (1) year of being hired, which
provide special instructions with regard to their
responsibility to promptly address complaints of
discrimination or sexual harassment and methods of
dealing with such complaints.
(4) Each departmental director, manager and
supervisor is responsible for periodic review of job
descriptions, selection techniques and employment
practices as necessary to ensure that all individuals
are afforded working conditions free of sexual
harassment.
C. Nonsupervisory employees.
(1) All employees are expected to support and enforce
the town's sexual harassment policy in terms of
acceptable employment practices and behavior in
the work setting. All employees who witness or
become aware of instances of sexual harassment will
immediately report the incident(s) to their
supervisor, the Affirmative Action Officer or the
Town Manager.
A12907
§A129-6 MILLINOCKET CODE § A129-7
(2) New employees are responsible for receiving, within
one (1) year of being hired, information regarding
acceptable employment behavior within the
framework of the sexual harassment policy which
will be provided to the employee by the town. The
employee is responsible for knowing that sexual
harassment is illegal; what the definition of sexual
harassment is under state and federal laws; what
constitutes examples of sexual harassment; what
the town's internal complaint process is; bow to
contact the MHRC .with a complaint; and what
protection from retaliation employees have under
Maine law. In addition, every employee is expected
to refrain from sexual harassment of others.
§ Al29-7. Penalties for noncompliance.
Sexual harassment violates federal and state law. Refusal to
comply with the town's sexual harassment policy will result in
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
A12908
§ A130-l BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-l
Chapter A130
BLOODBORNEPATHOGENSCONTROL
§ Al:J0..1.
§ Al30-2.
I Al30-8.
§ Al30-4.
§ Al30-5.
§ A130-8.
§ A130-7.
§ A130-8.
Definitions.
Exposure Control Plan.
Hepatitis B.
Exposure incident protocol.
Communication of biohazardous dangers.
Information and training.
Medical record.keeping.
Hepatitis B vaccine declination (mandatory).
[IDSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 10-29-1992. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REPBBRNCBS
Penoanel pollc:y- See Cb. Al&
§ A130-l. Definitions.
A For purposes of this Chapter A130 of the Millinocket
Code, the following shall apply:
ASSISTANT SECRETARY - The Assistant Secretary of
Labor for Occupational Safety and Health, or designated
representative.
BLOOD - Human blood, human blood components and
products made from human blood.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS - Pathogenic
microorganisms that are present in human blood and
A13001 4-U-98
§ A130-l MILLINOCKET CODE § A130-1
can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include
·but are not limited to hepatitis B virus (HBV) and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
CLINICAL LABORATORY - A workplace where
diagnostic or other screening procedures are performed
on blood or other potentially infectious materials.
CONTAMINATED - The presence or the reasonably
anticipated presence of blood or other potentially
infectious materials on an item or surface.
CONTAMINATED LAUNDRY - Laundry which has
been soiled with blood or other potentially infectious
materials or may contain sharps.
CONTAMINATED SHARPS - Any contaminated object
that can penetrate the skin, including but not limited to
needles, scalpels, broken glass, broken capillary tubes
and exposed ends of dental wires.
DECONTAMINATION - The use of physical or
chemical means to remove or destroy bloodborne
pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they
are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles
and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use
or disposal.
DIRECTOR- The Director of the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, United States
Department of Health and Human Services, or
designated representative.
ENGINEERING CONTROLS - Controls (e.g., sharps
disposal containers, self-sheathing needles) that isolate
or remove the bloodbome pathogens hazard from the
workplace.
EXPOSURE INCIDENT - A specific eye, mouth, other
mucous membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact
with blood or other potentially infectious materials that
results from the performance of an employee's duties.
A13002 4-21-93
.. .~
-~
(\,~,
l'A
\:9
§ Al30-1 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30-1
HANDWASHING FACILITIES - A facility providing an
adequate supply of nmning potable water, soap and
single·use towels or hot-air drying machines.
LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL- A
person whose legally permitted scope of practice allows
him or her to independently perform the activities
required by hepatitis B vaccination and postexposure
evaluation and follow-up.
HBV - Hepatitis B virus.
HIV - Human immunodeficiency virus.
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE - Reasonably
anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane or parenteral
contact with blood or other potentially infectious
materials that may result from the performance of an
employee's duties.
OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIALS:
(1) The following human body fluids: semen, vaginal
secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial :fluid,
pleural :fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid,
amniotic fluid, saliva in dental procedures, any body
fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood and all
body fluids in situations where it is difficult or
impossible to differentiate between body fluids.
(2) Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin)
from a human (living or dead).
(3) HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ
cultures and HIV- or HBV-containing culture
medium or other solutions; and blood, organs or
other tissues from experimental animals infected
with HIV or HBV.
PARENTERAL - Piercing mucous membranes or the
skin barrier through such events as needle sticks,
human bites, cuts and abrasions.
A13003 .&-35-93
§ A130-1 MILLINOCKET CODE §Al30-l
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT- Specialized
clothing or equipment worn by an employee for
protection against a hazard. General work clothes (e.g.,
uniforms, pants, shirts or blouses) not intended to
function as protection against a hazard are not
considered to be "personal protective equipment."
PRODUCTION FACILITY - A facility engaged in
industrial-scale large-volume or high-concentration
production of HIV or HBV.
REGULATED .WASTE - Liquid blood or other
potentially infectious materials or contaminated items
· that would release blood or other potentially infectious
materials in a liquid or semiliquid state if compressed;
items that are caked with dried blood or other
potentially infectious materials and are capable of
releasmg these materials during handling; contaminated
sharps; and pathological and microbiological wastes
containing blood or other potentially infectious
materials.
RESEARCH LABORATORY - A laboratory producing
or using research-laboratory-scale amounts of HIV or
HBV. "Research laboratories" may produce high
concentrations of HIV or HBV but not in the volume
found in production facilities.
SOURCE INDMDUAL - Any individual, living or
dead, whose blood or other potentially infectious
materials may be a source of occupational exposure to
the employee. Examples include but are not limited to
hospital and clinic patients; clients in institutions for the
developmentally disabled; trauma victims; clients of
drug and alcohol treatment facilities; residents of
hospices and nursing homes; human remains; and
individuals who donate or sell blood or blood
components.
STERILIZE - The use of a physical or chemical
procedure to destroy all microbial life, including highly
resistant bacterial endospores.
A13004 4-21-93
,:a
'S~
(A
'1rg
§ Al30-l BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-2
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS - An approach to
infection control. According to the concept of "universal
precautions," all human blood and certain human body
ftuids are treated as if known to be infectious for HIV,
HBV and other bloodborne pathogens.
WORK PRACTICE CONTROLS - Controls that reduce
the likelihood of exposure by altering the manner in
which a task is performed (e.g., prohibiting recapping of
needles by a two-handed technique).
B. This list of definitions may be expanded as needed.
§ A130-2. Exposure Control Plan.
A. To eliminate or minimize employee exposure to
bloodborne pathogens, the town hereby adopts the
following Exposure Control Plan. As an integral part of
this plan, the town has developed the following exposure
risk determination, which is made without regard to the
use of personal protective equipment:
(1) Job classiilcations in which all employees have
occupational exposure are ambulance attendants; all
Police and Fire Department personnel; and Public
Works employees assigned to garbage handling, the
transfer station and the sewer treatment plant.
(2) Job classifications in which some employees have
occupational exposure are Public Works employees
not described above and employees of the Recreation
Department.
(3) Those tasks and procedures or groups of closely
related task and procedures in which occupational
exposure occurs and that are performed by
employees in job classifications listed in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection A(l) and (2) above
of the 'lbwn Code are responding to emergency
situations (specifically including assisting in
treatment or extrication of victims of emergencies);
A13005 4-25-93
§ A130-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-2
the apprehension and/or transportation of criminal
suspects or intervention to prevent criminal
behavior; and the handling and/or exposure to raw
and processed municipal garbage and municipal
sewage.
(4) The classifications in Subsection A(l) and (2) above
and the tasks and procedures and groups of closely
related tasks and procedures described in
Subsection A(3) shall be reviewed no less than
annually by the Town Manager and each
department head.
B. The town hereby establishes the following methodology
for compliance with the requirements of 29 CFR Part
1910.1030:
(1) Universal precautions shall be observed to prevent
contact with blood or other potentially infectious
materials. Under circumstances in which
differentiation between body fluid types is difficult
or impossible, all employees shall consider all body
fluids to be potentially infectious materials.
C. The town hereby implements engineering and work
practice controls to eliminate or minimize employee
exposure. Where occupational exposure remains after
institution of these -controls, personal protective
equipment shall also be used. These engineering and
work practice controls are:
(1) The town shall provide handwashing facilities which
are readily accessible to all employees, or, when it is
not feasible to provide such facilities, the town shall
provide either an appropriate antiseptic hand
cleanser in conjunction with clean cloth/paper
towels or antiseptic towelettes. When antiseptic
hand cleanser or towelettes are used, employees
shall wash their hands with soap and running water
as soon as feasible.
A13006 4-25-98
,· ,~.,, I ;1'
§ A130-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30-2
(2) All employees must wash their hands immediately
or as soon as feasible after removal of gloves or other
personal protective equipment.
(3) All employees must wash their hands and any other
skin with soap and water or flush mucous
membranes with water immediately or as soon as
feasible following contact of such body areas with
blood or other potentially infectious materials.
(4) Employees shall ensure that contaminated needles
and other contaminated sharps shall not be bent,
recapped or removed, except as otherwise noted in
this section of the Town Code. Shearing or breaking
of contaminated needles is prohibited.
(5) Employees shall not recap or remove contaminated
needles and other contaminated sharps unless no
alternative is feasible or such action is required by a
specific medical procedure.
(6) Employees shall perform any recapping or needle
removal through the use of a mechanical device or a
one-handed technique.
(7) Immediately, or as soon as possible after use,
employees shall place contaminated reusable sharps
in appropriate containers until properly reprocessed.
These containers shall be:
(a) Puncture-resistant.
(b) Labeled or color-coded in accordance with this
section of the Town Code.
(c) Leakproofon the sides and bottom.
(d) In accordance with the requirements set forth
in this section of the Town Code for reusable
sharps.
(8) Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics or lip
balm and handling contact lenses are prohibited in
A13007
§ A130-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-2
work areas where there is a reasonable likelihood of
occupational exposure.
(9) Food and drink shall not be kept in refrigerators,
freezers, shelves, cabinets or on countertops or
benchtops where blood or other potentially
infectious materials are present.
(10) Employees shall perform all procedures involving
blood or other potentially infectious materials in
such a manner as to minimize splashing, spraying,
spattering and generation of droplets of these
substances.
(11) Mouth pipetting/suctioning of blood or other
potentially infectious materials is absolutely
prohibited.
(12) Specimens of blood or other potentially infectious
materials shall be placed in a container which
prevents leakage during collection, handling,
processing, storage, transport or shipping.
(a) The container for storage, transport or shipping
shall be labeled or color-coded according to the
provisions of this Chapter A130 of the
Millinocket Code and closed prior to being
stored, transported or shipped. If universal
precautions are utilized in the handling of the
specimen(s), the labeling/color-coding of
specimens is not necessary, provided that
containers are recognizable as containing
specimens. This exemption only applies while
such specimens/containers remain within the
facility. Labeling or color-coding in accordance
with the provisions of § A130-5 of the
Millinocket Code is required when such
specimens or containers leave the facility.
(b) If outside contamination of the primary
container occurs, employees shall place the
primary container within a second container
Al3008 4-21-83
/~
'·3'
§ A130-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-2
which prevents leakage during handling,
processing, storage, transport or shipping and is
labeled or color-coded according to the
requirements of § Al30-5 of the Millinocket
Code.
(c) If the specimen could puncture the primary
container, employees shall place the primary
container within a secondary container which is
puncture-resistant in addition to the above
characteristics.·
(13) Equipment which may become contaminated with
blood or other potentially infectious materials shall
be examined prior to servicing or shipping and shall
be decontaminated as necessary, unless
decontamination of such equipment or portions of
such equipment is clearly not feasible.
(a) Employees shall attach a readily observable
label in accordance with § Al30-5 of the
Millinocket Code to the equipment stating
which portions remain contaminated.
(b) Employees shall ensure that this information is
conveyed to all other affected employees, the
servicing representative and/or the
manufacturer and all other persons, as
appropriate, prior to handling, servicing or
shipping so that appropriate precautions will be
taken.
(14) Personal protective equipment. Where there is
occupational exposure, the· town shall provide, at no
cost to the employee, appropriate personal
protective equipment, such as but not limited to
gloves, gowns, laboratory coats, face shield or masks
and eye protection, and mouthpieces, resuscitation
bags, pock.et masks or other ventilation devices. This
personal protective equipment will be considered
appropriate only if it does not permit blood or other
potentially infectious materials to pass through or to
Al3009
§ A130-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § A130-2
reach the employee's work clothes, street clothes,
undergarments, skin, eyes, mouth or other mucous
membranes under normal conditions of use and for
the duration of time which the protective equipment
will be used.
(a) All employees will use appropriate personal
protective equipment unless it is the employee's
professional judgment that in a specific
instance its use would prevent the delivery of
health care or public safety services or would
pose an increased hazard to the safety of the
worker or a coworker. In such instances, the
employee may only temporarily and briefty
decline to use personal protective equipment
and then only in rare and extraordinary
circumstances. When the employee makes this
judgment, he shall report so in writing to his
department head who, in turn, shall report the
incident in writing to the Town Manager. The
Town Manager, 'lbwn Health Officer and the
employee's department head shall investigate
and document the circumstances in order to
determine whether changes can be instituted to
prevent such occurrences in the future.
(b) The town shall ensure that appropriate
personal protective equipment in the
appropriate sizes is readily accessible at the
work site or is issued to employees.
Hypoallergenic gloves, glove liners, powderless
gloves or other similar alternatives shall be
readily accessibly to those employees who may
be allergic to the gloves normally provided.
(c) The town shall clean, launder and dispose of
personal protective equipment required by this
Chapter A130 of the Millinocket Code at no cost
to its employees.
A13010
··.u.- ~·- -
.·,,•
(~....~ : _ \J
• .i~- te)• ,.
§ A130-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130·2
(d} The town shall repair or replace personal
protective equipment as needed to maintain its
effectiveness at no cost to its employees.
(15) Removal of personal protective equipment shall be
as follows:
(a) Employees shall remove, as soon as possible,
any garment penetrated by blood or other
potentially infections materials.
(b) Employees shall remove all personal protective
equipment prior to leaving their work area.
(c} When personal protective equipment is
removed, employees shall place it in an
appropriately designated area or container for
storage, washing, decontamination or disposal.
(d) The town will provide gloves whenever it can be
reasonably anticipated that an employee may
have band contact with blood, other potentially
infectious materials, mucous membranes and
nonintact skin; when performing vascular
access procedures except as specified in this
Chapter A130 of the Millinocket Code; and
when handling or touching contaminated items
or surfaces.
(e) Disposable (single-use) gloves, such as surgical
or examination gloves, shall be replaced by
employees as soon as practical when
contaminated or as soon as feasible if they are
tom or punctured or when their ability to
function as a barrier is compromised. The town
shall furnish the replacement gloves.
(t) Disposable (single-use) gloves shall not be
washed or decontaminated for reuse.
(g) Utility gloves may be decontaminated for reuse
if the integrity of the glove is not compromised.
However, employees must discard any glove(s}
A13011 4-U-83
§ Al30-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-2
which are cracked, peeling, tom, punctured or
exhibit other signs of deterioration or when
their ability to function as a barrier is
compromised.
(16) Phlebotomies and intravenous procedures.
(a) The town shall make gloves available to all
employees who wish to use them for phlebotomy
and intravenous procedures and shall not
discourage the use of gloves for phlebotomy and
intravenous procedures.
(b) The town requires that gloves be used for
phlebotomy and intravenous procedures in the
following circumstances:
[1] When the employee has cuts, scratches or
other breaks in his or her skin.
[2] When the employee judges that any
contamination with blood may occur, for
example, when performing phlebotomy or
intravenous procedures on an
uncooperative source individual.
[3] When the employee is receiving training in
phlebotomy or intravenous procedures.
(17) Protective equipment.
(a) Employees shall wear masks in combination
with eye protection devices, such as goggles or
glasses with solid side shields or chin length
face shields, whenever splashes, spray, spatter
or droplets of blood or other potentially
infectious materials may be generated and eye,
nose or mouth contamination can be reasonably
anticipated.
(b) Appropriate protective clothing, such as but not
limited to gowns, aprons, lab coats, clinic
jackets or similar outer garments shall be worn
by employees in occupational exposure
A13012
(9
§ Al30-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-2
situations. The type and characteristics will
depend upon the task and degree of exposure
anticipated. The Town Health Officer shall
determine the level of appropriate protective
clothing for the task and degree of exposure
anticipated.
(c) Surgical caps or hoods and/or shoe covers or
boots shall be worn in instances when gross
contamination can reasonably be anticipated
(e.g., autopsies, orthopedic surgery, removal of
victims from accident wreckage or buildings).
(18) The town shall ensure all of its work sites are
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Each
department head shall determine and implement an
appropriate written schedule for cleaning and
method of decontamination based upon the location
within the facility, type of surface~ be cleaned, type
of soil present and tasks or procedures being
performed in the area. That schedule shall be
approved by the town's Health Officer and Town
Manager and shall become part of the Exposure
Control Plan for that affected department and shall
be reviewed as needed or on no less than on a yearly
basis. At a minimum, such a schedule shall state
that:
(a) All equipment and environmental and working
surfaces, including those in vehicles, shall be
cleaned and decontaminated immediately or as
soon as feasible after contact with blood or
other potentially infectious materials.
(b) Contaminated work surfaces, including those in
vehicles, shall be decontaminated with an
appropriate disinfectant after completion of
procedures; immediately or as soon as feasible
when surfaces are overtly contaminated or after
any spill of blood or other potentially infectious
materials; and at each end of the work shift if
Al3013
§ A130-2 .MILLINOCKET CODE § A130-2
the surface might have become decontaminated
since the last cleaning.
(c) Protective coverings, such as plastic wrap,
aluminum foil or imperviously backed
absorbent paper used to cover equipment and
environmental surfaces, shall be removed and
replaced as soon as feasible when they become
overtly contaminated or at the end of each work
s.hm if they might have become contaminated
during the shift.
( d) All bins, pails, cans and similar receptacles
intended for reuse which bavf.' H reasonable
likelihood of becoming contam.im:t~.t<l ·lll'!th blood
or other potentially infectious mCJt.:.1r1a.b shall be
inspected and decontaminated on a daily basis
and cleaned and decontaminated immediately
or as soon as feasible upon visible
contamination.
(e) Broken glassware which may be contaminated
shall not be picked up directly with the hands.
It shall be cleaned up using mechanical means,
such as a brush and dustpan, tongs, adhesives
or forceps. A vacuum cleaner shall not be used
due to the risk of gross microbial airborne
contamination.
(f) Reusable sharps that are contaminated with
blood or other potentially infectious materials
shall not be stored or processed in a manner
that requires employees to reach by hand into
the containers where these sharps have been
placed.
(19) Procedures for disposing of containing contaminated
sharps.
(a) Contaminated sharps shall be discarded
immediately or as soon as feasible in containers
that are closable puncture resistant, leakproof
A13014
.9
1.·. ... ·.D" ."
l·'~a
·r\. . ,~JI
§ A130-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-2
on sides and bottom and labeled or color-coded
in accordance with § A130-5 of the Millinocket
Code.
(b) During use, containers for contaminated sharps
shall be easily accessible to personnel and
located as close as is feasible to the immediate
area where sharps are used or can be
reasonably anticipated to be found (e.g.,
laundries); maintained upright throughout use;
and replaced routinely and not be allowed to
overfill.
(c) When moving containers of contaminated
sharps from the area of use, the containers
shall be closed immediately prior to removal or
replacement to prevent spillage or protrusion of
contents during handling, storage, transport or
shipping or placed in a secondary container if
leakage is possible. The second container shall
be closable; constructed to contain all contents
and prevent leakage during handling, storage,
transport or shipping; and labeled or colorcoded
according to § Al30-5 of the Millinocket
Code.
(d) Reusable containers shall not be opened,
emptied or cleaned manually or in any other
manner which would expose employees to the
risk of percutaneous injury.
(20) Other regulated waste shall be placed in containers
which are closable and constructed to contain all
contents and prevent leakage of fluids during,
handling, storage, transport or shipping; labeled or
color-coded in accordance with § Al30-5 of the
Millinocket Code; and closed prior to removal to
prevent spillage or protrusion of contents during
handling, storage, transport or shipping.
(a) If outside contamination of the regulated waste
container occurs, it shall be placed in a second
Al3015
§ A130-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-2
container. The container shall be closable;
constructed to contained all contents and
prevent leakage of fluids during handling,
storage, transport or shipping; labeled or colorcoded
in accordance with Chapter Al30-5 of the
Millinocket Code; and closed prior to removal to
prevent spillage or protrusion of contents
during handling, storage, transport or shipping.
(b) Disposal of all regulated waste shall be in
accordance with applicable regulations of the
United States, states and territories and
political subdivisions of states and territories.
(21) Laundry.
(a) Contaminated laundry shall be handled as little
as possible with a minimum of agitation.
(b) Contaminated laundry shall be bagged or
containerized at the location where it was used
and shall not be sorted or rinsed in .the location
of use.
(c) Contaminated laundry shall be placed and
transported in bags or containers labeled or
color-coded in accordance with § Al30-5 of the
Millinocket Code.
(d) Whenever contaminated laundry is wet and
presents a reasonable likelihood of soakthrough
of or leakage from the bag or container,
the laundry shall be placed and transported in
bags or containers which prevent soak-through
and/or leakage of fluids to the exterior.
(e) Employees who have contact with contaminated
laundry must wear protective gloves and other
appropriate personal protective equipment.
(f) The town will provide employees with a laundry
facility and supplies suitable for the cleaning of
contaminated laundry. If it should become
Al3016
d,.
fl
\~
\r.·a,
§ Al30-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-2
necessary for a town department to ship
contaminated laundry to another department
for cleaning or off site to a facility which does
not utilize universal precautions in the
handling of all laundry, the department
generating the contaminated laundry must
place such laundry in bags or containers which
are labeled or color-coded in accordance with
§ A130-5 of the Millinocket Code.
(22) Compliance.
(a) The work practice and engineering controls
shall be examined and maintained or replaced
as needed, but no less than annually, by the
Town Manager and department heads to ensure
their effectiveness. Department heads, other
supervisory personnel and all other employees
shall ensure that these engineering and work
practice controls are followed. The Town
Manager and department heads will review and
update the town's entire Exposure Control Plan
as needed, but no less than annually, to reflect
new or modified tasks and procedures which
affect occupational exposure and to reflect new
or revised employee positions with occupational
exposure.
(b) The town will provide copies of its Exposure
Control Plan to its employees and also to any
state or federal official or agency which requests
it.
(c) Each department head is responsible for
ensuring that his or her department maintains
the necessary supplies and equipment to ensure
compliance with the town's Exposure Control
Plan at all times. Each department head is also
responsible for ensuring that their
department's personnel are adequately trained
in the Exposure Control Plan at all times and
A13017 4-25-98
§ A130-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-2
must ensure that current employees and new
hires are given proper training in exposure
control as soon as feasible. Such training will be
in accord with § Al30-6 of the Millinocket Code.
Each department head shall review the
facilities and training within his department as
often as necessary, but no less than annually, to
ensure compliance with the Exposure Control
Plan.
(d) Every employee shall report every violation of
the engineering and workplace controls to his
department head, who shall document, in
writing, every such violation of the engineering
and workplace controls which he becomes
aware of. This report shall be forwarded to the
Town Manager at the earliest opportunity for
determination of the appropriate remedy of
and/or disciplinary action for the violation. In
addition, every employee shall report every
violation of any other aspect of the Exposure
Control Plan to his department head, who shall
document, in writing, such violation of the
Exposure Control Plan which he becomes aware
of. This report shall be forwarded to the Town
Manager at the earliest opportunity for
determination of the appropriate remedy and/or
disciplinary action for the violation.
(e) Any employee found to be acting in violation of
the engineering and workplace controls or any
other part of this Exposure Control Plan after
receiving notice of and training about the same
shall face discipline which includes but is not
limited to verbal warning, written warning,
suspension with pay, suspension without pay
and/or termination. Because a single violation
can lead to serious or terminal illnesses
infecting the employee or others, termination
shall be available as a penalty for a first
Al3018
'•·~r.•·
I•
't ·D.¥ .· · t · . •
()
§ Al30-2 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30-3
violation. Any department head failing to fulfill
his obligations under the engineering and
workplace controls or any other part of this
Exposure Control Plan after receiving notice of
and training about the same shall also face
these disciplines. Such disciplinary authority is
in accord with § A128-5 [specifically
§ A128-5B(7)] of the Millinocket Code.
§ A130-3. Hepatitis B.
A. Hepatitis B vaccination and postexposure evaluation and
follow-up.
( 1) The town shall make available the hepatitis B
vaccine and vaccination series to all employees who
have occupational exposure and postexposure
evaluation and follow-up to all employees who have
had an exposure incident.
(2) The town shall ensure that all medical evaluations
and procedures, including the hepatitis B vaccine
and vaccination series and postexposure evaluation
and follow-up, including prophylaxis, are:
(a) Made available at no cost to employees.
(b) Made available to employees at a reasonable
time and place.
(c) Performed by or under the supervision of a
licensed physician or by or under the
supervision of another licensed health-care
professional.
(d) Provided according to recommendations of the
Unit.ed States Public Health Service current at
the time these evaluations and procedures take
place, except as otherwise specified in Chapter
Al30 of the Millinocket Code.
A13019

§ A130-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § A130-3
(3) The town shall ensure that all laboratory tests are
conducted by an accredited laboratory at no cost to
employees.
B. The town shall make hepatitis B vaccination available
after an employee has received the training required in
§ Al30-6 of the Millinocket Code or not later than within
ten (10) working days of initial assignment of any
employees who have occupational exposure, unless the
employee has previously received the complete hepatitis
B vaccination series, or antibody testing has revealed
that the employee is immune, or the vaccine is
contraindicated for medical reasons.
(1) The town shall not make participation in a
prescreening program a prerequisite for receiving
hepatitis B vaccination.
(2) If an employee initially declines a hepatitis B
vaccination but at a later date, while still covered
under the standard, decides to accept the
vaccination, the town . shall make a hepatitis B
vaccination available at that time.
(3) The town shall ensure that an employee who
declines the hepatitis B vaccination offered by the
town signs a statement in accordance with § Al30-8
of the Millinocket Code.
(4) If a routine booster dose(s) of hepatitis B vaccine is
recommended by the United States Public Health
Service at a future date, such booster dose(s) shall
be made available in accordance with this Chapter
Al30 of the Millinocket Code and applicable state
and federal law.
(5) Compliance with this requirement is controlled by
§ A130-2C(22) of the Millinocket Code.
A13020
,'a
'·ZI
@..
§ Al30-4 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-4
§ Al30-4. Exposure incident protocol.
Postexposure evaluation and follow-up shall include the
following:
A. Following a report of an exposure incident, the Town
Manager, 'Thwn Health Officer and/or the employee's
department head shall ensure that the town makes
immediately available to the exposed employee a
confidential medical evaluation and follow-up, including
at least the following elements:
(1) Documentation of the route(s) of exposure and the
circumstances under which the exposure incident
occurred.
(2) Identification and documentation of the source
individual, unless identification is clearly not
feasible or is prohibited by law.
B. The source individual's blood shall be tested as soon as
feasible and after consent is obtained in order to
determine HIV or HBV infectivity. If consent is not
obtained, the 'Thwn Manger or 'Thwn Health Officer will
document that legally reqaj.red consent cannot be
obtained. When the source individual's consent is not
required by law, the source individual's blood, if
available, shall be tested and the results documented.
C. When the source individual is already known to be
infected with HBV or HIV, testing for the source
individual's known HBV or HIV status need not be
repeated.
D. Collection and testing of blood for HBV and HIV
serological status shall be performed as follows:
(1) The exposed employee's blood shall be collected as
soon as feasible and tested after consent is obtained.
(2) If the employee consents to baseline blood collection
but does not give consent at that time for HIV
serologic testing, the sample shall be preserved for
at least ninety (90) days. If within ninety (90) days
A13021
§ A130-4 MILLINOCKET CODE §Al30-4
E.
F .
G.
of the exposure incident, the employee elects to have
the baseline sample tested, such testing shall be
done as soon as feasible.
The town shall provide postexposure prophylaxis, when
medically indicated, as recommended by the United
States Public Health Service, by way of:
(1) Counseling; and
(2) Evaluation of reported illnesses.
The town shall ensure that the health care professional
responsible for the employee's hepatitis B vaccination is
provided a copy of 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. The town
shall ensure that the health care professional evaluating
an employee after an exposure incident is provided the
following information:
(1) A copy of29 CFR Part 1910.1030.
(2) A description of the exposed employee's duties as
they relate to the exposure incident.
(3) Documentation of the route(s) of exposure and
circumstances under which exposure occurred.
(4) Results of the source individual's blood testing, if
available.
(5) All medical records relevant to the appropriate
treatment of the employee, including vaccination
status, which are the town's responsibility to
maintain pursuant to § Al30-7 of the Millinocket
Code.
The town shall obtain and provide the employee with a
copy of the evaluating health care professional's written
opinion within fifteen (15) days of the completion of the
evaluation.
(1) The health care professional's written opinion for
hepatitis B vaccination shall be limited to whether
hepatitis B vaccination is indicated for an employee
and if the employee has received such vaccination.
Al3022
... .•., ,".r": '
)
t' ~:~ )
'
i·,a ··=a
.~
\:.I
§ A130-4 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30-5
H. Written evaluation.
(1) The town shall require that the health care
professional's written opinion for postexposure
evaluation and follow-up shall be limited to the
following information:
(a) That the employee has been informed of the
results of the evaluation.
(b) That the employee has been told about any
medical conditions resulting from exposure to
blood or other potentially infectious materials
which require further evaluation or treatment.
(2) All other findings or diagnoses shall remain
confidential and shall not be included in the written
opinion for postexposure evaluation.
(3) Medical records required herein shall be maintained
in accordance with § Al30-7 of the Millinocket Code.
I. Compliance with these requirements is controlled by
§ A130-2C(22) of the Millinocket Code.
§ A130~5. Communication of biohazardous dangers.
A. Communication of hazards to employees; labels and
signs.
(1) Labels. Warning labels shall be affixed to containers
of regulated waste, refrigerators and freezers
containing blood or other potentially infectious
material and other containers used to store,
transport or ship blood or other potentially
infectious materials, except as provided in Chapter
A130-5 of the Millinocket Code. The town shall
ensure that these labels are available at all times.
(2) Labels required by this section of the Town Code
shall include the following legend:
BIO HAZARD
A13023
§A130·5 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30·5
(3) These labels shall be fluorescent orange or orange·
red, or predominantly so, with lettering or symbols
in a contrasting color.
(4) Labels required by this section of the Town Code
shall be affixed to or as close as feasible to the
container by string, wire, adhesive or other method
that prevents their loss or unintentional removal.
(5) Red bags or red containers may be substituted for
labels.
(6) Containers of blood, blood components or blood
products that are labeled as to their contents and
have been released for transfusion or other clinical
use are exempted from the labeling requirements of
§ Al30·5 of the Millinocket Code.
(7) Individual containers of blood or other potentially
infectious materials that are placed in a labeled
container during storage, transport, shipment or
disposal are exempted from the labeling
requirement.
(8) Labels required for contaminated equipment shall
be in accordance with § Al30·5 of the Millinocket
Code and shall also state which parts of the
equipment remain contaminated.
(9) Regulated waste that has been decontaminated need
not be labeled or color·coded.
(10) The town shall ensure signs are posted at the
entrance to work .areas where exposure to
bloodborne pathogens may be reasonably
anticipated and in departments whose personnel
may reasonably anticipate occupational exposure to
bloodbome pathogens, which signs shall bear the
following legend:
Al3024
(·•~ § Al30·5 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30·6
BIO HAZARD
(Name of the infectious agent)
(Special requirements for entering the area)
(Name, telephone number of the department
head or other responsible person)
(11) These signs shall be fluorescent orange·red, or
predominantly so, with lettering or symbols in a
contrasting color.
(12) Compliance with these requirements is controlled by
§ A130·2C(22) of the Millinocket Code.
§ A130-6. Information and training.
The town shall ensure that all employees with occupational
exposure participate in a training program which will be
provided at no cost to the employee and during working hours.
A. Training shall be provided as follows:
(1) At the time of initial assignment to tasks where
occupational exposure may take place.
(2) By October 6, 1992.
(3) At least annually thereafter.
(4) For employees who have received training on
bloodbome pathogens prior to the adoption of this
Chapter A130 of the Millinocket Code, only training
with respect to the provisions of Chapter A130 of the
Millinocket Code which was not included need be
provided.
(5) Annual training for all employees shall be provided
within one (1) year of their previous training.
(6) The town shall provide additional training when
changes (such as modification of tasks or procedures
or institution of new task or procedures) affects the
employee's occupational exposure. The additional
A13025 4-25-93
§ A130·6 MILLINOCKET CODE § A130-6
training may be limited to addressing the new
exposures created.
(7) Material appropriate in content and vocabulary to
educational level, literacy and language of
employees shall be used.
B. Training program.
(1) The town's training program shall contain at a
minimum the following elements:
(a) An accessible copy of 29 CFR 1910.1030 and an
explanation of its contents.
(b) A general explanation of the epidemiology and
symptoms of bloodbome diseases.
(c) An explanation of the modes of transmission of
bloodborne pathogens.
(d) A copy of and explanation of Chapter A130 of
the Millinocket Code, including its exposure
control component and the means by which the ( )
employee can obtain additional copies of
Chapter Al30 of the Millinocket Code.
(e) An explanation of the appropriate methods for
recognizing tasks and other activities that may
involve exposure to blood and other potentially
infectious materials.
(t) An explanation of the use and limitations of
methods that will prevent or reduce exposure,
including appropriate engineering controls,
work practices and personal protective
equipment.
(g) Information on the types, proper use, location,
removal, handling, decontamination and
disposal of personal protective equipment.
(h) An explanation of the basis for selection of
personal protective equipment.
Al3026
§ Al30-6 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-7
(i) Information on the hepatitis B vaccine,
including information on its efficacy, safety,
method of administration, the benefits of being
vaccinated and that the vaccine and vaccination
will be offered free of charge.
(j) Information on the appropriate actions to take
and persons to contact in an emergency
involving blood or other potentially infectious
materials.
(k) An explanation of the procedure to follow if an
exposure incident occurs, including the method
of reporting the incident and the medical
follow-up that will be made available.
(l) Information on the postexposure evaluation and
follow-up that the town will provide for its
employees following an exposure incident.
(m) An explanation of the signs and labels and/or
color-coding required by Chapter A130-5 of the
Millinocket Code.
(n) An opportunity for interactive questions and
answers with the person conducting the
training session.
(2) The person conducting the training shall be
knowledgeable in the subject matter covered by the
elements contained in the training program as it
relates to the workplace that the training will
address.
C. Compliance with these requirements is controlled by
§ A130-2C(22) of the Millinocket Code.
§ A130-7. Medical recordkeeping.
The town shall establish and maintain an accurate record for
each employee with occupational exposure, in accordance with
29 CFR 1910.20.
A13027
§A130-7 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-7
A This record shall become an integral r• J _. , .. r the
employee's personnel record. This record sh ...
(1) The name and social security numbe1· v.i. the
employee.
\~a
·~•
(2) A copy of the employee's hepatitis B vaccination
status, including the dates of all the hepatitis B
vaccinations and any medical records relative to the f~:)
employee's ability to receive vaccination as required
by this§ Al30-7 of the Millinocket Code.
(3) A copy of all results of examinations, medical testing
and follow-up procedures as required by § Al30-7 of
the Millinocket Code.
(4) The employer's copy of the health care professional's
written opinion as required by § A : :· · ·· of the
Millinocket Code.
(5) A copy of the information provided to the health
care professional as required by § A130-7 of the
Millinocket Code.
B. The town shall ensure that employee medical records
required by this § A130-7 of the Millinocket Code are
kept confidential and are not disclosed or reported
without the employee's express written consent to any
person within or outside the workplace, except as
required by § A130-7 of the Millinocket Code, 29 CFR
Section 1910.1030 or as may be otherwise required by
state or federal law.
C. The town shall maintain the records required above for
at least the duration of employment, plus thirty (30)
years, in accordance with 29CFR1910.20.
D. The town shall also keep training records in the
employee's personnel file and in a separate master
training records file. These training records shall include
the following information: ·
(1) The dates of the training sessions.
A13028
t' \:_,)· J
(
§ A130-7 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § Al30-7
(2) The contents or a summary of the training sessions.
(3) The names and qualifications of persons conducting
the training.
(4) The names and job titles of all persons attending the
training sessions.
(5) Training records shall be maintained for at least
three (3) years from the date on which the training
occurred.
E. The town shall ensure that all such records maintained
shall be made available upon request to any state or
federal agent or agency authorized by law to access such
information.
F. Employee training records shall be provided upon
request for examination and copying to employees, to
employee representatives, to the Assistant Secretary of
Labor for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
and/or the Director of the National Institute of
Health for the. Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
United States Department of Labor, in
accordance with 29 CFR 1910.20.
G . . Employee medical records required by this section of the
Town Code shall be provided upon request for
examination and copying to the employee, to anyone
having written consent of the employee or to the federal
officials designated in the preceding subsection.
H. The town shall comply with the requirements involving
transfer of records set forth in 29 CFR 1910.20(h) as
follows:
(1) If the town ceases its present municipal
organization, and there is no successor organization
to receive and retain the records for the prescribed
period, the town shall notify the Assistant Secretary
of Labor for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
and/or the Director of the National
Institute of Health for the Occupational Safety and
A13029
§ Al30-7 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al30-8
Health Administration, United States Department
of Labor, at least three (3) months prior to any
disposal of such records and transmit them to the
Assistant Secretary of Labor for the Occupational
Safety ·and Health Administration and/or the
Director of the National Institute of Health for the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
United States Department of Labor, if required by
law to do so, or to the Assistant Secretary of Labor
for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
and/or the Director of the National Institute of
Health for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
United States Department of Labor,
within that three-month period. This information
will also be presented to, if requested by, the Maine
Department of Human Services.
I. Compliance with the above requirements is controlled by
§ A130-2C(22) of the Millinocket Code.
§ AlS0-8. Hepatitis B vaccine declination (mandatory).
Employees who decline a hepatitis B vaccination must
execute a properly notarized waiver which shall read as follows:
"I understand that, due to my occupational exposure to blood
or other potentially infectious materials, I may be at risk of
acquiring hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. I have been given
the opportunity to be vaccinated with hepatitis B vaccine at no
charge to myself. However, I decline hepatitis B vaccination at
this time. I understand that by declining this vaccine, I
continue to be at risk of acquiring hepatitis B, a serious and
potentially fatal disease. If in the future I continue to have
occupational exposure to blood or other potentially infectious
materials and I want to be vaccinated with hepatitis B vaccine,
I can receive the vaccination series at no charge to me."
SIGNED: ___________ _
Signature of Employee
STATE OF MAINE
Al3030
(..: ~, a,
§ A130-8 BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS CONTROL § A130-8
PENOBSCOTt SS.
Now comes before me the above-signed
---------' and states his/her signing of this
document to be his/her free act and deed.
DATED: _J _J _
NOTARY PUBLIC
A13031 4-211-93
; ..7~
fl ~ .
,..•.., , \ '.
.• , .. \.
'·.
r\..f~l
FAJ."1ILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
Chapter A131
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POUCY
Policy; intent.
Definitions.
§ A131·1.
§ Al31·2.
§ AlSl-3.
§ A131·4.
Requirement of notice; entitlement to leave.
Intermittent family and medical leave.
§ A131-o. Certification.
§ A131-6. Second opinion.
§ A131-7. Confticting opinions of certification.
§ A131-8. Subsequent recertification.
§ Al31-9. Restoration to employment position.
§ Al31·10. Denial of restoration.
§ Al31-11. Maintenance of health benefits.
§ A131-12. Failure to return to work; effect on health
benefits paid.
§ A131-13. Maintenance of other benefits.
§ Al31-14. Responsibilities concerning leave.
§ A131-15. Special considerations; administration.
[WSTORY: Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Millinocket 6-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2-98. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penonnel policy - See Ch. A128.
A13101 10-25-98
...... __ - • !
.~-' "'"'..., ....... ,
§ A131-1 MILIJNOCKET CODE
§ A131-1. Policy; intent.
A. This policy is designed to comply with United States
Public Law 103-3 (Sections 6381 through 6387 of Title 5,
United States Code) and 26 M.R.S.A. § 843 et seq., which
are the federal and state Family Leave Acts, and to
balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of
families. The town recognizes the occasional need for
employees to take temporary leaves for the birth and
care of a child, for the placement of a child with the
employee for adoption or foster care, for a serious health
condition of the employee or of a member of the
employee's immediate family. This policy establishes
eligibility guidelines which an employee must meet
before a request is granted, as well as the guidelines
which are to be observed throughout the process.
B. It is the policy of the town to grant eligible employees up
to 12 work weeks of leave during any twelve-month
period commencing on the day of approval of his or her
family leave for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The birth of a child of the employee and in order to
care for the child.
(2) The placement of a child with the employee for
adoption or foster care.
(3) A serious health condition which makes the
employee unable to perform his or her job functions.
(4) To care for the spouse, child or parent of the
employee if such individual has a serious health
condition.
§ A131-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE - An employee who has been
employed for at least 12 months by the town and has
A13102 10- 25-98
§ A131-2 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY § Al31-2
performed at least 1,250 hours of service during that
period.
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE:
A. A total of 12 workweeks of leave during any twelvemonth
period for reason(s) defined by this policy.
(1) During the first 60 days this policy is in effect, a
"twelve-month period" shall be defined, at the
employee's election, as one of the following:
(a) The calendar year;
(b) Any fixed twelve-month leave year, such as
a fiscal year, a year required by state law
or a year starting on an employee's
anniversary date;
(c) The twelve-month period measured
forward from the date any employee's first
leave under this policy begins; or
(d) A rolling twelve-month period measured
backward from the date an employee uses
leave under this policy (except that such
measure may not extend back before
August 5, 1993).
(2) Commencing on the 61st day after this policy is
in effect, a "twelve-month period" shall be
defined as in Subsection A(l)(d) above. This
definition shall be applicable to all employees
governed by this policy. Should another
definition of twelve-month period be adopted,
employees will be given not less than 60 days'
notice of the proposed redefinition. Any
redefinition of twelve-month period shall allow
employees to retain the full benefit of 12 weeks
of leave under whichever definition at
Subsection A(l)(a) through (d) above affords the
greatest benefit to employees.
A13103 10-25-98
§ A131-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131-2
B. The employee who begins a family and medical
leave has the option to draw down from accrued
benefits/earned time prior to being on leave on an
unpaid basis. If an employee opts to use accrued
benefits, benefits are to be drawn down in the
following order: sick time; vacation time; personal
time. The total aggregate family and medical leave ..• .
taken in any twelve-month period, as defined above,
is limited to 12 weeks, whether or not any or all of
that 12 weeks includes accumulated benefits/earned
time and whether or not any or all of that i2 weeks
is paid or unpaid.
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER:
A. Includes:
(1) A doctor of medicine or osteopathy who is
authorized to practice medicine or surgery by
the state in which the doctor practices;
(2) Any other person determined by the Secretary
of Labor to be capable of providing health care
services, including but not limited to
podiatrists, dentists, clinical psychologists,
optometrists and chiropractors (limited to
treatment consisting of manual manipulation of
the spine to correct a subluxation as
demonstrated by X-ray to exist) licensed or
authorized to practice in the state and
performing within the scope of their practice as
defined under state law;
(3) Nurse practitioners and nurse-midwives and
clinical social workers who are authorized to
practice under state law and who are
performing within the scope of their practice as
defined under state law;
( 4) Christian Science practitioners listed with the
First Church of Christ Scientist in Boston,
Massachusetts;
A13104 10-ZIS-98
r:~
~
• .
"
• .
'
§ A131-2 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POI.JCY § A131-2
(5) Any healthcare provider from whom the town or
its group health pJan•s benefits manager will
accept certification of the existence of a serious
health condition to substantiate a claim for
benefits; and
(6) A healthcare provider listed above who
practices in a country other than the United
States, who is authorized to practice in
accordance with the law of that country and
who is performing within the scope of his or her
practice as defined under such law.
B. Where an employee or family member is receiving
treatment under Subsection A(4), an employee may
not object to any requirement from the town that
the employee or family member submit to
examination (though not treatment) to obtain a
second or third certification from a health care
provider other than that described in Subsection
A(4) .
SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION:
A. An illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental
condition that involves:
(1) Inpatient care (i.e., an overnight stay) in a
hospital, hospice or residential medical care
facility, including any period of "incapacity" (for
purposes of this section, defined to mean
inability to work, attend school or perform other
regular daily activities due to the serious health
condition, treatment therefor or recovery
therefrom) or any subsequent treatment in
connection with such inpatient care; or
(2) Continuing treatment by a healthcare provider.
A serious health condition involving continuing
treatment by a health care provider includes
any one or more of the following:
Al3105 10-25-98
§ A131-2 MIWNOCKET CODE §A131-2
(a) A period of incapacity (i.e., inability to
work, attend school or perform other
regular daily activities due to the serious
health condition, treatment therefor or
recovery therefrom) of more than three
consecutive calendar days and any
subsequent treatment or period of
incapacity relating to the same condition
that also involve:
(1) Treatment two or more times by a
health care provider, by a nurse or
physician's assistant under direct
supervision of a health care provider
or by a provider of health care service
(e.g., physical therapist) under orders
of, or on referral by, a health care
provider; or
[2] Treatment by a health care provider
?n at le~t onefoccast~on .whitch restmultst {....~ ·· ·
m a regimen o con mwng rea en '"V
under the supervision of the health
care provider.
(b) Any period of incapacity due to pregnancy
or for prenatal care.
(c) Any period of incapacity or treatment for
such incapacity due to a chronic serious
health condition. A .. chronic serious health
condition" is one which:
(1] Requires periodic visits for treatment
by a health care provider or by a nurse
or physician's assistant under direct
supervision of a health care provider;
[2] Continues over an extended period of
time (including recurring episodes of a
single underlying condition); and
A13106 10-25-98
§ A131-2 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY § Al31-2
[3] May cause episodic rather than a
continuing period of incapacity (e.g.,
asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.)
(d) A period of incapacity which is permanent
or long-term due to a condition for which
treatment may not be effective. The
employee or family member must be under
the continuing supervision of, but need not
be receiving active treatment by, a health
care provider. Examples include
Alzheimer's, a severe stroke or the
terminal stages of a disease.
(e) Any period of absence to receive multiple
treatments (including any period of
recovery therefrom) by a health care
provider or by a provider of health care
services under orders of, or on referral by, a
health care provider, either for restorative
surgery after an accident or other injury, or
for a condition that would likely result in a
period of incapacity of more than three
consecutive calendar days in the absence of
medical intervention or treatment, such as
cancer (chemotherapy, radiation, etc.),
severe arthritis (physical therapy), kidney
disease (dialysis).
B. Treatment for purposes of Subsection A of° this
section includes (but is not limited to) examinations
to determine if a serious health condition exists and
evaluations of the condition. Treatment does not
include routine physical examinations, eye
examinations or dental examinations. Under
Subsection A(2)(a)[2], a regimen of continuing
treatment includes, for example, a course of
prescription medication (e.g., an antibiotic) or
therapy requiring special equipment to resolve or
alleviate the health condition (e.g., oxygen). A
regimen of continuing treatment that includes the
A13107 10-25-98
§ Al31-2 MILLINOCKET CODE § Al31~2
taking of over-the-counter medications such as
aspirin, antihistamines or salves or bed rest,
drinking fluids, exercise and other similar activities
that can be initiated without a visit to a health care
provider is not, by itself, sufficient to constitute a
regimen of continuing treatment for purposes of
leave under this policy.
C. Conditions for which cosmetic treatments are
administered (such as most treatments for acne or
plastic surgery) are not serious health conditions
unless inpatient hospital care is required or unless
complications develop. Ordinarily, unless
complications arise, the common cold, the fiu, ear
aches, upset stomach, minor ulcers, headaches other
than migraine, routine dental or orthodontia
problems, periodontal disease, etc., are examples of
conditions that do not meet the definition of a
serious health condition and do not qualify for leave
in this policy. Restorative dental or plastic surgery
after an injury or removal of cancerous growths are
serious health conditions, provided that all the other
conditions of this regulation are met. Mental illness
resulting from stress or allergies may be a serious
health condition, but only if all the conditions of this
section are met.
D. Substance abuse may be a serious health condition
if the conditions of this section are met. However,
leave under this policy may only be taken for
treatment for substance abuse by a health care
provider or by a provider of health care services on
referral by a health care provider. On the other
hand, absence because of the employee's use of the
substa,nce, rather than for treatment, does not
qualify for leave under this policy.
E. Absences attributable to incapacity under
Subsection A(2)(b) or (c) qualify for leave under this
policy even though the employee or the immediate
family member does not receive treatment from a
Al3108 10-25-98
(I.
.
• .
. -
§ A131-2 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY § A131-3
health care provider during the absence and even if
the absence does not last more than three days. For
example, an employee with asthma may be unable
to report for work due to the onset of an asthma
attack or because the employee's health care
provider has advised the employee to stay home
when the pollen count exceeds a certain level. An
employee who is pregnant may be unable to report
to work because of severe morning sickness.
SON or DAUGHTER - A biological, adopted or foster
child, a stepchild, a legal ward or a child of a person
standing in loco parentis who is under 18 years of age or
18 years or older and incapable of self-care because of a
mental or physical disability.
§ A131-3. Requirement of notice; entitlement to leave.
A. In any case in which the necessity for leave is foreseeable
(birth, placement, planned medical treatment), the
employee will provide written notice and certification to
the Personnel Director and department head not less
than 30 days before the date of the leave is to begin. This
is with the exception that if the circumstances of the
date of birth, placement or treatment requires leave to
begin in less than 30 days, the employee will provide
written notice and certification as soon thereafter as
possible.
B. In any case in which the necessity for leave is foreseeable
based on planned medical treatment, the employee will
make a reasonable effort to schedule the treatment so as
not to disrupt unduly the operation of the employer,
subject to the approval of the employee's healthcare
provider or of the immediate family member's healthcare
provider.
C. In any case in which a husband and wife entitled to
leave are employed by the town, the aggregate number of
workweeks of leave to which both may be entitled will be
Al3109 10-ZG-98
§A131-3 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131-4
limited to 12 workweeks during any twelve-month period
if such leave is for the birth of a child or to care for the
new cbildt the placement of a child with the employee for
adoption or foster care or to care for a member of the
employeets immediate family who has a serious health
condition. The entitlement to leave for a birth or
placement of a child will expire at the end of the twelvemonth
period beginning on the date such birth or
placement leave was commenced.
§ A131-4. Intermittent family and medical leave.
Leave may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave
schedule under certain circumstances. Where family and
medical leave is taken to care for a sick family member or for an
employeets own serious health condition, leave may be taken
intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically
necessary.
A. There is no limit on the size of an increment of leave
when an employee takes intermittent leave or leave on a
reduced leave schedule. However. the town limits leave
increments to the shortest period of time (one hour or
less) that its payroll system uses to account for absences
or use ofleave.
B. If an employee requests intermittent leave or leave on a
reduced leave schedule that is foreseeable based on
planned medical treatmentt including during a period of
recovery from a serious health conditiont the town may
require the employee to transfer temporarily to an
available alternative position for which the employee is
qualified and which better accommodates recurring
periods of leave than does the employee's regular
position.
C. Transfer to an alternative position will comply with any
applicable collective bargaining agreement, federal law
(such as the Americans with Disabilities Act) and state
law. Transfer to an alternative position may include
A13110 10-111-98
(... . .. ··.::•
r9· · V,-·. "
(~ ·!!fl
§ A131-4 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY § A131-5
altering an existing job to better accommodate the
employee,s need for intermittent or reduced leave.
D. The alternative position will have equivalent pay and
benefits. An alternative position for these purposes does
not have to have equivalent duties. The town may
increase the pay and benefits of the returning employee
performing an existing alternative position so as to make
them equivalent to the employee,s regular job, The town
may also transfer the employee to a part-time job with
the same hourly rate of pay and benefits, provided that
the employee is not required to take more leave than is
medically necessary. The town will not eliminate benefits
which otherwise would not be provided to a full-time
employee who because of FML bas temporarily become a
part-time employee; however, the town may
proportionately reduce earned time benefits, such as
vacation leave, where such a reduction is normally made
by the town as applies to part-time employees.
E. Intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave schedule
is not available because of birth or placement of a child
for adoption or foster care unless the child has a serious
health condition as defined in this policy.
§ A131-5. Certification.
The town requires that a request for a family or medical
leave be supported by a certification issued by the healthcare
provider of the employee or of the employee's immediate family
member, as appropriate. The employee will provide the town, in
a timely manner, a copy of such certification. Certification will
be considered sufficient if it states:
A. The date on which the serious health condition
commenced.
B. The probable duration of the condition.
C. The appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of
the healthcare provider regarding the condition.
Al3111 10-25-88
§ Al31-5 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131-6
D. For purposes of leave, a statement that the eligible
employee is needed to care for the member of the
immediate family member and an estimate of the
amount of time that such employee is needed to care for
the member of the immediate family.
E. For purposes of leave, a statement that the employee is
unable to perform the functions of the position of the
employee.
F. In the case of certification for intermittent leave for
planned medical treatment, the dates on which such
treatment is expected to be given and the duration of
such treatment.
G. In the case of certification for intermittent leave for
medical necessity as it pertains to the employee, a
statement of the medical necessity for the intermittent
or reduced leave schedule and the expected duration of
the intermittent or reduced schedule.
H. In the' case of certification for intermittent leave for the
purpose of caring for an immediate family member, a
· statement that it is necessary for the employee to care
and to assist in the recovery of the immediate family
member and the expected duration and schedule of
intermittent leave.
§ A131-6. Second opinion.
The town may require, at its expense. that the eligible
employee obtain the opinion of a second healthcare provider
designated or approved by the employer concerning any
information certified for such leave. A healthcare provider
designated shall not be employed on a regular basis by the Q~
employer. 1f!ll
A13112 10-25-98
(~
§ A131-7 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POUCY § A131-9
§ A131-7. Confticting opinions of certification.
In any case in which the second opinion differs from the
opinion in the original certification, the town may require, at its
expense, that the employee obtain the opinion of a third
healthcare provider designated or approved jointly by the town
and the employee concerning the information certified. The
opinion of the third healthcare provider will be considered to be
final and binding on the town and the employee.
§ A131-8. Subsequent recertification.
A. The town may request recertification at its expense at
any reasonable interval, but not more often than every
30 days, unless:
(1)
{2)
(3)
The employee requests an extension of leave.
Circumstances described by the original certification
have changed significantly (e.g., the duration of the
illness, the iiature of the illness, complications); or
The town receives information that casts doubt upon
the continuing validity of the certification.
B. When an employee is unable to return to work after
family and medical leave because of the continuation,
recurrence or onset of a serious health condition, thereby
preventing the town from recovering its share of health
benefit premium payments made on the employee's
behalf during a period of unpaid FML leave, the town
may require medical certification of the employee's or the
family member's serious health condition.
(I § A131-9. Restoration to employment position.
f"· ·,.~l·.wD~ · · ' ,.
A. Any eligible employee who takes a family or medical
leave is entitled, upon return from such, leave, to be
restored by the town to the position of employment held
by the employee when the leave commenced or to be
restored to an equivalent position with equivalent
A13113 10-25-98
§ A131-9 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131-9
employment benefits, pay and other terms and
conditions of employment.
B. As a condition of job restoration for an employee who
was out for the birth of a child or because of a serious
health condition that made the employee unable to do
the functions of his/her job, the town requires that the
employee receive certification from his/her healthcare
provider that the employee is able to resume work and to
what capacity. ·
C. The town may require the employee on leave to report
periodically to the Personnel Director on his/her status
and intention to return to work.
D. If an employee is unable to return to work because of the
continuation, recurrence or onset of a serious health
condition (previously defined), the town requires the
employee to provide certification, from the employee's
healthcare provider or the healthcare provider of the
employee's immediate family member, such as the case
may be. The certification will be considered sufficient if it
follows the guidelines already cited in this policy, as well
as stating that a serious health condition prevented the
employee from being able to perform the functions of the
job position on the date that the leave expired, or that
the employee is needed to care for the immediate family
member who has a serious health condition on the date
that the leave of the employee expired.
E. No employee will have a greater right to reinstatement
or to other benefits and conditions of employment than if
the employee had been continuously employed during
the family and medical leave period. If the town
determines an employee would not otherwise have been
employed at the time reinstatement is requested, that
employee may not expect to be restored to employment.
For example, if the town determines an employee would
have been laid off during the family and medical leave
period, that employee would not be entitled to
reinstatement.
A13114 10-25-98
·'~ t· § A13lw9 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POUCY § A131-11
()
()
F. If an employee was hired for a specific term or only to
perform work on a discrete project, the town has no
obligation to restore the employee if the employment
term or project is over and the town would not otherwise
have continued to employ the employee.
§ Al31-10. Denial of restoration.
The town may deny restoration to certain highly
compensated employees if such denial is necessary to prevent
substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of
the town. The town will. notify the employee of the intent to
deny restoration on such basis at the time the town determines
that such injury will occur. In any case in which the leave has
occurred and the employee receives such notice, the employee
may elect not to return to employment. A highly compensated
employee is a salaried employee who is among the highest paid
10% of the employees employed by the town within 75 miles of
the facility.
§ A131-11. Maintenance of health benefits.
During any period that an eligible employee takes family or
medical leave, the town will maintain coverage for the employee
under the town's group health plan for the duration of such
leave at the level and under the conditions coverage would have
been provided to the employee had the leave not taken place. If
an employee does not have accrued payroll benefits to pay
his/her portion of the health plan premium or if she/he uses up
his/her accrued benefits during the timeframe of his/her leave,
then she/he can arrange with the Personnel Director to pay
his/her premium portion directly to the town. The first time the
employee does not pay his/her premium portion when due, loss
of coverage for nonpayment will occur, and, at such time, the
Personnel Director will offer COBRA benefits to the employee.
Al3115 10-25-88
t A131-12 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131·14
§ A131·12. Failure to return to work; effect on health
benefits paid.
If the employee fails to return from leave after the period of
leave to which the employee is entitled has expired or for a
reason other than the continuation, recurrence or onset of a
serious health condition that entitles the employee to leave,
then the employee is to reimburse the town for the town's
portion of the group health premiums paid for the benefit of
that employee during the time she/he was out on unpaid leave.
§ A131-13. Maintenance of other benefits.
For employees on leave under this policy, the town will
maintain other benefits for the duration of such leave at the
level and under the conditions coverage would have been
provided to the employee had the leave not taken place. If
applicable, this includes employee dental, life insurance and
long-term disability. If an employee does not have accrued
payroll benefits to pay his/her portion of a benefit plan premium
':" if she/he uses up his/her accrued benefits during· the
.,.aneframe of his/her leave, then she/he can arrange with the
Personnel Direct.or to pay hislher premium portion directly to
the town. Failure of the employee to pay bis/her premium
portion when due will result in loss of coverage.
§ Al31·14. Responsibilities concerning leave.
A. Except in emergency situations, an employee requesting
a leave must do so in writing to his/her department head
with a copy to the Personnel Director. As explained
earlier in this policy, certification by a healthcare
provider attesting to the seriousness of the healthcare
condition is necessary. The requirements of notice and
certification are listed in H A131·3 and A131-5. Before
actual leave is to begin, the employee is required to make
an appointment with the Personnel Director to review
the status of his/her benefits. It is essential that department
heads inform the Personnel Director of any
A13116 10-15-98
\'"J'
,. ~:,
§ A131-14 FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY § A131-15
requests for family or medical leave as soon as they
become aware of the request.
B. This particular policy is very specific in its focus and
demands a high degree of communication among the
employee and the employer.
§ A131·15. Special considerations; administration.
A. The Federal Family and Medical Leave Act became
effective on August 5, 1993. For employees covered by
collective bargaining agreements, the Act and this policy
became effective when the collective bargaining
agreementJs terminates or by February 5, 1994,
whichever date is earlier. Nothing in the federal Act or
this policy is meant to diminish the obligation of the
town to comply with any collective bargaining agreement
or any employment benefit program or plan that
provides greater family or medical leave right to
employees.
B. Nothing in the federal Act or this policy shall be
construed to modify or affect any federal or state law
prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
color, national origin, sex, age or disability.
C. The town will post and keep posted, in conspicuous
places on the premises where notices to employees and
applicants for employnient are customarily posted, a
notice, to be prepared or approved by the Secretary of
Labor, setting forth excerpts from or summaries of the
pertinent provisions of the federal law.
D. An eligible employee may sue the town in Federal Court
for any lost wages, salary, employment benefits and/or
other compensation denied or lost by reason of a
violation of the federal law, up to a sum equal to 12
weeks of wages or salary of the employee; this sum shall
include interest, and, if the Court determines that the
employer was not acting in good faith, the employee may
receive an amount equal to twice 12 weeks' wages or
Al3117 10-25-98
§ A131·15 MILLINOCKET CODE § A131·15
salary plus interest, and liquidated damages. The
employee can also recover reasonable attorney's fees,
witness fees and other costs of the action, and also has as
a remedy any equitable relief that the Court may deem
appropriate.
E. The Secretary of Labor may also enforce the federal Act
on behalf of employees.
F. The town must preserve records of family and medical
leaves, consistent with state and federal law, which may
be inspected by the Secretary of Labor.
G. The town will administer its Family and Medical Leave
Policy so as to accommodate applicable collective
bargaining provisions until February 5, 1994, and so as
to comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act.
H. This policy is designed to comply with United States
Public Law 103·3 (5 U.S.C. §§ 6381 through 6387) and 26
M.R.S.A. § 843 et seq., which are the federal and state
...... ,,
·•
Family and Medical Leave Acts, and if or where 'B
inconsistent with the provisions of those statutes and (1.
their amendments, the statutes, as amended, shall
control.
A13118 10-ZG-98
(.~
·~Pl
l• ,
DISPOSITION
LIST
(\ '.. .~V\
ChapterDL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
§ DLI. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the
Town of Millinocket adopted since January 1, 2002, indicating
its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion.
[Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent in
nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).] Consult
municipal records for disposition of prior legislation.
Ordinance Adoption
No. Date Subject Disposition
1-1-2002 Personnel policies Ch. A128
amendment
1-2002 8-22-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 125
2-2002 8-22-2002 Building Code Ch. 48
amendment
3-2002 8-22-2002 Life Safety Code Ch.49
amendment
4-2002 8-22-2002 Dogs amendment Ch.61
5-2002 10-24-2002 General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
7-2002 1-9-2003 Capital budget Ch. 7, Art. I
1-2003 1-23-2003 Sewers amendment Ch. 104
2-2003 7-10-2003 Solid waste Ch. 73
amendment
4-2003 12-11-2003 Snow removal Ch. 108, Art.
amendment I
DL:l 05. 01 - 2011
§ DL-1 MILLINOCKET CODE § DL-1
Ordinance Adoption
No. Date Subject Disposition
5-2003 12-11-2003 Warrant review and Ch. 29A
approval
1-2004 3-11-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 125
2-2004 12-9-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 125
1-2005 6-9-2005 Floodplain Ch.68
management
amendment
2-2005 9-8-2005 Petitions Ch.4
3-2005 9-22-2005 WaJTant review and Ch. 29A
approval
amendment
4-2005 General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
5-2005 12-8-2005 Zoning Map Ch. 125,
amendment table only
1-2006 3-9-2006 Zoning Map Ch. 125, (. amendment table only
2-2006 Failed
3-2006 Failed
4-2006 10-26-2006 Outdoor wood Ch. 86
boilers
5-2006 10-26-2006 General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
6-2006 12-14-2006 Zoning Map Ch. 125,
amendment table only
1-2007 5-24-2007 Salaries and Ch. 27, Art. I
compensation: Town Council •.
amendment
2-2007 General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
3-2007 General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
DL:2 05. 01 - 2011
.. ~
"~'
(~ f~!I
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
Ordinance Adoption
No. Date Subject Disposition
1-2008 See Ch. 75
1-2009
2-2009
1-2010
General assistance
amendment
General assistance See Ch. 75
amendment
9-24-2009 Solid waste Ch. 73
amendment
6-24-2010 Wind turbines Ch. 123
DL:3 05 - 01-2011
,~_,
r'~
VJ
INDEX
15 - 115-93

'·' MILLINOCKET INDEX
DEFINITIONS NOTE: For the convenience
or the Code user, all terms defined
In this Code are included In the Index
under the heading "Definitions and Abbreviations."
-AACCESSORY
STRUCTURES
Fees, 125-116
Floodplain management, 68-6
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVER.~MENT
Administrative policy and procedures,
3-9
Bonds of officials, 3-7
Budget year, 3-8
Chief Administrator, 3-4
Commissions, 3-27-3-29
Definitions, 3-3
Departmental organization, 3-5
Department of Community Development,
3-10.1-3-10.3
Department of Finance, 3-1t,3-12
Department of Fire, 3-16, 3-17
Department of Health, 3-18
Department of Law, 3-10
Department of Personnel, 3-24
Department of Police, 3-14, 3-15
Department of Public Welfare, 3-25,
3-26
Department of Public Works, 3-19,
3-20
Department of Purchasing, 3-21 - 3-23
Department of Records, 3-13
Fiscal year, 3-8
General provisions, 3-1 - 3-9
Oaths of office, 3-6
Scope, 3-2
Title, 3-1
Violations and penalties, 3-30
ADOPTION OF CODE
Altering or tampering with Code, l-8
Amendments to Code, 1-6
Book to be kept up-to-date, l -7
Changes in previously adopted legislation,
1-9
Code adopted, J-2
Copy of Code on file, 1-7
Designation of Code, l- l
General penalty, l-5
I
Items saved from repeal, l-4
Penalties for violations, 1-8
Repealer, 1-3
Repeal of ordinance, 1-10
Severability, 1-11
When cffe<:tive, 1-3, 1-l 2
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
Town of Millinocket Affirmative Action
Plan, A 127-1
See also PERSONNEL POLICY
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION OFFICER
Powers and duties, A129-6
Sexual harassment, Al29-6
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Setbacks, 125-74
Shoreland areas, 125-74
Storage, 125-74
AIRPORT
Adoption of rules and regulations,
33-10
Airport Manager, 33-11
Applicability of ordinances, 33-2
Compliance with building construction
regulations, 33-5
Distribution of copies, 33-3
Exclusive use prohibited, 33-9
Fees, 33-6
Licenses, 33-4
Lighting, 125-44
Permits, 33-6
Presumption regarding use of airport
property, 33-1
Promulgation of rules and regulations,
33-3
Radio and electronic devices, 125-44
Smoke, 125-44
Special standards, 125-44
Use of buildings, 33-7
Uses, 33-8
Violations and penalties, 33-12
Zoning, 125-44
AIRPORT MANAGER
Airport, 33-1 J
Appointments, 29-3
Department of Transportation, 29-3
Powers and duties, 29-3, 33-1 l
ALARM SYSTEMS
Appeals, 35-13
Applications for existing systems,
35-15
Burglar and security alann systems,
35-17
Definitions, 35-3
07 - 25-2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
False alanns, 35-11
Fees, 35-6, 35-9
Inspections, 35-8
Municipal fire alarm system, 35-9
Nonemergency alanns, 35-11
Permits, 35-4-35-6, 35-12, 35-16
Prohibited systems, 35-7
Purpose, 35-2
Response to alarm by owner, 35-l 0
Title, 35-1
Violations and penalties, 35-14
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Bottle clubs, 38-1 - 38-14
Entertainment licenses, 65-7
ANCHORING
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-78
Floodplain management, 68-6
Manufactured housing, 68-6
ANIMALS, see DOGS AND OTHER
ANIMALS
APPEALS
Alarm systems, 35-13
Board of Appeals, 5-7
Bottle clubs, 38-11
Building construction, 48-3
Floodplain management, 68-9
Life safety code, 49-5
Manufactured housing, 83-27
Mobile home parks, 83-16
Nonprofit housing facilities service
fees, 66-3
Notices, C1008
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-8
Property maintenance, 50-5
Removal of officers and employees,
Cl008
Summons by courts, C 1005
Zoning, 125-94
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-124,
125-125
APPEALS, BOARD OF, see BOARD OF
APPEALS; ZONING BOARD OF
APPEALS
APPOINTMENTS
Airport Manager, 29-3
Board of Appeals, 5-1, 5-2, C703
Board of Assessment Review, C602
Cemetery Commission, 9-1
Department of Transportation, 29-1
Director of Community Development,
3-10.1
Director of Public Welfare, 3-25
2
Dog Constable, 61 -3
Health Officer, C305
Librarian, 17-10
Library Board of Trustees, 17-2
Nursing Commission, 21-1
Personnel Appeals Board, C 1009
Planning Board, 23-2, C70 l
Recreation Commission, 26-2
Recreation Director, 26-9
Town Assessor, C60 I
Town Manager, C216
Transportation Commission, 29-2
Warrant review and approval, 29A-1
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-122
AREA, YARD AND BULK REGULA ..
TIONS
Campgrounds, 125-48
Conversions, 125-49
Junkyards, 125-55
Mobile home parks, 83-7
Zoning, I 25-50
See also LOTS
-BBANDSTAND
Permits, 42-1 - 42-3, 42-5
Use by nonprofit organizations, 42-1
Violations and penalties, 42-6
Written report of Chief of Police, 42-4
BED-AND-BREAKFAST
Maximum number of rooms and guests,
125-46
Permitted uses, 125-46
Signs, 125-46
Zoning, 125-46
BEREAVEMENT
Personnel policy, Al28-10
BLOODBORNEPATHOGENSCONTROL
Communication ofbiohazardous dangers,
A 130-5
Definitions, A I 30-1
Exposure Control Plan, A130-2
Exposure incident protocol, A 130-4
Hepatitis B, Al30-3, Al30-8
lnfortnatfon and training, A 130-6
Inspections, A 130-2
Investigations, Al30-2
Medical ·recordkeeping, A 130-7
Notices, A 130-2
Records, Al30-4, A130-7
07. 25 -2007
,·.~;D I .
I .~ ; ·
.:.~ #
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Reports, Al30-2, Al30-4
Signs, A 130-5
Storage, A130-2, Al30-5
Tests, A130-3, Al30-4
Violations and penalties, A 130-2
BOARD OF APPEALS
Appeals, 5-7
Appointments, 5-1, 5-2, C703
Budget and explanatory message, 5-6
Compliance with Charter, 5-9
Conflicts of interest, 5-4
Establishment, S-1
Floodplain management, 68-9
Meetings, S-5
Membership, 5-2
Minutes, 5-5
Municipal development, C703
Powers and duties, 5-8, C703
Qualifications, 5-3
Quorum, 5-5
Rules, 5-5
Terms of office, 5-2
Vacancies, 5-2
See also ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
Appointments, C602
Membership, C602
Powers and duties, C603
Salaries and compensation, C602
.Tax administration, C602, C603
Terms of office, C602
Vacancies, C602
BOARD OF EDUCATION
Department of Education, C40 I - C405
Membership, C401
Organization, C404
Powers and duties, C405
Preparation of budget, C405
Qualifications, C402
Quorum, C404
Swearing in, C404
Tenns ofoffice, C401
Vacancies on board, C403
BOILERS, OUTDOOR WOOD, see
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILERS
BONDS
Administration of government, 3-7
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58, 125-81
Officials, C 1011
Zoning, 125-128
3
BOTILE CLUBS
Alcoholic beverages, 38-1 - 38-14
Appeals, 38-11
Definitions, 38-2
Fees, 38-4
Hearings, 38-6
Hours ofopcration, 38-13
Inspections, 38-5
Licenses, 38-1, 38-3 - 38-10, 38-14
Notices, 38-6
Reports, 38-5
Violations and penalties, 38-12
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
Property maintenance, 50-3
BUDGET
Allotments, C507
Budget year, C501
Certification to Town Assessor, C504
Departmental expenditures, C506
DepartmentS, agencies, offices, 7-3
Established appropriations, C503
Fiscal year, C501
Gross appropriations, C506
Hearings, C502
fntcrim expenditures, C509
Notices, C502
Preparation and submission of budget,
C502
Process established, 7-1
Public statement of excesses, C509
School Department, 7-2
Summary, C505
Tax levy established, C504
Transfer of unencumbered appropriations,
C508
Wastewater treatment, 7-3
Work program, C507
BUFFERS
Shoreland areas, 125-76
Zoning, 125-45, 125-47
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
Additions, insertions and changes, 48-3
Adoption of Code by reference, 48-1
Airport, 33-5
Alternative building process requirements,
29A-4
Appeals, 48-3
Building permits, 29A-4, 29A-6
Handicapped accessibility, 29A-6, 48-3
Renovations, 29A-5
Saving clause, 48-7
Violations and penalties, 48-3
Zoning Board of Appeals, 48-3
07-25- 2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
BUILDING PERMITS
Building construction, 29A-4. 29A-6
Conversions. 125-49
Site plan review. 125-104
See also ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES;
LICENSES; PERMITS
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
Fees, 125-116
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
Fees, 12.S-116
BUREAU OF PERMITS AND IN
· sPECTIONS
Division of Engineering, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
-CCAMPGROUNDS
Area, yard and bulk regulations. 125-48
Off-street parking and loading. 125-48
Screening, 125-48
Zoning. 125-48
CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS
Containers, 70-26
Food establishments, 70-26
Vehicles, 70-26
CATS
Dogs, 61-7, 61-14
CEMETERY COMMISSION
Appointments, 9-1
Budget and explanatory message, 9-6
Cemetery Superintendent, 9-7
Chairman, 9-5
Commissions. 3-27 - 3-29
Compliance with Charter, 9-8
Creation of, 3-27
Establishment, 9-1
Meetings, 9-4
Membership, 3-28
Powers and duties, 3-29, 9-3
Qualifications, 9-2
Tenns of office, 9-1
Vacancies, 9-1, 9-5
Vice Chairman, 9-5
CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT
Cemetery Commission, 9-7
Powers and duties, 9-7
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Floodplain management, 68-7
CERTIFICATE OF FLOODPROOFING
Floodplain management, 68-6
4
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
Zoning, 125-114
CHAIRMAN OF TOWN COUNCIL
Town Council, C209
CHARGES, see FEES
CHARTER
Amendments, C 1012
Appeals, C 1008
Bonds of officials, C 1011
Budget, CSO I - C509
Continuance of present administrative
officers, ClOlO
Continuation of ordinances not inconsistent,
C 1007
Department of Education, C40 I - C40S
Existing rights and contracts not affected,
C 1004
General provisions, CIOOI -Cl012
Grant of powers to town, C 102
Incorporation, Cl 0 I
Initiative and referendum, C901 -C90S
Issuance of summons by courts, C 1005
Municipal development, C701 -C703
Nominations and elections, C801 -
C805
Oath of office, CI 006
Removal of officers and employees,
CI008
Tax administration, C60 l - C603
Title, C 1003
Town Council, C201-C219
Town Manager, C301 - C30S
CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR
Administration of government, 3-4
Powers and duties. 3-4
CHIEF OF POLICE
Bandstand, 42-4
Department of Police, 3-14
Powers and duties, 3-14
CIVIL DEFENSE COMMISSION
Commissions, 3-27 - 3-29
Creation of, 3-27
Membership, 3-28
Powers and duties, 3-29
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Floodplain management, 68-5
~Powers and duties, 50-6, 68-5
Property maintenance. 50-6
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Fees, 125-116
Floodplain management, 68-10
Powers and duties, 68-1 o. l 25-119
07 - 25 -2007
(.·;a :9
c• 9
~IILLINOCKET INDEX
Zoning, 125-93- 125-96, 125-116,
125-J19
COMMISSIONS
Administration of government, 3-27 -
3-29
Cemetery Commission, 3-27 - 3-29
Civil Defense Commission, 3-27 - 3-29
Creation of advisory commissions, 3-27
Department of Transportation, 3-27-
3-29
Nursing Commission, 3-27 - 3-29
Recreation Commission, 3-27 - 3-29
COMPENSATION, see SALARIES
AND COMPENSATION
COMPOSITION OF BOARDS, DEPARTMENTS,
ETC., see MEMBERSHIP
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Board of Appeals, 5-4
Transportation Commission, 29-2
Welfare Hearing Board, 30-1
CONVERSIONS
Approval of plans, 125-49
Area, yard and bulk regulations, 125-49
Building pennits, 125-49
Off-street parking and loading, 125-49
Zoning, 125-49
COSTS, see FEES
CRIME PREVENTION DIVISION
Department of Police, 3-15
Powers and duties, 3-15
-DDEFINITIONS
AND ABBREVIATIONS
Abutting, 125-132
Access, 125-132
Access drive, 125-132
Accessory structure, 68-13
Accessory structure or use, 125-132
Acre, 125-132
Act, 104-2
Adequate shelter, 61-2.1
Adjacent grade, 68-13
Administrator, 3-3
Aggrieved party, 125-132
Agriculture, 125-132
Alarm systems, 35-3
Alteration, 125-132
Appeals, 125-132
Applicant, t 04-2
5
Area of a sign, 125-132
Area of special flood hazard, 68-13
Assistant department head, A 128-2
Assistant Secretary, A 130-1
At large, 61-1
Attic, 125-132
Audible alarm system, 35-3
Automobile graveyard, 125-132
Automobile sales lot, 125-132
Automobile service station (filling station),
125-132
Auto repair garage, 125-132
Available to the public, 65-3
Base flood, 68-13
Basement, 68-13, 125-132
Billboard, 125-132
Blood, A 130-1
Bloodbome pathogens, A 130-1
Boat launching facility, 125-132
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen
demand"), 104-2
Bottle clubs, 38-2
Buffers, 125-132
Building, 68-13, 125-132
Building, accessory, 125-132
Building drain, I 04-2
B_uilding front line, 125-132
Building height, 125-132
Building, principal, 125-132
Building sewer, I 04-2
Campgrounds, 125-132
Catering establishments, 70-1
Center, 35-3
Certificate of compliance, 68-13
Chief. 35-3
Chief Administrator, 3-3
Church, 125-132
Clinic, 125-132
Clinical laboratory, A130-t
Cluster development, 125-132
Code Enforcement Officer, 68-13,
125-132
Commercial complex (shopping mall),
125-132
Commercial indoor recreation use,
125-132
Commercial outdoor recreation use,
125-132
Commercial use, 125-132
Condominium, 125-132
Condominium conversion, 125-132
Congregate housing, 125-132
Contaminated, A 130-1
07 -25 . 2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Contaminated laundry, A 130-1
Contaminated sharps, A 13 0-1
Council, 3-3
Dangerous dog, 61-1
Daughter, A131-2
Day-care center, 125-132
Day-care facility, 125-132
Day-care home, 125-132
DBH (diameter at breast height),
125-132
Deck, 125-132
Decontamination, A 130-1
Dedication, 125-132
Department head, A 128-2
Developer, 125-132
Development, 68-13, 125-132
Director, Al30-l
Disseminate, 65-3
Dog, 61-I
Domestic sewer, 104-2
Domestic wastewater, 104-2
Drainage, 125-132
Driver, 115-1
Driveways, 115-1, 125-132
Dwelling, 125-132
Dwelling, multifamily, 125-132
Dwelling, single-family detached,
125-132
Dwelling, two-family, 125-t 32
Dwelling unit, 125-132
Easements, 125-I 3 2
Easily cleanable, 70-1
Eating place, 70-1
Elevated building, 68-13
Elevation certificate, 68-t 3
Eligible employee, A13 l-2
Emergency operations, 125-t 32
Emergency work, Al 28-2
Employee, 70-1
Engineering controls, A 130-1
Enlargement, 125-132
Entertainment, 65-3
EPA, 104-2
Essential services, 125-132
Excessive, I 04-2
Existing, 86-5
Expansion of a structure, 125-132
Expansion of use, 125-13 2
Exposure incident, A 130-1
Extension, 125-132
Exterior property, 50-2
Facilities, 104-2
False alanns, 35-3
6
Family, 125-132
Family and medical leave, A 131-2
Firewood, 86-10 f· Vo:> k~ C \-~,~
Flood, 68-13 ~li"e 0 "
Flood Elevation Study, 68-13 ~ 1 ').
Flooding, 68-13
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM),
68-13
Flood Insurance Study, 68-13
Floodplain, 68-13, 125-132 '
Floodplain management, 68-13 '
Floodplain management regulations,
68-13
Flood-prone area, 68-J 3
Flood proofing, 6 8-13
Floodway, 68-13
Floor area, I 25-132
Flowing water, 125-132
Food processing facility, 125-132
Forested wetland, 125-132
Forest management activities, 125-132
Foundation, 125-132
Freeboard, 68-13
Freestanding sign, l 25-I 32
Freshwater wetland, 125-132
Frontage, road, 125-132
Frontage, shore, 125-132
Front lot line, 125-132
Front yard, 125-132
Full-time employee, A128-2
Functionally dependent use, 68-13
Garage, commercial, J 25-13 2
Garage, residential, 125-132
Garbage, 50-2, 104-2
Grade, 125-132
Great pond, 125-132 ·
Great pond classified GPA, 125-132
Greenhouse, commercial, 125-132
Greenhouse, noncommercial, J 25-132
Grocery store, 125-132
Guest room, 125-132
Handwashing facilities, A 130-1
HBV, Al30-l
Health care provider, Al 31-2
Highway, I 15-1
Historic structure, 68-13
HIV, Al30-l
Home occupations, 125-54, 125-132
Hospital, I 25-132
Hourly waged employee, A 128-2
Immediate family, Al28-10
Impervious surface, 125-132
Incompatible pollutant, 104-2
07-25-2007
,.,.· j' :.·. . '\-:.: .
(~ •
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Individual private campsites, 125-132
Industrial, 125-132
Industrial wastewater, 104-2
Industry, 104-2, 125-132
In existence, 86-5
Invert, 104-2
Junkyards, 125-132
Keeper, 61-1
Kennel, commercial, 125-132
Kennel, noncommercial, 125-132
Knowingly, 65-3
Lakes, 125-132
Level of service, 125-132
Licensed health care professional,
Al30-I
Licensee, 65-3
Loaded pulp truck, 115-7
Loading space, 125-132
Locally established datum, 68-13
Lot area, 125-132
Lot, comer, 125-132
Lot coverage, 125-132
Lot depth, 125-132
Lot line, 125-132
Lots, 125-132
Lowest floor, 68-13
Major flowing waters, 125-132
Manufactured home, 68-13
Manufactured home park or subdivision,
68-13
Manufactured housing, 83-22, 125-132
Marina, 125-132
Material, 65-3
Mean sea level, 68-13
Mineral exploratfon, 125-132
Mineral extraction, 125-132
Minor development, 68-13
Minor flowing waters, 125-132
Mobile food service units, 70-1
Mobile home parks, 83-2, 83-22,
125-132
Mobile homes, 83-2
Mobile home space, 83-2
Modular homes, 125-132
Motor vehicle, 125-132
Motor vehicle, unserviceable, 125-132
Multiunit residential, 125-132
Municipal facilities, 125-132
Municipal system, 35-3
National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NOVO), 68-13
New construction, 68-13
Newer mobile homes, 125-132
7
Nonconformities, 125-26
Normal high-water line, l 2S- l 32
Nonnal maintenance and repair,
125-132
Notices, 50-2
Nursery, commercial, 125-132
Nursing home, 125-132
Obscene, 65-3
Occupant, 50-2
Occupational exposure, A 130-l
Officer, 38-2
Older mobile homes, 125-132
Older mobile homes and trailers, 83-22
One-hundred-year flood, 68-13
Open space use, 125-132
Order, 50-2
Other pctentially infectious materials,
Al30-1
Outdoor wood boiler, 86-10
Owner, 50-2, 61-1, 104-2, 125-132
Parenteral, A 130-1
Parking lot, 125-132
Parking space, 125-132
Part-time employee, A128-2
Pawnbrokers, 90-1
Pedestrian, 115-1
Performance, 65-3
Pennanently connected alarm system,
. 35-3
Permanent piers, docks, wharfs, bridges
and other structures and uses extending
over or beyorid the normal ·
high-water line or within a wetland,
125-132
Pennits, 83-2
Person, 38-2, 50-2, 104-2, 115-1,
125-132
Personal protective equipment, A 130-1
pH, 104-2
Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other
structures and uses extending over
or beyond the normal high-water
line or within a wetland, 125-132
Planned unit development, 125-132
Ponds, 125-132
Populated portions, 121-3
Porch, 125-132
Portable sign, 125-132
Potentially hazardous foods, 70-1
Premises, 50-2
Principal structure, 125-132
Principal use, 125-I 32
Private road, 115-1, 125-132
07 - 25- 2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Production facility, A 130-1
Professional office building, 125-132
Promote, 65-3
Properly shredded garbage, 104-2
Provider, 35-3
Public facility, 125-132
Public road, 125-132
Public sewer, I 04-2
Public utility, 125-132
Rear lot line, 125-132
Rearyard, 125-132
Receiving waters, 104-2
Recent floodplain soils, 125-132
Reconstruction, 125-132
Recreational facility, 125-132
Recreational vehicle, 68-13
Recreational vehicles, 125-132
Regular part-time employee, Al28-2
Regulated waste, Al 30-1
Regulatory floodway, 68-t 3
Replacement system, 125-132
Research facility, 125-132
Research laboratory, Al30-l
Residential dwelling unit, 125-132
Restaurant, 125-132
Retail establishment, 125-132
Right-of-way, 115-1
Riprap, 125-132
River, 125-132
Riverine, 68-13
Road, 125-132
Roadside stand, 125-132
Roadway, 115-1
Roof sign, 125-132
Rubbish, 50-2
Sanitary sewer, I 04-2
Sanitization, 70-1
School, municipal, 125-132
School, private, 125-132
Seasonal employee, A 128-2
Seasoned firewood, 86-10
Serious health condition, AlJl-2
Service drop, 125-132
Service to patrons, 65-3
Setbacks, 125-132
Sewers, 104-2
Sexual harassment, A 129-2
Shoreland areas, 125-132
Side lot line, 125-132
Sidewalks, 115-1
Side yard, 125-132
Sign items, 125-132
Signs, 125-132
8
Single-service articles, 70-1
Slug, 104-2
Son, A13 l-2
Source individual, A 130-1
Special flood hazard area, 68-13
Spill, 104-2
Start of construction, 68-13
State Plumbing Code, 104-2
Sterilize, At30-l
Stop, tl5-I
Stonn drain, 104-2
Storm sewer, 104-2
Stream, l 25-132
Street, 115-1, 125-132
Structure, 68-13, 125-132
Subdivision, 125-132
Substantial damage, 68-13
Substantial improvement, 68-13
Superintendent, 104-2
Suspended solids, I 04-2
Sustained slope, 125-132
Telephonic alarm system or dialer, 35-3
Temporary piers, docks, wharfs,
bridges and other structures and
uses extending over or beyond the
normal high-water line or within a
wetland, 125-132
Temporary sign, 125-132
Temporary use, 125.-J 32
Timber harvesting, 125-l 32
To enlarge, 125-132
To extend, 125-132
Town, 3-3, 104-2, 125-132
Town Council, 3-3
Town Manager, Al28-2
Trailer, 83-2
Transient. 125-132
Transient accommodations I (also referred
to as "bed-and- breakfast"),
125-132
Transient accommodations II (also referred
to as "small inns and boardinghouses"),
125-132
Transient accommodations III (also referred
to as "motels, hotels and
inns"), 125-132
Transient accommodations IV (also referred
to as "motels, hotels and
inns"), 125-132
Transient accommodations V (also referred
to as "motels, hotels and
inns"), 125-132
Transportation facilities, 125-132
07-25 -2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Tributary stream, 125-!32
Unconfined, 61-1
Undertaking establishment, 125-132
Undue hardship, 83-27
Universal precautions, A 130-1
Untreated lumber, 86-10
Use, 125-132
Variances, 68-13, 125-132
Vehicles, 115-1
Vicious dogs, 61-1
Victualer, 70-1
Violation, 68-13
Volume of a sttucture, 125-132
Wall sign, 125-132
Warehousing and storage facility,
125-132
Wastes, 104-2
Wastewater, I 04-2
Wastewater treatment plant, 104-2
Wastewater works, 104-2
Water body, 125-132
Water crossing, 125-13 2
Water-related structure, 125-132
Weapons, 121-3
Well-distributed stand of trees and
other vegetation, 125-76
Wetlands associated with great ponds
and rivers, 125-132
Wholesale business establishment,
125-132
Wildlife, 125-132
Wildlife management practices,
125-132
Window sigri, 125-132
Work practice controls, A I 30-1
Yards, 50-2, 125-132
Zone, 125-132
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT
Administration of government, 3-10.1 -
3-10.3
Director of Community Development,
3-10.1, 3-10.2
Establishment, 3-10.1
Personnel, 3-10.3
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Board of Education, C401 - C405
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Administration of government, 3-11,
3-12
Director of Finance, 3-11
Division of Accounts, 3-12
Division of Assessments, 3-12
9
Division of Licenses, 3-12
Division of Tax Collection, 3-12
Division of the Treasury, 3-12
Divisions of, 3-12
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE
Administration of government, 3-16,
3-17
Division of, 3-J 7
Fire Chief, 3-16
Fire-Fighting Division, 3-17
Fire Prevention Division, 3-17
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Administration of government, 3-18
Town Health Officer, 3-18
DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Administration of government, 3-10
Town Attorney, 3-10
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL
Administration of government, 3-24
Director of Personnel, 3-24
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
Administration of government, 3-14,
3-15
Chief of Police, 3-t 4
Crime Prevention Division, 3-15
Divisions of, 3-15
Investigation Division, 3-15
Patrol Division, 3-15
Radio Division, 3-15
Records Division, 3-15
Traffic Division, 3-15
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE
Administration of government, 3-25,
3-26
Director of Public Welfare, 3-25, 3-26
Establishment, 3-25
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Administration of government, 3-19,
3-20
Director of Public Works, 3-19
Division of Construction Projects, 3·20
Division of Engineering, 3-20
Division of Highways, 3-20
Division of Parks, 3-20
Division of Property Control, 3-20
Division of Sewer Maintenance, 3-20
Divisions of. 3-20
DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASING
Administration of government, 3-21 -
3·22
i;:>elegation of authority, 3-22
Purchasing Agent, 3-21, 3-23
07-25-2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
DEPARTMENT OF RECORDS
Administration of government, 3-13
Town Clerk. 3-13
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Airport Manager, 29-3
Appoinbnents, 29-l
Commissiona, 3-27 - 3-29
Creation of, 3-27
Establishment, 29-1
Membership, 3-28, 29-l
Powers and duties, 3-29
Supervision, 29-1
Transportation Commission, 29-2
DEPOSITS, see FEES
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DE·
VELOPMENT
Appoinbnents, 3-10.1
Department of Community Development,
3-10.1, 3-10.2
Powers and duties, 3-10.2
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Department of Finance, 3-11
Powers and duties, 3-11
DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL
Department of Personnel, 3-24
Powers and duties, 3-24
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WELFARE
Appoinbnent.9, 3-25
Department of Public Welfare, 3-25,
3-26
Powers and duties, 3-26
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Department of Public Works, 3-19
Powers and duties, 3-19
DISCRll\'fiNATION
Personnel policy, A 128-1
DISTRICT NURSE
Absence ot: 21-11
Answering service, 21-11
Benefits, 21-11
Fees, 21 -11
Head Nurse, 21-11
Hours, 21-11
Insurance, 21-11
Liability, 21-11
Nursing Commission, 21-11
Powers and duties, 21-11
Qualifications, 21 -11
DIVISION OF ACCOUNTS
Department of Finance, 3-12
Town Auditor, 3-12
10
DIVISION OF ASSESSMENTS
Department of Finance, 3-12
Tax administration, C601
Town Assessor, 3-12
DIVISION OF CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF ENGINEERING
Bureau of Pennits and Inspections, 3-20
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF LICENSES
Department of Finance, 3-12
Town Clerk, 3-12
DIVISION OF PARKS
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF PROPERTY CONTROL
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF SEWER MAINTENANCE
Department of Public Works, 3-20
Powers and duties, 3-20
DIVISION OF TAX COLLECTION
Department of Finance, 3-12
Tax Collector, 3-12
DIVISION OF THE TREASURY
Department of Finance, 3-12
Town Treasurer, 3-12
DOG CONST ABLE
Appointments, 61-3
Dogs and other animals, 61-3
Powers and duties, 61-3
DOGS
Cats, 61-7, 61-14
Other domestic animals, 61-14
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Adequate shelter required, 61-2.1
Barking or howling, 61-9
Conditions of release, 61 -7
Confinement of certain dogs, 61-8
Definitions, 61-1, 61-2.1
Dog Constable, 6 l-3
Exceptions, 61 -2, 61-IO.l
Food establishments, 70-9
Handicapped persons, 61-10.1
lmpoundment, 61 -S - 61 -7
Keeping of animals, 61-11 - 61-13
07-25-2007
I '
1 .
.
,i. . . •·. .
"'\-· ~
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Licenses, 61-4
Noise, 61-9
On public property, 61-10.l
Other animals prohibited, 61-12
Registration, 61-6
Removal of fecal matter, 61-10.1
Running at large prohibited, 61-2
Swine prohibited, 61-11
Vicious dogs, 61-8
Violations and penalties, 61-10, 61-13
DRAINAGE
Driveways, 125-86
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-52, 125-78
Floodplain management, 68-8
Mobile home parks, 83-5, 83-7
Sewers, l 04-32
Streets and sidewalks, 125-86
DRIVEWAYS
Drainage, 125-86
Grading, 125-45, 125-86
Setbacks, 125-86
Shoreland areas, 125-86
Snow removal, 108-2
Widths, 125-45
Zoning, 125-45
DUMPSTERS
Food establishments, 70-14
DUST
Home occupations, 125-54
Zoning, 125-51
DUTIES, see POWERS AND DUTIES
EASEMENTS
Sewers, l 04-53
-EELECTIONS,
SPECIAL MUNICIPAL
Petitions, 4-1, 4-2
ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE
Home occupations, 125-54
ELECTRICAL PER.l\11T FEES, 125-16
ELECTRICITY
Mobile home parks, 83-12
EMERGENCIES
Alarm systems, 35-11
EMISSION ST AND ARDS
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-6
ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES
Alcoholic beverages, 65-7
Conduct constituting offenses by licensee,
65-8
11
Definitions, 65-3
Fees, 65-6, 65-9
Gambling, 65-7
Hearings, 65-6
Noise, 65-7
Notices, 65-6
Nuisances, 65-7
Obscenity, 65-7
Permits, 65-4 - 65-6, 65-8, 65-9
Prostitution, 65-7
Purpose, 65-2
Tille, 65-1
Violations and penalties, 65-8
See also BUILDING PERMITS; LICENSES;
PERMITS
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION
CONTROL
Anchoring, 125-78
Best-management practices, 125-52
Drainage, 125-52, 125-78
Fences, 125-78
Grading, 125-52
Implementation of plan, 125-52
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58
Shoreland areas, 125-78
Zoning, 125-52
EXCAVATIONS
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58, 125-81
Sewers, 104-22, 104-27
EXPENSES, see FEES
EXPLOSIVES
Zoning, 125-51
-FFALSE
ALARMS
Alann systems, 35-11
Fees, 35-11
Notices, 35-11
FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
Administration, A 131-1 S
Certification, A 131-5
Conflicting opinions of certification,
Al31-7
Definitions, Al 31-2
Denial of restoration to certain employees,
Al31-10
Entitlement to leave, Al31-3
Failure to return to work, A 13 I -12
07-25-2007
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Health benefits, ·maintenance of,
Al31-ll
Intent of policy, A 131-1
Intermittent family and medical leave,
Al31-4
Maintenance of benefits, A 131-13
Notices, Al31-3
Recertification, A 131-8
Responsibilities concerning leave,
Al31-14
Restoration to employment position,
Al3l-9
Second opinion may be required for
certification, A 131-6
Special considerations, A 131-15
FEES
Accessory structures, 125-116
Airport, 33-6
Alarm systems, 35-6, 35-9
Bottle clubs, 38-4
Buildings, demolition of, 125-116
Buildings, moving of, 125-116
Code Enforcement Officer, 125-116
District Nurse, 21-1 I
Electrical, 125-116
Entertainment licenses, 65-6, 65-9
False alarms, 35-t 1
Fences, 125-116
Flood hll7Jlrd areas, 125-116
Floodplain management, 68-4
Food establishments, 70-3, 70-4
Junk dealers, 78-4
Mobile home parks, 83-4
Nonprofit housing facilities service
fees, 66-1 - 66-S
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-4
Pawnbrokers, 90-2
Peddling and soliciting, 97-6
Property maintenance, 50-5
Residential buildings, 125-116
Sewers, 104-14, 104-43-104-47
Signs, 125-116
Site plan review, 125-102, 125-104,
125-106, 125-117
Solid waste, 73-2
Utilities, 125-116
Walls, 125-116
Zoning, 125-115 - 125-118
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-118
FENCES
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-78
Fees, 125- 116
12
Junkyards, 125-55
Zoning, 125-52. l
FINES, see VIOLATIONS AND PENAL
TIES
FIREAR.i'\tlS, see WEAPONS
FIRE CALL BOXES
Snow removal, 108-3
FIRE CHIEF
Department of Fire, 3-16
Powers and duties, 3-16
FIRE-FIGHTING DIVISION
Department of Fire, 3-17
Powers and duties, 3-17
FIRE HYDRANTS
Snow removal, J 08-3
FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION
Department of Fire, 3-17
Powers and duties, 3-17
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Fees, 125-116
FLOOD INSURANCE
Floodplain management, 68-1
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
Floodplain management, 68-1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Accessory structures, 68-6
Anchoring, 68-6
Appeals, 68-9
Areas of special flood hazard, 68-1
Board of Appeals, 68-9
Certificate of compliance, 68-7
Certificate of floodproofing, 68-6
Code Enforcement Officer, 68-5, 68-10
Conflicts with other regulations, 68-12
Definitions, 68-I 3
Development standards, 68-6
Drainage, 68-8
Enforcement, 68-10
Establishment, 68-1
Fees, 68-4
Flood insurance, 68-l
Flood Insurance Study, 68-1
Floodproofing certificates, 68-3
Floodways, 68-6
Hearings, 68-9
Improvements, 68-6
Manufactured housing, 68-6
New construction, 68-3, 68-6
Nonresidential construction, 68-6
Notices, 68-5
Pennits, 68-2 - 68-5
Piers, docks, wharves and bridges, 68-6
Planning Board, 68-5
07-25-2007
\,. .'. ',r a:l·fh-_~..1. i': . ·._ . . ~ ..
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Records, 68-5
Recreational vehicles. 68-6
Residential construction. 68-6 ·
Review of subdivision and development
proposals. 68-8
Sewers. 68-6
Statutory authority. 68-1
Substantial improvements, 68-3
Utilities, 68-8
Variances. 68-9
Violations and penalties, 68-1 O
Walls, 68-6
W atereourses, 68-6
Water supply, 68-6
Word usage, 68-13
Zoning, 125-53
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATES
Floodplain management, 68-3
FLOODWAYS
Floodplain management. 68-6
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Animals prohibited, 70-9
Catering establishments. special requirements,
70-26
Cleaning. 70-6
Cleaning of utensils and food contact
surfaces, 70-19
Common towels and drinking containers
prohibited, 70-22
Compliance with state plumbing and
sewage Jaws, 70-24
Definitions, 70-1
Disposal of garbage and rubbish, 70-14
Dumpsters, 70-14
Exceptions, 70-9
Fees, 70-3, 70-4
Floors and walls, 70-10
Hot and cold running water required,
70-20
Insect control, 70-18
Lavatories, 70-21
Licenses, 70-2 - 70-4, 70-28
Lighting, 70-16
Mobile food service units, special requirements,
70-25
Notices, 70-5
Nuisances, 70-14
Outside food service, 70-27
Persons with communicable diseases
70~ •
Poisonous materials, 70-13
Protection of food from contamination,
70-11
13
Sanitation of premises, 70-6
Screening, 70-18
Serving utensils, 70-12
Sewage and refuse disposal, 70-23
Sinks, 70-19
Sleeping equipment, 70-7
Soiled linen and employee clothing,
70-8
Storage, 70-8, 70-11, 70-13, 70-14
Ventilation, 70-17
Vermin control, 70-15
FUNCTIONS, see POWERS AND DUTIES
-GGAMBLING
Entertainment licenses, 65-7
GARAGE SALES, ~·ee SALES
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
Food establishments, 70-14
Mobile home parks. 83-10
Property maintenance, 50-4
Storage, 50-4
See also SOLID WASTE
GENERAL ASSISTANCE, see CH. 75;
WELFARE HEARING BOARD
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Adoption of Code, 1-1 - 1-12
GLARE
Home occupations, 125-54
Zoning, 125-51
GOOD ORDER, ~·ee PEACE AND
GOOD ORDER
GRADING
Driveways, 125-45, 125-86
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-52
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58, 125-81
Streets and sidewalks, 125-86
GRANITE STREET SCHOOL
DRIVEWAY
Parking, 115-14
Vehicles and traffic, 115-9
GRASS, ~·ee BRUSH, GRASS AND
. WEEDS
GRIEVANCES
Personnel policy, A 128-15
GUARANTIES
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58, 125-81
05 -01 - 2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Zoning. 125-126 - 125-130
GUNS, see WEAPONS
-HHABITAT
PROTECTION OVERLAY
ZONE
Permitted uses, 125-39
Zoning, 125-39. I
HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBILITY
Building construction, 29A-6, 48-3
HANDICAPPED PARKING
Agreements for policing, J 15-23
Extended parking allowed. 115-22
Parking stalls designated, I J 5-20
Special registration plate required.
J 15-21
Vehicles and traffic, 115-20- 115-23
Violations and penalties, 115-22
See also OFF-STREET PARKING
AND LOADING; PARKING;
PUBLIC PARKING LOTS
HANDICAPPED PERSONS
Dogs and other animals, 61-10.1
HARDSHIP
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-8
HAZARDOUS WASTES
Solid waste, 73-3. 73-9
Zoning, 125-72
HEALTH OFFICER
Appointments, C305
Town Manager, C305
HEARINGS
Bottle clubs, 38-6
Budget. C502
Entertainment licenses. 65-6
Floodplain management, 68-9
Initiative and referendum, C90J, C903
Manufactured housing, 83-27
Petitions, 4-1, 4-2
Site plan review, 125-104, 125-JOS
Town Council, C2 I 3
Zoning, 125-95
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125- I 24
HEIGHT REGULATIONS
Junkyards, 125-55
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-6
Signs, 125-70
Wind turbines, 123-4
Zoning, 125-50
14
HEPATITIS B
Bloodbome pathogens control, A 130-3,
Al30-8
Vaccine declination (mandatory),
AIJ0-8
HOLIDAYS
Personnel policy, A 128-6
HOME OCCUPATIONS
Adverse impacts, 125-54
Definitions, 125-54, 125-132
Dust, 125-54
Electrical interference, 125-54
Glare, 125-54
Home deliveries, 125-54
Inspections, 125-54
Noise, 125-54
Odors, 125-54
Off-street parking and loading, 125-54
Pcrfonnancc standards, 125-54
Permits. 125-54
Registration, 125-54
Sales, 125-54
Signs, 125-54
Smoke, 125-54
Storage, outdoor, 125-54
Vehicles, 125-54
Vibration, 125-54
Zoning, 125-54
-1-
IMPOUNDMENT
Dogs and other animals, 61-5 - 61-7
Vicious dogs, 61-8
IMPROVEMENTS
Floodplain management, 68-6
Zoning, 125-126
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITES
Shore land areas, J 25-80
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Enactment of ordinance by initiative,
C903
Form of ballot, C904
Hearings, C90 I, C903
Petition for overrule of Council action,
C901
Recall, C905
Referendum reconsideration limited,
C906
Submission by Council of proposition
to popular vote, C902
05. 01 • 2011 ,.
\l
tJii.\
~
MILLINOCKET INDEX
INSPECTIONS
Alarm systems, 35-8
Bloodbomc pathogens control, A 130-2
Bottle clubs, 38-5
Building construction, 48-2
Home occupations, I 25-54
Junk dealers, 78-1
Mobile home parks, 83-I 4
Private sewage disposal, I 04-9
Sewers, 104-26, 104-51
Zoning, 125-130
INSURANCE
District Nurse, 21-11
Vicious dogs, 61-8
INVESTIGATION DIVISION
Department of Police, 3-15
Powers and duties, 3-15
INVESTIGATIONS
Bloodbome pathogens control, A 130-2
Pawnbrokers, 90-3
Shoreland areas, 125-89
-J -
JACOB ENGINE BRAKES
Use prohibited, I I 5-25
Vehicles and traffic, 115-25
Violations and penalties, 115-25
JUNK DEALERS
Definitions, 78-2
Fees, 78-4
Inspections, 78-1
Licenses, 78-1 - 78-7
Records, 78-1
JUNKYARDS
Arca, yard and bulk regulations, 125-55
Fences, I 25-55
Height regulations, 125-55
Open burning, 125-55
Permits, I 25-55
Screening, 125-55
Setbacks, 125-55
Site plan approval, 125-55
Storage, 125-55
Vehicles, 125-55
Zoning, 125-55
-LLANDSCAPING
Building construction, 48-2 I
15
Zoning, 125-68
LAND USE STANDARDS
Zoning, 125-42 - 125-72
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Personnel policy, A 128-8, A 128-1 1,
Al28-13, Al28-14
LIABILITY
District Nurse, 21-1 I
Sewers, I 04-57
Vicious dogs, 61-8
LIBRARIAN
Absence of, 17-14
Appointments, 17-10
Library Board of Trustees, 17-9 -
17-11,17-14
Powers and duties, 17-14
Qualifications, 17-14
Removal of, 17-I 1
Secretary of Board, 17-9
Tcnnsofoffice, 17-10
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Appointments, 17-2
Budget and explanatory message, 17-12
Compliance with Charter, 17-13
Establishment of Millinocket Memorial
Library, 17-1
Librarian, 17-9-17-1 1, 17-14
Meetings, I 7-6
Membership, 17-2
N oticcs, 17-6
Powers and duties, 17-4
Qualifications, 17-3
Quorum, I 7-6
Rules of procedure, 17-8
Salaries and compensation, 17-5
Terms ofoffice, 17-2
Vacancies, 17-7
LICENSES
Airport, 33-4
Bottle clubs, 38-1, 38-3 - 38-10, 38-14
Dogs and other animals, 61-4
Food establishments, 70-2 - 70-4,
70-28
Junk dealers, 78-1 - 78-7
Mobile food service units, 70-25
Pawnbrokers, 90-2 - 90-4, 90-7
Peddling and soliciting, 97-2 -97-9
See also BUILDING PERMITS; ENTERTAINMENT
LICENSES;
PERMITS
LIFE SAFETY CODE
Additions, insertions and changes, 49-3
Adoption of code, 49-1
05 - 01 -2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Appeals. 49-5
Conflict with other ordinances, 49-2
Enforcement and legal action, 49-4
Violations and penalties. 49-6
LIGHTING
Airport, 125-44
Food establishments, 70-16
Mobile home parks, 83-9
Signs, 125-70
Wind turbines, 123-4
Zoning, 125-57
LOADING ZONES
Vehicles and traffic, 115-12
LOTS
Nonconfonnitics, 125-31
Shorcland areas, I 25-82
Wind turbines, I 23-4
Zoning, 125-61
See also AREA, YARD AND BULK
REGULATIONS
-MMANUFACTURED
HOUSING
Amendments, 83-29
Anchoring, 68-6
Appeals, 83-27
Applicability, 83-21
Conflict with other provisions, 83-30
Definitions, 83-22, 125-132
Enforcement, 83-28
Floodplain management, 68-6
Hearings, 83-27
Housing standards, 83-26
Location of substandard housing restricted,
83-24
Nonconforming structures, 83-25
Notices, 83-28
Nuisances, 83-28
Permits, 83-23
Purpose, 83-19
Records, 83-28
Statutory authority, 83-20
Variances, 83-27
Violations and penalties, 83-28
See also MOBILE HOME PARKS
MEETINGS
Board of Appeals, 5-5
Cemetery Commission, 9-4
Library Board of Trustees, 17-6
Nursing Commission, 21-10
Planning Board, 23-S
16
Recreation Commission, 26-7
Town Council, C208, C2 IO
Warrant review and approval, 29A-2,
29A-6
MEMBERSHIP
Board of Appeals, 5-2
Board of Assessment Review, C602
Board of Education, C40 I
Cemetery Commission, 3-28
Civil Defense Commission, 3-28
Department of Transportation, 3-28,
29-1
Library Board of Trustees. 17-2
Nursing Commission, 3-28, 21-2
Personnel Appeals Board, Cl 009
Planning Board, 23-2
Recreation Commission, 3-28, 26-2
Town Council, C201
Transportation Commission, 29-2
Welfare Hearing Board, 30-1
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-122
MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION
Bonds, 125-58, 125-81
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-58
Excavations, 125-58, 125-81
Grading, 125-58, 125-81
Guaranties, I 2.S-58, 125-81
Penni ts, 125-81
Screening, 125-58
Shoreland areas, 125-81
Storage, 125-58
Topsoil, 125-58, 125-81
Zoning, 125-58
MINORS
Pawnbrokers, 90-5
MINUTES
Board of Appeals, 5-5
Planning Board, 23-5
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-122
See also RECORDS
MOBILE FOOD SERVICE UNITS
Food establishments, 70-25
Licenses, 70-25
Sales, 70-25
Storage, 70-25
Water supply, 70-25
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Additions lo and skirting on mobile
homes, 83-13
Appeals, 83-16
Arca requirements, 83-6
05-01-2011
··e··
·..-. ...~ , \ . ~
• "• I
'. •..: ..
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Arca, yard and bulk regulations, 83-7
Definitions, 83-2, 83-22, 125-132
Drainage, 83-5, 83-7
Electricity, 83-12
Fees, 83-4
Garbage, rubbish and refuse, 83-10
High slandards lo prevail, 83-17
Inspections, 83-14
Lighting, 83-9
Location requirements, 83-5
Mobile homes, 83-3, 125-60
Noise, 83-5
Nonconforming uses, 83-15
Occupied trailers prohibited, 83-3
Odors, 83-5
Parking, 83-7
Permits, 83-4
Plumbing, 83-10
Proximity to dumps or swamps, 83-5
Purpose, 83-1
Registration of occupants, 83-1 1
Right of entry, 83-14
Sanitation requirements, 83-10
Setbacks, 83-7
Sewage disposal, 83-10
Space requirements for mobile homes,
83-7
Streets and sidewalks, 83-8, 83-9
Violations and penalties, 83-18
Water supply, 83-10
Zoning, 125-59
See also MANUFACTURED HOUSING
MOBILE HOMES
Mobile home parks, 83-3, 125-60
Parking, 125-60
Penni ts, 125-60
Sales, 125-60
Zoning, 125-60
MOTOR VEHICLE, see VEHICLES
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT
Board of Appeals, C703
Planning Board, C70 I
Zoning Ordinance, C702
-NNOISE
Dogs and other animals, 61-9
Entertainment licenses, 65-7
Home occupations, 125-54
Mobile home parks, 83-5
17
Wind turbines, 123-4
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Activity restricted at voting places,
C906
Conduct and management of elections,
C803
Election officials, C805
Municipal elections, C801
Qualification for nomination, C802
Voting places, C804
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Reconstruction or replacement, 125-28
Relocation, 125-28
Setbacks, 125-28
NONCONFORMING USES
Mobile home parks, 83-15
Nonconfonnitics, 125-30
See a/su PERMITTED USES; PROHIBITED
USES
NON CON FORM ITI ES
Definitions, 125-26
Existing nonconforming mobile homes,
125-29
General provisions, 125-27
Nonconforming lots, 125-31
Nonconforming structures, 125-28
Nonconforming uses, 125-30
Zoning, 125-26- 126-31
NONEMERGENCY ALARMS, see
FALSE ALARMS
NONPROFIT HOUSING FACILITIES
SERVICE FEES
Appeals, 66-3
Collection of unpaid fees, 66-4
Fees, 66-1 - 66-5
NOTICES
Appeals, CI 008
Bloodbome pathogens control, Al30-2 '
Bottle clubs, 38-6
Budget, C502
Entertainment licenses, 65-6
False alanns, 35-11
Family Medical Leave Policy, A 131-3
Floodplain management, 68-5
Food establishments, 70-5
Library Board of Trustees, 17-6
Manufactured housing, 83-28
Personnel policy, A 128-11
Property maintenance, 50-5
Sewers, I 04-26, I 04-35, I 04-55
Sexual harassment, A 129-6
Site plan review, 125-104, 125-105
Solid waste, 73-21
05 - 01 - 2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Town Council, C2 I 3
Vicious dogs, 61-8
Wind turbines, 123-4
Zoning, 125-95
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-124
NUISANCES
Entertainment licenses, 65-7
Food establishments, 70-14.
Manufactured housing, 83-28
Signs, 125-70
NURSING COMMISSION
Appointments, 21-1
Budget and explanatory message, 21-8
Commissions, 3-27 - 3-29
Compliance with Charter, 21-9
Creation of, 3-27
District Nurse, 21-11
Establishment, 21-1
Meetings, 21-10
Membership, 3-28, 21-2
Powers and duties, 3-29, 21-5, 21-7
Qualifications, 21-3
Quorum, 21-10
Salaries and compensation, 21-6
Terms of office, 21-2
Vacancies, 2 1-4
-0-
0BSTRUCTIONS
Parking, 115-13
ODORS
Home occupations, 125-54
Mobile home parks, 83-S
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-7
Zoning, 125-5 I
OFFENSES, see VIOLATIONS AND
PENALTIES
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Applicability limited, 125-64
Campgrounds, 125-48
Conversions, 125-49
Home occupations, 125-54
Location on other property, 125-64
Shading of parking areas, 125-64
Space requirements, 125-64
Trees, 125-64
Zoning, 125-63, 125-64
See also HANDICAPPED PARKING;
PARKING; PUBLIC PARKING
LOTS
18
ONE-WAY STREETS
Vehicles and traffic, 115-12
ON-SITE CIRCULATION
Zoning, 125-66
OPEN BURNING
Junkyards, 125-55
OPEN SPACE
Zoning, 125-66
OUTDOOR STORAGE, see STORAGE,
OUTDOOR
OUTDOOR WOOD BOILERS
Appeals, 86-8
Definitions, 86-5, 86-10
Emission standards, 86-6
Existing outdoor wood boilers, 86-S
Fees, 86-4
Hardship, 86-8
Height regulations, 86-6
Legislative intent and findings, 86-3
Odors, 86-7
Permits, 86-4, 86-5
Scvcrability, 86-11
Specific requirements, 86-6
Statement of purpose, 86-2
Suspension of permit, 86-7
Title, 86-1
Violations and penalties, 86-7, 86-9
Waivers, 86-8
OUTSIDE FOOD SERVICE
Food establishments, 70-27
-PPARKING
Counseling center on Katahdin Avenue,
115-15
Garbage collection vehicles, 73-23
General parking restrictions, 115-13
Granite Street School driveway, 115-14
Mobile home parks, 83-7
Mobile homes, 125-60
No parking anytime, 115-16
No parking certain hours, 115-18
Obstructions, 115-13
Restricted certain months, 115-19
Shorcland areas, 125-83
Snow removal, 115-13
Streets and sidewalks, 115-13
Ti me limit parking, 115-17
Vehicles and traffic, I 15-2 - 115-6,
115-13 - 115-23
05 · 01-2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
See also HANDICAPPED PARKING;
OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING; PUBLIC PARKING
LOTS
PATROL DIVISION
Department of Police. 3-15
Powers and duties. 3-15
PAWNBROKERS
Definitions. 90-1
Fees. 90-2
Investigations, 90-3
Licenses, 90-2 - 90-4, 90-7
Minors, 90-5
Receipt of articles from certain persons
prohibited, 90-5
Reports, 90-3
Violations and penalties, 90-6
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
Throwing of objects, 94-1, 94-2
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Fees, 97-6
Goods, wares and merchandise offered
for sale to limited, 97-14
Licenses, 97-2- 97-9
Nonapplicability, 97-13
Responsibilities oflicensee, 97-15
Retained authority over public property,
97-1 I
Size of operation limited, 97-12
Violations and penalties, 97-10
PENALTIES9 see VIOLATIONS AND
PENALTIES
PERFORMANCE BONDSt see BONDS
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY9 see
GUARANTIES
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Home occupations, 125-54
PERMITS
Airport, 33-6
Alarm systems, 35-4 - 35-6, 35-12,
35-16
Bandstand, 42-1 - 42-3, 42-5
Entertainment licenses, 65-4 - 65-6,
65-8, 65-9
Floodplain management, 68-2 - 68-5
Home occupations, 125-54
Junkyards, 125-55
Manufactured housing, 83-23
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-81
Mobile home parks, 83-4
Mobile homes, 125-60
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-4, 86-5, 86-7
19
Private sewage disposal, 104-8
Sewers, 104-13, 104-14
Signs, 125-116
Site plan review. 125-109
Storage, 125-65
Transfer station, 73-6
Zoning, 125-93 - 125-96, 125-116
See also BUILDING PERMITS; ENTERTAINMENT
LICENSES; LICENSES
PERMITTED USES
Bed-and-breakfast, 125-46
Habitat Protection Overlay Zone,
125-39. I
Zoning, 125-38
See also NONCONFORMING USES;
PROHIBITED USES
PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD
Appointments, CI 009
Membership, Cl009
PERSONNEL POLICY
Absence from work, A 128-1 1
Administration, A 128-1
Amendments, A 128-1
Benefits. A 128-17
Bereavement, A 12 8-10
Business and travel reimbursement,
A128-20
Call-in, A 128-9
Computer usage, A 128-21
Definitions, A 128-2, A 128-10
Disciplinary procedures, A 128-5
Discrimination, A 128-1
Employment and promotion, A 128-3
Grievances, A 128-15
Holidays, A 128-6
Leave of absence without pay, A 128-13
Military leave and jury duty, Al28-14
Notices, A 128-11
Overtime, Al28-16
Probationary employees, A 128-4
Purpose, A 128-1
Relationship fo union contracts,
Al28-18
Sick leave, A 128-8
Termination of services, Al28-12
Training and career development,
A 128-19
Vacations, A 128-7
See also AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
PETITIONS
Council review, 4-3
Elections, special municipal, 4-1, 4-2
OS-01 - 2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Hearings, 4-1, 4-2
Petitions filed pursuant to Charter sections
C90 I and C903, 4-1 - 4-3
Referendum, 4-1, 4-2
Section C90 I petitions, 4-I
Section C903 petitions, 4-2
Town Council, 4-3
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS AND
BRIDGES
Shore land areas, I 25-84
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES AND
BRIDGES
Floodplain management, 68-6
PLANNING BOARD
Appointments, 23-2, C70 J
Chairman and Secretary, 23-3
Disqualification from voting. 23-4
Establishment, 23-1
Floodplain management, 68-5
Meetings, 23-5
Membership, 23-2
Minutes, 23-5
Municipal development, C70 I
Other offices, 23-3
Planning Board Chairman, 23-3
Powers and duties, 23-6, 68-5, C701
Quorum, 23-5
Site plan review, 125-97- 125-113
Terms of office, 23-2, 23-3
Vacancies, 23-2
PLANNING BOARD CHAIRMAN
Planning Board, 23-3
Terms of office, 23-3
PLANNING BOARD SECRET ARV
Planning Board, 23-3
Terms ofoffice, 23-3
PLUMBING
Food establishments, 70-24
Mobile home parks, 83-10
POLLUTION LEVELS
Zoning, 125-67
POWERS AND DUTIES
Affinnativc Action Officer, Al29-6
Airport Manager, 29-3, 33-J I
Board of Appeals, 5-8, C703
Board of Assessment Review, C603
Board of Education, C405
Bureau of Penni ts and Inspections, 3-20
Cemetery Commission, 3-29, 9-3
Cemetery Superintendent, 9-7
Chief Administrator, 3-4
Chief of Police, 3-14
Civil Defense Commission, 3-29
20
Code Enforcement Officer, 50-6, 68-5,
68-IO, 125-J 19
Crime Prevention Division, 3-1 S
Department of Transportation, 3-29
Director of Community Development,
3-10.2
Director of Finance, 3-11
Director of Personnel, 3-24
Director of Public Welfare, 3-26
Director of Public Works, 3-19
District Nurse, 21-11
Division of Construction Projects, 3-20
Division of Engineering, 3-20
Division of Highways, 3-20
Division of Parks, 3-20
Division of Property Control, 3-20.
Division of Sewer Maintenance, 3-20
Dog Constable, 61-3
Fire Chief, 3-16
Fire-Fighting Division, 3-17
Fire Prevention Division, 3-17
Investigation Division, 3-15
Librarian, J 7-14
Library Board of Trustees, 17-4
Nursing Commission, 3-29, 21-5, 21-7
Patrol Division, 3-1 S
Planning Board, 23-6, 68-5, C70 I
Purchasing Agent; 3-21, 3-23
Radio Division, 3-15
Records Division, 3-JS
Recreation Commission, 3-29, 26-S
Recreation Director, 26-9
Tax Co Hector, 3-12
Town Assessor, 3-12, C601
Town Attorney, 3-10
Town Auditor, 3-12
Town Clerk, 3-12, 3-13
Town Council, 4-3, C203, C204
Town Council Chairman, C209
Town Health Officer, 3-18
Town Manager, C302
Town Treasurer, 3-12
Traffic Division, 3-15
Transportation Commission, 29-2
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-123
PRINCIPAL USE, see PERMITTED
USES
PRJV A TE SEW AGE DISPOSAL
Additional requirements, J 04-12
Connection to public sewer when available,
104-10
Inspections, 104-9
Permits, 104-8
05 - 01 - 2011
(
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Responsibility of owner for operation
and maintenance, I 04-11
Sewers, 104-5, 104-7- 104-12
When private facilities allowed, I 04-7
PROHIBITED USES
Zoning, 125-39
See also NONCONFORMING USES;
PERMl1TED USES
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Appeals, 50-5
Brush, grass and weeds, 50-3
Code Enforcement Officer, 50-6
Definitions, 50-2
Exterior property areas, 50-3
Fees, 50-5
Garbage, rubbish and refuse, 50-4
Notices, 50-5
Orders, 50-5
Sanitation, 50-3
Vehicles, 50-3
Violations and penalties, 50-7
PROSTITUTION
Entertainment licenses, 65-7
PUBLIC HEARINGS, see HEARINGS
PUBLIC NOTICES, see NOTICES
PUBLIC PARKING LOTS
Exiting, 115-5
Manner of parking, 115-3
Snow removal, I l 5-4
Time limit parking established and indicated,
115-2
Vehicles and traffic, 115-2 - 115-6
Violations and penalties, 115-6
See also HANDICAPPED PARKING;
OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING; PARKING
PUBLIC UTILITY, see UTILITIES
PURCHASING AGENT
Department of Purchasing, 3-21, 3-23
Powers and duties, 3-21, 3-23
-QQUALIFICATIONS
Board of Appeals, 5-3
Board of Education, C402
Cemetery Commission, 9-2
District Nurse, 21-1 I
Librarian, 17-14
Library Board of Trustees, 17-3
Nominations and elections, C802
Nursing Commission, 21-3
21
Recreation Commission, 26-3
Recreation Director, 26-9
Town Council, C202, C207
Town Manager, C301
QUORUM
Board of Appeals, 5-5
Board of Education, C404
Library Board of Trustees, 17-6
Nursing Commission, 21-10
Planning Board, 23-5
Recreation Commission, 26-7
Town Council, C2 IO
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-122,
125-124
-RRADIO
DIVISION
Department of Police, 3-15
Powers and duties, 3-15
RECORDS
Bloodbomc pathogens control, A 130-4,
Al30-7
Floodplain management, 68-5
Junk dealers, 78-1
Manufactured housing, 83-28
Site plan review, 125-1 IO
Town Council, C214 ·
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-124
See also MINUTES
RECORDS DIVISION
Department of Police, 3-15
Powers and duties, 3-15
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Floodplain management, 68-6
Zoning, 125-60
RECREATION AREAS
Vehicles and traffic, 115-9
RECREATION COMMISSION
Appointments, 26-2
Commissions, 3-27 - 3-29
Compliance with Charter, 26-8
Creation of, 3-27
Establishment, 26-1
Meetings, 26-7
Membership, 3-28, 26-2
Powers and duties, 3-29, 26-5
Qualifications, 26-3
Quorum, 26-7
Recreation Director, 26-9
Salaries and compensation, 26-6
Terms of office, 26-2
MJLLINOCKET INDEX
Vacancies, 26-4
RECREATION DIRECTOR
A bscnce, 26-9
Appointments, 26-9
Powers and duties, 26-9
Qualifications, 26-9
Recreation Commission, 26-9
Removal, 26-9
Terms of office, 26-9
RECYCLING
Solid waste, 73-2
REFERENDUM
Petitions, 4-1, 4-2
REGISTRATION
Dogs and other animals, 61-6
Home occupations, 125-54
Mobile home parks, 83-11
Vicious dogs, 61-8
REGULAR MEETINGS, see MEETINGS
REPORTS
Bandstand, 42-4
Bloodbomc pathogens control, A 130-2,
Al30-4
Bottle clubs, 38-5
Pawnbrokers, 90-3
Sewers, 104-4 I
Seitual harassment, A 129-4
Shorcland areas, 125-89
Site plan review, 125-104
Zoning, 125-96
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
Fees, 125-116
RESPONSIBILITIES, see POWERS
AND DUTIES
RIGHT OF ENTRY
Mobile home parks, 83-14
Sewers, I 04-51
-SSALARIES
AND COMPENSATION
Board of Assessment Review, C602
Library Board of Trustees, 17-5
Nursing Commission, 21-6
Recreation Commission, 26-6
Town Council, 27-1 -27-6, C205
Town Council Chairman, C209
SALES
Garage sales, 125-54
Home occupations, 125-54
Mobile food service units, 70-25
22
Mobile homes, 125-60
Yard sales, 125-54
SANITATION
Property maintenance, 50-3
SCHEDULE OF USES
Zoning, I 25-36 - I 25-4 I
SCHOOL BOARD, see BOARD OF
EDUCATION
SCHOOL DEPARTMENT
Budget, 7-2
SCREENING
Food cstabl ishments, 70-18
Junkyards, 125-55
Mineral citploration and extraction,
125-58
Zoning, 125-47
SEPTIC TANKS, see PRIVATE SEWAGE
DISPOSAL; SEWERS
SETBACKS
Agricultural activities, 125-74
Driveways, 125-86
Junkyards, 125-55
Mobile home parks, 83-7
Nonconforming structures, 125-28
Shore land areas, I 25-76
Streets and sidewalks, 125-86
Wind turbines, 123-4
Zoning, 125-50
SEWERS
Annual report by industrial user, l 04-41
Applicant agreement required, l 04-40
Basis for rates, 104-43
Billing, l 04-46
Building sewers and connections,
104-13 - 104-29
Collection, 104-47
Community disposal system required
for future developments, 104-28
Connection of building sewer to public
sewer, I 04-25
Connection to public sewer required,
·104-6
Construction materials, I 04-23
Construction of community disposal
system, r 04-29
Damage to facilities prohibited, 104-49
Definitions, 104-2
Discharge of unpolluted drainage,
104-32
Disposal of unpolluted waters prohibited,
104-30
Easements, I 04-53
Excavations, I 04-22, I 04-27
05-01 -2011
• .
':.·
,e· I .
~.
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Factors to be included in rates, 104-44
Failure to pay, 104-46
Federal penalties, I 04-54
Fees, 104-14, 104-43- 104-47
Floodplain management, 68-6
Food establishments, 70-23, 70-24
General provisions, I 04-1, I 04-2
Grease, oil and sand interceptors,
104-34
Indemnification by town, I 04-52
Industrial wastes measurements and
analyses, I 04-48
Inspections, 104-26, I 04-51
Jointing methods and materials, 104-24
Liability, 104-57
Lifting of sewage to discharge to building
sewer, I 04-21
Location of building sewer, 104-20
Maintenance of pretreatment facility,
104-37
Measurement, test and analysis standards,
I 04-39
Miscellaneous provisions, I 04-48 -
104-53
Mobile home parks, 83-10
Monitoring and control manhole required,
104-38
Notices, I 04-26, I 04-35, 104-55
Observance of company safety rules,
104-52
Permits, 104-13, 104-14
Pipe laying and backfill, 104-22
Plan of sewers, I 04-50
Private sewage disposal, 104-5, 104-7 -
104-12
Prohibited wastes, 104-33
Purpose, 104-1
Rebate of surplus, I 04-45
Responsibilities of owner, I 04-15
Restoration of property, 104-27
Right of entry, I 04-S I
Right of town to make assessments,
104-16
Right to levy sewer use charge, I 04-15
Separate sewers required, 104-17
Sewer system use charges, I 04-43 -
104-47
Shorcland areas, 125-87
Size and slope, 104-19
Special agreements, I 04-42
Subsoil drains, 104-31
Surcharges, I 04-43
Town control over discharges, I 04-36
23
Unlawful discharge, 104-4
Unsanitary disposal methods, 104-3
Use of old sewers restricted, 104-18
Use of public sewers required, 104-3 -
104-6
Use regulations, I 04-30 - I 04-42
Violations and penalties, I 04-54 -
104-57
Zoning, 125-72
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
A ffirmativc Action Officer, A 129-6
Duties of implementation, A 129-6
Notices, A 129-6
Protection, A 129-5
Purpose, A 129-1
Reporting, A 129-4
Violations and penalties, A 129-7
When prohibited, A 129-3
SHORELAND AREAS
Agricultural activities, 125-74
Applicability, 125-73
Archaeological sites, 125-75
Buffers, 125-76
Clearing of vegetation for development,
125-76
Commercial and industrial uses, 125-77
Definitions, 125-32, 125-76
Driveways, 125-86
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-78
Essential services, 125-79
Individual private campsites, 125-80
Investigations, 125-89
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-81
Minimum lot standards, 125-82
Parking, 125-83
Piers, docks, wharfs and bridges,
125-84
Reports, 125-89
Selective cutting of trees, 125-76
Septic waste disposal, 125-87
Setbacks, 125-76
Signs, 125-88
Soils, 125-89
Stormwater runoff, 125-90
Streets and sidewalks, 125-86
Timber harvesting, 125-91
Water quality, 125-92
Zoning, 125-73 - I 25-92
05 - 01 - 2011
MILLINOCKET INDEX
SIDEWALKS, !i'ee STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS
SIGNS
Bed-and-breakfast, 125-46
Bloodbome pathogens control, A I 30-5
Confonnance, 125-70
Exempt, 125-70
F ces, l 25-1 16
Height regulations, 125-70
Home occupations, 125-54
Lighting, 125-70
Nuisances, 125-70
On-premises signs, 125-70
Permits, 125-116
Prohibited signs, 125-70
Requirements, 125-70
Shoreland areas, 125-88
Temporary signs, 125-70
Throughways, 1 15-1 I
Wind turbines, 123-4
Zoning, 125-70
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Access to site and records, 125-110
Activities not requiring review, 125-99
Activities requiring review, 125-98
Additional information required of major
developments, 125-I03
Application, 125-102
Building permits, 125-104
Classification of projects, 125-IOO
Criteria, 125-111
Expiration of approvals, 125-108
Failure to act, 125-107
Fees, 125-102, 125-104, 125-106,
125-117
Hearings, 125-104, 125-105
Notices, 125-104, 125-105
Permits, 125-109
Planning Board, 125-97- 125-113
Professional review, 125-106
Prohibition, 125-101
Purpose, 125-97
Reports, 125-104
Review procedures, 125-104
Waiver of review criteria, 125-113
Waiver of submission requirements,
125-112
Zoning, 125-95, 125-97 - 125-113,
125-117
SMOKE
Airport, 125-44
Home occupations, 125-54
24
SNOW REMOVAL
Deposit of snow after plowing, I 08-1
Fire call boxes, I 08-3
Fire hydrants. 108-3
Parking, 115-13
Public parking lots, 115-4
Storage of snow removed from driveways,
108-2
Streets and sidewalks, I 08-1 - I 08-4
Violations and penalties, I 08-4
SOLICITING, see PEDDLING AND
SOLICITING .
SOLID WASTE
Construction debris, 73-1 1
Dcfi ni tions, 73-l
Deposit of noxious materials of streets
prohibited, 73-21
Deposit of refuse on private property,
73-24
Dredge spoils, 73-17
Enforcement, 73-26
Fees, 73-2
Hazardous waste, 73-3, 73-9
Hot loads, 73-12 ·
Land clearing debris, 73-13
Limitation on disposal, 73-20
Liquid waste, 73-18
Miscellaneous provisions, 73-21 -
73-26
Notices, 73-21
Parking of garbage collection vehicles,
73-23
Recycling, 73-2
Refuse on public lands prohibited,
73-22
Removal by town, 73-21
Sludge, 73-14
Solid waste management, 73-1 - 73-5
Special waste, 73-10
Storage and transfer facilities, 73-2
Tires, 73-19
Use of transfer station, 73-6 - 73-8
Violations and penalties, 73-25
White goods, 73-15
Woodwastcs, 73-16
Zoning, 125-72
See also GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND
REFUSE
OS- 01 - 2011
.-,.·.· .•
' .
·~·
(, ,.. •. '.
MILLINOCKET INDEX
SPECIAL MEETINGS, see MEETINGS
SPECIAL MUN_ICIPAL ELECTIONS,
see ELECTIONS, SPECIAL MU·
NICIPAL
STORAGE
·Agricultural activities, 125· 74
Bloodbomc pathogens control, A 130-2,
Al30-5
Food establishments, 70-8, 70· I I,
70·13, 70-14
Garbage, rubbish and refuse, 504
Junkyards, 125-55
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58
Mobile food service units, 70·25
Oil and chemicals, 125-65
Permits, 125·65
Snow removal, I 08-2
Solid waste, 73-2
Zoning, 125-65
STORAGE, OUTDOOR, Home occupations
125-54
STREET AND ROAD ADDRESSING
Administration, 110-5
Display of numbers, 110·8
Naming authority, 110-4
Naming system, 110-6
Numbering system, 110-7
Violations and penalties, 110-9
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Drainage, 125-86
Grading, 125-86
Mobile home parks, 83-8, 83-9
Parking, 115-13
Setbacks, 125-86
Shorcland areas, 125-86
Snow removal, I 08-1 - I 084
Zoning, 12545, 125-66
SUMMONS BY COURTS
Appeals, CI005
Issuance of, CI 005
Violations and penalties, CI 005
-T-
' TAX ADMINISTRATION
Board of Assessment Review, C602,
C603
Division of Assessment, C601
Town Assessor, C601
TAX COLLECTOR
Division of Tax Collection, 3-12
25
Powers and duties, 3-12
TERMS OF OFFICE
Board of Appeals, 5-2
Board of Assessment Review, C602
Board of Education, C40 I
Cemetery Commission, 9-1
Librarian, 17-10
Library Board of Trustees, 17-2
Nursing Commission, 21-2
Planning Board, 23-2, 23-3
Planning Board Chairman, 23-3
Planning Board Secretary, 23-3
Recreation Commission, 26-2
Recreation Director, 26-9
Town Council, C201
Transportation Commission, 29-2
TESTS
Bloodbome pathogens control, A 130-3,
Al304
Sewers, I 04-39
THROUGHWA YS
Signs, 115-11
Vehicles and traffic, 115-1 1
THROWING OF OBJECTS
Peace and good order, 94-1, 94-2
Prohibited activity, 94-1
Violations and penalties, 94-2
TIMBER HARVESTING
Forest management plan, 125-91
Selective cutting, 125-91
Shorcland areas, 125-91
TIRES
Solid waste, 73-19
TOPSOIL
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58, 125-81
TOWERS
Wind turbines, 1234
TOWN ASSESSOR
Appointments, C60 I
Budget, C504
Division of Assessments, 3-12
Powers and duties, 3-12, C60t
Tax administration, C60 I
TOWN ATTORNEY
Department of Law; 3-10
Powers and duties, 3-10
TOWN AUDITOR
Division of Accounts, 3-12
Powers and duties, 3-12
TOWN CLERK
Department of Records, 3-13
Division of Licenses, 3-12
05-01-2011
MILLJNOCKET INDEX
Powers and duties, 3-12, 3-13
Town Council, C214
TOWN COUNCIL
Petitions, 4-3
Powers and duties, 4-3
Salaries and compensation, 27-1 - 27-6
TOWN COUNCIL
Adjourned meeting, C2 I 0
Adoption of ordinances, C2 I 3
Chainnan of Town Council, C209
Election, C201
Hearings, C2 I 3
I ndepcndcnt annual audit, C2 I 5
Induction into office, C206
Interference by Council with administrative
service, C2 I 8
Meetings, C208, C2 I 0
Membership, C20 I
Notices, C2 I 3
Orders and resolves, C2 I 2
Ordinances, C2 I 2
Posting of actions, C208
Powers and duties, C203, C204
Qualifications, C202, C207
Quorum, C2 I 0
Recall of elected officials, C2 I 9
Records, C2 I 4
Rules of procedure, C212
Salaries and compensation, C205
Terms ofoffice, C201
Town Clerk as Clerk of Council, C214
Town Manager, C2 I 6, C2 I 7
Vacancies, C2 l 1
TOWN COUNCIL CHAIRMAN
Powers and duties, C209
Salaries and compensation, C209
TOWN HEAL TH OFFICER
Department of Health, 3-18
Powers and duties, 3-18
TOWN MANAGER
Appointments, C2 I 6
Establishment of departments, C304
Health Officer, C305
Powers and duties, C302
Qualifications, C30 I
Removal of, C2 I 7
Town Council, C2 I 6, C217
TOWN TREASURER
Division of the Treasury, 3-12
Powers and duties, 3-12
TRAFFIC DIVISION
Department of Police, 3-15
Powers and duties, 3-I 5
26
TRANSFER STATION
Commercial solid waste haulers, 73-6
Hours of operation, 73-6
Pcnnits, 73-6
Regulations for use, 73-6
Solid waste, 73-6- 73-8
Vehicles, 73-6
Violations and penalties, 73-6, 73-1
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
Appointments, 29-2
Conflicts of interest, 29-2
Department of Transportation, 29-2
Membership, 29-2
Powers and duties, 29-2
Terms of office, 29-2
TRANSPORTATION, DEPARTMENT
OF, see DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION
TREES
Off-street parking and loading, 125-64
Shore land areas, 125-76
Wind turbines, 123-4
TRUCK EXCLUSIONS
Definitions, 115-7
Heavy truck traffic, I 15-8
Loaded pulp trucks, 1 IS-7
Vehicles and traffic, J J 5-7, 115-8
UTILITIES
Fees, 125-116
-UFloodplain
management, 68-8
Zoning, 125-72
U-TURNS
Vehicles and traffic, 115-10
- VVACATIONS
Personnel policy, A 128-7
VARIANCES
Floodplain management, 68-9
Manufactured housing, 83-27
VEHICLES
Catering establishments, 70-26
Home occupations, 125-54
Junkyards, 125-SS
Property maintenance, 50-3
Transfer station, 73-6
OS-01-1011
'@ .
MILLINOCKET INDEX
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Definitions, I I S-1
Granite Street School driveway, 115-9
Handicapped parking, 115-20 - 115-23
Jacob engine brakes, I 1.5-25
Loading zones, I I 5-12
One-way streets, I IS-12
Parking, 115-2- 115-6, 115-13-
115-23
Public parking lots, 115-2 - 115-6
Recreation areas, I I S-9
Throughways, 115-I I
Traffic regulations, 11 S-9 - I 15- I 2
Truck e"clusions, I I 5-7, I 15-8
U-tums, 115-10
Violations and penalties, l I 5-24
VENTILATION
Food establishments, 70-17
VERMIN
Food establishments, 70-15
VIBRATION
Home occupations, 125-54
VICIOUS DOGS
Dogs and other animals, 61-8
lmpoundmcnt, 61-8
Insurance, 61-8
Liability, 61-8
Muzzling and leashing, 61-8
Notices, 61-8
Registration, 61-8
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Administration of government, 3-30
Adoption of Code, 1-5, 1-8
Airport, 33-12
Alarm systems, 3.5-14
Bandstand, 42-6
Bloodbomc pathogens control, A 130-2
Bottle clubs, 38-12
Building construction, 48-3
Dogs and other animals, 61-10, 6 I -I 3
Entertainment licenses, 65-8
Floodplain management, 68-1 O
Handicapped parking, 115-22
Jacob engine brakes, 115-25
Life safety code, 49-6
Manufactured housing, 83-28
Mobile home parks, 83-18
Outdoor wood boilers, 86-7, 86-9
Pawnbrokers, 90-6
Peddling and soliciting, 97-10
Property maintenance, 50-7
Public parking lots, I 1 S-6
Sewers, 104-54 - 104-57
27
Se"ual harassment, A 129-7
Snow removal, 108-4
Solid waste, 73-25
Street and road addressing, J 10-9
Summons by courts, CI 005
Throwing of objects, 94-2
Transfer station, 73-6, 73-7
Vehicles and traffic, 115-24
Weapons, 121-5
Wind turbines, 123-5
Zoning, 125-121
- WWALLS
Fees, 125-116
Floodplain management, 68-6
WARRANT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
Appointments, 29A-1
Approval for payment, 29A-4
Inability of member to fulfill assignment,
29A-5
Meetings, 29A-2, 29A-6
Presentation of warrant, 29A-4
Review by Councilors, 29A-7
Review to be in open session, 29A-3
Special project cost overruns, 29A-3
Warrant Subcommittee, 29A-3
WARRANT SUBCOMMITTEE
Warrant review and approval, 29A-3
WATER
Food establishments, 70-20
Mobile food service units, 70-25
WATERCOURSES
Floodplain management, 68-6
WATER SUPPLY
Floodplain management, 68-6
Mobile home parks, 83-10
Zoning, 125-72
WEAPONS
Definitions, 121-3
Discharge prohibited, 121-2
Exceptions, 121-4
Purpose, 12 1-1
Violations and penalties, 121-5
WEEDS, see BRUSH, GRASS AND
WEEDS
WELFARE HEARING BOARD
Conflicts of interest, 30-1
Membership, 30-1.
05 - 01-2011
M1LL1NOCKET INDEX
WIND TlJRBINES
Height regulations, 123-4
Legislative authority, 123-3
Lighting. 123-4
Lots, 123-4
Noise. 123-4
Notices. 123-4
Provisions, 123-4
Purpose. 123-2
Setbacks. 123-4
Signs. 123-4
Title, 123~ I
Towers. 123-4
Trees. I 23-4
Violations and penalties. 123-5
-Yy
ARDS, see AREA, YARD AND BULK
REGULATIONS
YARD SALES, see SALES
-ZZONING
Access to site, J 25-45
Activities described, 125-36
Airport, I 25-44
Amendments, I 25-22
Annual administrative review, 125-23
Appeals, 125-94
Applicability, 125-19
Arca, yard and bulk regulations, 125-50
Authority, 125-17
Bed-and-breakfast, 125-46
Bonds, 125-128
Buffers, 125-45, 125-47
Campgrounds, 125-48
Capacity of off-site roads, l25-45
Certificate of use and occupancy,
125-114
Code Enforcement Officer, 125-93 -
125-96, 125-116, 125-ft9
Compliance with land use standards re-
. quired, 125-40
Conflict with other provisions, 125-20
Construction of language. 125-13 t
Conversions, 125-49
Definitions, 125-132
Dimensional requirements, 125-50
Driveways, 125-45
28
Dusti 125-51
Emergency vehicle access, 125-45
Enforcement, 125-119 - 125-121
Erosion and sedimentation control,
125-52
Escrow account, 125-128
Explosive materials, 125-51
Fees, 125-115 - 125-118
Fences, 125-52.1
Flood hazard areas, 125-53
Fumes, 125-5 I
Gases, 125-51
General provisions, 125-16 - 125-25
General standards, 125-43
Glare, 125-5 I
Habitat Protection Overlay Zone,
125-39.1
Hazardous waste, 125-72
Hearings, 125-95
Height regulations, 125-50
Highway access, 125-45
Home occupations, 125-54
Improvements, 125-126
Inspections, 125-130
Interpretation of zone boundaries,
125-34
Junkyards, 125-55
Land not suitable for development,
125-56
Land use standards, 125-42- 125-72
Legal action, 125-120
Lighting, 125-57
Mineral exploration and extraction,
125-58
Mobile home parks, 125-59
Mobile homes, 125-60
Multiple uses on a single lot, 125-61
Municipal services, I 25-62
Nonconformities, 125-26- 126-31
Notices, 125-95
Odors, 125-5 I
Official Zoning Map, 125-34
Off-street parking and loading, 125-63,
125-64
Oil and chemical storage, 125-65
On-site circulation, 125-66
Open space, 125-66
Pcrfonnanec guaranties, 125-126 -
125-J 30
Permits, 125-93-125-96, 125-116
Permitted uses, 125-38
Pollution levels, 125-67
OS· OJ · 2011
·~
MILLINOCKET INDEX
Preservation and enhancement of the
landscape, 125-68
Private rights-of-way, 125-69
Procedural exceptions to activities requiring
site plan review, 125-95
Prohibited uses, 125-39
Purpose, 125-18, 125-42
Recreational vehicles, 125-60
Reports, 125-96
Retaining walls, 125-52. I
Schedule of Uses, 125-36 - 125-41
Screening, 125-47
Setbacks, 125-50
Sewage disposal, 125-72
Shorcland areas, 125· 73 - 125-92
Signs, 125-70
Site conditions, I 25-71
Site plan review, 125-97 - 125-113,
125-117
Solid waste, 125-72
Standards for establishing zones,
125-33 .
Streets and sidewalks, 125-45, 125-66
Symbols used in Schedule of Uses,
125-37
Title, 125-16
Utilities, 125-72
Vapors, 125-51
Vehicular access, 125-45
Violations and penalties, 125-121
Waste disposal, 125-72
Water supply, 125-72
Zones established, 125-32
Zoning Board of Appeals, 125-118,
125-122-125- 125
Zoning Ordinance, C702
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Appeal procedure, 125-124
Appointments, 125-122
Building construction, 48-3
Establishment, 125-122
Fccs, 125-118
Hearings, 125-124
Membership, 125-122
Minutes, 125-122
Notices, 125-124
Powers and duties, 125-123
Quorum, 125-122, 125-124
Records, J 25-124
Superior Court appeals, 125-125
Zoning, 125-118, 125- 122 - 125-125
See also BOARD OF APPEALS
29
ZONING MAP
Zoning, 125-34
05 . 01 - 2011
(
