Part I: Administrative Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of
Selectmen — See Ch. 503.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-9-2008]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004, the ordinances of the Town of
Madison, as codified by General Code, and consisting of Division 1, Code
of Ordinances, Chapters 1 through 490, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Town of Madison," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever
reference is made in any of the ordinances contained in the Code of the
Town of Madison to any other ordinances appearing in said Code, such
reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number,
article number or section number appearing in the Code as if such
ordinances had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances. All such provisions
are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town of Madison, and it is the intention of said Town
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as
it appears in said Code.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Madison which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Madison prior to the effective date
of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this ordinance or of any ordinances included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Madison and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Madison or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Madison.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Madison.
E. Any ordinance of the Town of Madison providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Madison or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Madison appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Madison or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinances relating to salaries.
K. Personnel policies of the Town.
L. The Charter of the Town and all amendments thereto.
M. Any ordinances adopted subsequent to August 14, 2007.
§ 1-4 MADISON CODE § 1-6
1:4
Clerk of the Town of Madison by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the Town of Madison" or
any new ordinances, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate
the intention of the Town to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter
be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing
contained in this ordinance shall affect the status of any ordinances
contained herein, and such ordinances may be amended, deleted or
changed from time to time as the Town deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Madison required to be filed
in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment
of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said Town to
be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included
therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes or ordinances
until such changes or ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Town Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment of
a fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who changes or amends, by additions or deletions, any part
or portion of the Code of the Town of Madison or who alters or tampers
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the ordinances
of the Town of Madison to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
other provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Code
of the Town of Madison, no changes in the meaning or intent of such
ordinances have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B
hereof. Certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention
of the Town that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Throughout the Code, References to the Maine Revised Statutes
Annotated (M.R.S.A.) are revised to reflect the numbering of the
statutes as of the publication of this Code as follows: (Chapter and
section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
CODE SECTION &
SUBJECT OLD CITATION
REVISED TO
CURRENT CITATION
Chapter 7, Board of Appeals
§ 7-3 (establishment) 30 M.R.S.A § 2411 30-A M.R.S.A § 2691
§ 7-5A(6) (amusement
permits)
28 M.R.S.A.§ 702 28-A M.R.S.A.§ 1054
§ 7-5A(10) (carrying
concealed weapon)
25 M.R.S.A. § 2032 25 M.R.S.A. § 2003
Chapter 26, Cemeteries, Town
§ 26-6D (deposit and
investment of funds
for perpetual care)
Title 30, Section 5051,
M.R.S.A.
30-A M.R.S.A. § 5706
Chapter 49, Ethics, Code of
§ 49-3B(12)
(ineligibility)
21 M.R.S.A. § 533,
Persons Ineligible to
Serve as Election
Officials, 21A and 504
21-A M.R.S.A. § 504,
Persons ineligible to
serve [as election
officials]
Chapter 154, Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards
§ 154-2 (statutory
authority)
30 M.R.S.A. § 2454,
Subsection 5, as
amended in 1985
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3754-A
§ 154-3 (definitions) 30 M.R.S.A. § 2451-B 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3752
§ 154-4A (permit) 30 M.R.S.A. § 2451 et
seq.
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3751
et seq.
§ 154-7A (permit) 30 M.R.S.A. § 2451 et
seq.
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3751
et seq.
§ 1-10 MADISON CODE § 1-11
1:6
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Code of the Town of Madison, such ordinance to be titled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by the Town Meeting of the
Town of Madison.
CODE SECTION &
SUBJECT OLD CITATION
REVISED TO
CURRENT CITATION
§ 154-8 (enforcement) 30 M.R.S.A. § 4966 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452
Chapter 200, General Assistance
§ 200-6A (records) 22 M.R.S.A. § 4303 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306
§ 200-23B(6) (22 M.R.S.A. Section
4316.5)
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A,
Subsection 5)
§ 200-33B(7)(c)[2]
(hospital free care/
charity care program)
22 M.R.S.A. Section
396-F(1)
22 M.R.S.A. § 1716
§ 200-38B (fair
hearing authority/
board of appeals)
Title 30 M.R.S.A. Sec.
2691
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691
§ 200-42 (workers'
compensation)
39 M.R.S.A. Section
106
39-A M.R.S.A. §§ 303
and 308
Chapter 294, Radioactive Wastes
§ 294-2A (legislative
authority)
Article VII-A of the
Maine Constitution
Article VIII, Part 2, of
the Maine Constitution
Chapter 399, Vehicles and Traffic
§ 399-13 (handicap
parking)
29 M.R.S.A. § 252 29-A M.R.S.A. § 521
§ 399-26C (handicap
parking)
29 M.R.S.A. § 252 29-A M.R.S.A. § 521
Chapter 484, Site Review
§ 484-43
(enforcement)
30 M.R.S.A., Section
4966
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4756
Chapter 490, Subdivision of Land
§ 490-1 (purpose) 30 M.R.S.A., Section
4956, Subsection 2A
30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 4401
through 4407
§ 490-4 (applicant
requirements)
30 M.R.S.A., Section
4956, Subsection 3 AD
30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 4401
through 4407
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
Chapter 7
APPEALS, BOARD OF
§ 7-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals for the Town of Madison,
which shall be known as the Madison Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred
to as the "Board of Appeals").
§ 7-2. Membership.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members, who shall elect a
Chairman and a Secretary from among their number. The members of
the Board of Appeals shall be appointed and their compensation shall be
determined by the Selectmen. Each member shall serve for a term of three
years, except that initially one member shall be appointed to serve for a
term of one year, and two members shall be appointed to serve for a term
of two years each, in order that the terms of all members shall thereafter
be staggered. If a permanent vacancy shall exist, the remainder of such
member's term shall be filled by appointment of the Selectmen.
§ 7-3. Organization; procedures.
The organization of the Board of Appeals, the qualifications of its members,
the powers of the Chairman and Secretary, and the procedures of the Board
of Appeals shall be as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A § 2691, as the same may
now or hereafter be amended, and as supplemented by the provisions of
this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to adopt reasonable
rules and regulations necessary or helpful to implement the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 7-4. Jurisdiction of variance requests. [Amended 6-12-2017]
A. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and determine all
requests of variances pursuant to Chapter 478, Shoreline Zoning,
Chapter 484, Site Review, Chapter 490, Subdivision of Land, and
Chapter 422, Floodplain Management, and Chapter 148, Animals, of
the Code of the Town of Madison, as the same may now or hereafter be
amended. A request for a variance shall be made by application for
variance, which shall be prepared and filed in substantially the same
manner and within the same time as set forth in § 7-6. After public
notice pursuant to § 7-7, the Board of Appeals shall conduct a public
hearing on the application for variance and shall determine the same by
majority vote in accordance with its procedures and the criteria set
forth in the applicable Town ordinance. Notice of the decision shall be
given in accordance with the provisions of § 7-9. [Amended
6-10-2019]
§ 1-13 MADISON CODE § 7-4
1:8
§ 7-5. Jurisdiction of appeals.
B. Granting variance requests shall be based on a determination that the
current regulation would create an undue financial burden on the
applicant and/or render the property unsuitable for conducting
business.
A. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and determine all
appeals by any person directly affected by any decision, action or
failure to act with respect to any license, permit, variance or other
required approval, or any application therefor, including conditional
grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of any such license, permit,
variance or other approval (hereinafter a "decision"):
(1) Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board
pursuant to Chapter 478, Shoreland Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of Madison;
(2) Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector
relating to building code enforcement pursuant to any statute or
Town ordinance;
(3) Rendered by the General Assistance Administrator pursuant to
Chapter 200, General Assistance, of the Code of the Town of
Madison, or the Maine statutes relating to general assistance;
(4) Rendered by the Planning Board or the Selectmen pursuant to
Chapter 490, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of
Madison or the Maine subdivision statute;
(5) Rendered by the Selectmen or the Assessors pursuant to 36
M.R.S.A. § 841 and 2060 (relating to the abatement of taxes);
(6) Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 142, Amusement
Permits, of the Code of the Town of Madison or 28-A M.R.S.A.
§ 1054 (also relating thereto);
(7) Rendered by the Selectmen or the Road Commissioner pursuant to
Chapter 339, Street Design and Construction Standards, of the
Code of the Town of Madison;
(8) Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 26, Cemeteries, of
the Code of the Town of Madison;
(9) Rendered by the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to Chapter 422, Floodplain Management, of the Code of
the Town of Madison;
(10) Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to 25 M.R.S.A. § 2003
(relating to the carrying of concealed weapons) or the Policy
Regarding Applications for Licenses to Carry Concealed Weapons;
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:9
§ 7-6. Time and manner of taking appeal.
(11) Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 767, Warning Sign
Requests, of the Code of the Town of Madison;
(12) Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 189, Excavations,
of the Code of the Town of Madison;
(13) Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector
pursuant to the Madison Sanitary Code;
(14) Rendered by the Membership Committee of the Madison Fire
Department or of the East Madison Fire Department pursuant to
the ordinances regarding the organization of such Fire
Departments, respectively,1 with respect to the admission of new
members, and the dismissal, suspension and other discipline of
members;
(15) Rendered by the Town Manager (or other designated Hearing
Officer) or the Selectmen pursuant to Section V(H) of the Town of
Madison Personnel Policy relating to grievances and disciplinary
procedures with respect to Town employees and officers;2
(16) Rendered by the Selectmen, the Plumbing Inspector, the Electrical
Inspector or such other officer as may be designated by statute, or
by Town ordinance implementing such statute, pursuant to any of
the provisions of Subchapters I and X (inclusive) of Chapter 215 of
Title 30 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated;3
(17) Rendered pursuant to, and by such official or officials as may be
specified in, any Town ordinance that may hereafter be enacted
which specifically provides that an appeal from a decision may be
taken to the Board of Appeals.
B. All as such statutes, ordinances and policies may now or hereafter be
amended.
A. Appeal from a decision shall be by notice of appeal on a form to be
prescribed for such purpose. The notice of appeal shall be signed by the
person taking the appeal, shall include such person's full name and
mailing address, shall identify the decision as to which the appeal is
being taken, and shall briefly state the basis of or reason for the appeal.
B. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals by delivery
in person to or by mail received by the Town Clerk not later than 30
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 62, Fire Department.
2. Editor's Note: Refers to an older version of the Personnel Policy. The current policy is on
file in the Town offices.
3. Editor's Note: Laws 1987, c. 737, § A, 1, repealed Parts 1 to 3 of Title 30. See now M.R.S.A.
Title 30-A, Part 2, Municipalities, Subpart 6, Regulation, Licenses and Permits, Chapter
185, Regulation of Construction and Permits (30-A M.R.S.A. § 4101 et seq.), which
regulates buildings, electrical installations and plumbing.
§ 7-5 MADISON CODE § 7-6
1:10
§ 7-7. Public notice.
If a public hearing is required by the statute or ordinance, or if the Board
of Appeals determines in its discretion that a public hearing shall be held,
public notice state the time, place and subject matter of the hearing shall be
given, not less than seven days nor more than 45 days prior to the hearing:
§ 7-8. Scope of review on appeal.
§ 7-9. Decision of appeal.
days after notice of decision is given by the official rendering the
decision, together with payment of a uniform filing fee as determined
by the Board of Appeals, which shall not exceed $20.
C. The date of the giving of notice of decision shall be the date on which
written notice of the decision is mailed or delivered in person to the
person whose application or other conduct required the decision to be
rendered. If the officer required to give notice of decision fails to do so
within the period prescribed in the applicable statute or ordinance,
notice of decision shall be deemed to have been given on the last day
prescribed for the giving thereof.
A. To the public, by publication of the notice in two successive editions of
the local weekly or daily newspaper and;
B. If the matter involves the use of buildings or premises, to the owners of
all real property lying within 500 feet of the premises in question, by
mailing a copy of the notice to such owners; provided, however, that
ownership of such real property shall be conclusively presumed by the
Town tax assessment records, and provided further that the failure of
any owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate any action taken at
our pursuant to the public hearing nor require that another hearing be
held.
A. The sole issue for determination by the Board of Appeals upon review of
a decision shall be whether the decision was:
(1) Arbitrary, capricious or rendered in bad faith; or
(2) Unsupported by substantial evidence; or
(3) In violation of applicable law.
B. The Board of Appeals may in its discretion hear additional evidence or
may rely entirely upon the record of the proceedings below.
A. After reviewing a decision in accordance with its procedures, the Board
of Appeals may:
(1) Affirm the decision in whole or in part;
(2) Reverse the decision in whole or in part;
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:11
§ 7-10. Review by Superior Court.
Review of a decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by the Superior Court
in accordance with applicable statutes and the procedures of Rule 80B of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, as the same may now or hereafter be
amended. In any case where the Board of Appeals refuses, fails or neglects
to give notice of its decision, the Board of Appeals shall be deemed to have
rendered a decision adverse to the party seeking review and notice thereof
shall be deemed to have been duly given 15 days following the last day
prescribed herein for the giving of such notice.
§ 7-11. Construal with other provisions.
Any provision of a Town ordinance (whether heretofore or hereafter enacted
or amended) which is inconsistent with or contrary to any provision of
this chapter with respect to any matter governed hereby is repealed and
declared void and of no effect, and the provision or provisions of this
chapter with respect to such matter shall be controlling; provided, however,
that if any such provision of a Town ordinance (whether heretofore or
hereafter enacted or amended) is adopted to conform such ordinance to
a specific provision of state law, then, in such instance, the conforming
provision of such other Town ordinance shall remain in effect and shall
control over the inconsistent provision or provisions hereof.
§ 7-12. Amendment procedure.
This chapter and any of the provisions hereof may be amended, modified
or repealed, in whole or in part, by majority vote of the governing body
in accordance with the then-applicable procedures for amendment of Town
ordinances; provided, however, that if any Town ordinance shall hereafter
be enacted or amended to specifically provide that appeals from a decision
rendered pursuant thereto shall be taken to the Board of Appeals, the
jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals set forth in § 7-5 hereof shall thereby be
(3) Vacate the decision in whole or in part and order new proceedings
to be held by the officer rendering the decision, either in their
entirety or limited to such issues of law or fact, or both, as the
Board of Appeals may direct.
B. The such decision by the Board of Appeals shall be in writing, with the
vote of each participating member being indicated thereon, and shall
state with reasonable particularity the basis of the decision, including
the grounds therefor upon all material issues of law or discretion
presented, and any factual findings necessary to support the decision.
Notice of the decision (to which a copy of the decision shall be attached)
shall be mailed or delivered in person to the person taking the appeal,
to the officer rendering the decision from which the appeal was taken,
and to the Selectmen, within seven days of the rendering of the
decision. The notice of decision shall include a statement of the time for
seeking review by the Superior Court.
§ 7-9 MADISON CODE § 7-12
1:12
enlarged pursuant to Subsection A(17) of said § 7-5, without the necessity
for a vote of the governing body specifically amending this chapter.
§ 7-13. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective 30 days after the adoption hereof by the
voters at any Annual or Special Town Meeting called for such purpose.
Chapter 18
BUDGET ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Expenditures — See Ch. 53.
§ 18-1. Initial appointment.
VOTED: That Selectmen be instructed to appoint during the month of
December, a Committee of 15 persons to submit to the Annual March
Meeting in 1936 estimates of appropriations to be made for that year, and
that no person entrusted with control of expenditures of Town funds be
eligible to appoint on such Committee.
§ 18-2. Ongoing charge and duties. [Added 3-2-1936]
VOTED: That whenever the Warrant for any Town Meeting contains an
article or articles under which an appropriation of money or expenditure
of money may be made, such article or articles shall be considered by the
Committee of 15 and its recommendations reported to such Meeting. Said
Committee of 15 shall be appointed annually by the Selectmen within 14
days after the Annual Town Meeting with power to fill vacancies as they may
occur, and shall be subject at all times to call of the Selectmen for advisory
purposes.
Chapter 26
CEMETERIES, TOWN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Selectmen cemetery regulations and
charges — See Ch. 532.
§ 7-12 BUDGET ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 26-1
18:13
§ 26-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to cemetery land owned by the Town of Madison
and used for cemetery purposes.
§ 26-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BURIAL or INTERMENT — The depositing of the remains of a human being
into the ground.
CONTRACTOR — A person, firm, or corporation engaged in the sale and/or
erection of vaults, liners, monuments, headstones, etc.
MARKER — Stone, concrete, or metal used to designate a burial plot (flat,
level with the ground).[Amended 6-11-20184]
MONUMENTS (HEADSTONE) — Granite or other stone block which may
have the name of the lot or burial rights owner(s) inscribed on it.[Amended
6-11-2018]
OWNER — Shall refer to burial rights and title to land held by a person or
their heirs.
PLOT — A portion of land designed to hold the full remains of a human
being.
SEXTON — Person responsible for locating and positioning of any burial.
SINGLE GRAVE — A plot designated to contain the remains of one adult
human being, or two cremated remains of human beings; or one child
and two cremated remains of human beings.[Amended 6-13-2016;
6-11-2018]
VAULT — A concrete box large enough to contain the casket remains of the
deceased.
WEEKENDS and HOLIDAYS — "Weekends" shall mean Saturday and
Sunday and "holidays" shall mean the approved holidays in the Town of
Madison's Personnel Policy in effect at the time.5
§ 26-3. General regulations.
A. No vehicle shall be operated on other than paved and unpaved
roadways unless authorized by the Town. No vehicle shall be operated
at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour on any established roadways.
The Town may post and close the roadways during certain times of the
year to prevent damage to the cemeteries. All cemetery roads shall be
closed at the discretion of the Town. No snowmobiles or unregistered
vehicles may be operated within the cemetery at any time. No vehicle
4. Editor's Note: The former definition of "memorials," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-11-2018.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 673, Personnel Policies.
§ 26-1 MADISON CODE § 26-3
18:14
§ 26-4. Burials, interments and disinterments.
may be operated in any manner which results in damage to cemetery
property, such as leaving ruts or displacing turf. Vehicles must not stop
so as to block the path of other vehicles, except in cases involving
burial ceremonies, and then only for such length of time as is absolutely
necessary. All vehicles must park on the right side of the roadway.
B. The use of firearms, except as part of a military burial, is prohibited.
C. The owner of any lot is responsible for the removal of any unsightly
flowers, wreaths, decorations, etc., from the grave site. If the owner
fails to execute such removal, the Town may remove the same. The
depositing of any refuse, unsightly flowers, wreaths or other grave
decorations for disposal must be made in receptacles provided for such
purpose; otherwise said deposits would be considered an act of
littering. It is unlawful for anyone other than the owner or the Town to
remove flowers, wreaths or decorations, etc., from the plots upon which
they are laid.
D. If any trees or shrubs shall, by means of their roots, branches or
otherwise, become detrimental to cemetery lots or roadways, or
dangerous or inconvenient, the Town may remove said trees or shrubs
or parts thereof as are detrimental, dangerous or inconvenient, without
liability therefor to the owner of said trees or shrubs. No one shall
damage, remove, injure or harm any trees or shrubs except the owner
of said tree or shrub, or the Town. No trees or shrubs shall be removed
by any owner without the permission of the Town.
E. Reports of any damage or thefts shall be reported to the Sheriff's Office
for investigation and to the owner of such property, if known.
[Amended 6-11-20186]
F. The Town shall not be responsible for damages done to any property.
G. A copy of this chapter shall be issued with each deed.
H. All lots sold by the Town must have a perpetual care trust established
prior to conveyance of title to the cemetery lot by the Town.
A. Any burial, interment or disinterment shall be done by the cemetery
sexton or an agent approved by the Town.
B. Plots of land shall not be used for any other purpose than as a place of
burial for human remains. No animal burials will be permitted.
C. If disinterment is requested, the Town shall be informed as to the length
of disinterment, and proof that said disinterment complies with all
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection F, which stated that it was
unlawful to damage or remove any items in the cemetery without Town permission, and
which immediately followed this subsection. It also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsections G through I as Subsections F through H, respectively.
§ 26-3 BUDGET ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 26-4
18:15
§ 26-5. Memorials, monuments and other structures.
applicable laws, rules and regulations of the State of Maine. If
disinterment results in permanent removal, the Town shall be notified
of the state, county, town and name of cemetery where the new burial
is to be made.
D. Funeral directors shall be responsible for the payment of all burial
charges, fees and burial permits except in cases where their services
are not retained and other arrangements have been made with the
Town.
E. All interments of noncremated remains shall be required to have vaults.
All internments must be coordinated with the Town Sexton. [Amended
6-11-2018]
F. The Town shall designate a section of the Forest Hills Cemetery as
cremation only in which only flat markers will designate grave sites and
in which no planted flowers, trees or shrubbery will be allowed. [Added
6-11-2018]
A. No lot may contain more than one monument/headstone. Individual
graves may have one marker per interment. Monuments and
headstones should be kept in alignment with existing structures within
the section, and should not be placed in such a way as to obscure the
visibility of engravings on neighboring lots. All existing lots not in
conformance with this provision shall be considered preexisting,
nonconforming lots. No nonconforming lot shall be allowed to add
monuments from the effective date of this chapter. [Amended
6-11-2018]
B. No structure shall be erected for the purpose of enclosing a plot
without the approval of the Madison Board of Selectmen.
C. No objects such as benches, seats, fences, etc., shall be erected without
a complete base that keeps grass or weeds from growing underneath.
Location of such objects must be approved by the Town Sexton.
[Amended 6-11-2018]
D. No monument or any inscription shall be placed in or upon said lot
which shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen, after notice and
hearing, to be offensive or improper. The Board of Selectmen may order
the removal of said offensive or improper object or cause such and
inscription to be removed or obliterated without liability to said owner.
[Amended 6-11-2018]
E. The contractor installing monuments/headstones shall be responsible
for installing said monuments/headstones according to standards
approved by the Town. The contractor and/or the owner must contact
the Town Sexton for proper location and shall be held responsible for
improper installation, and no liability on the Town's part shall be
§ 26-4 MADISON CODE § 26-5
18:16
§ 26-6. Fees; collected money; trust accounts.
incurred for repair of faulty workmanship by private contractors.
[Amended 6-11-2018]
F. The Town shall not remove or allow any monuments/headstones to be
moved unless first obtaining permission of the owner, unless said
removal is of an emergency nature or for making necessary repairs to
the plot and its appurtenances. [Amended 6-11-2018]
A. The Madison Board of Selectmen shall be empowered to establish fees
for the purchasing of plots and perpetual care, paid to the Town of
Madison. Said fees shall be available for public inspection in the Town
office. [Amended 6-11-2018]
B. Plots may not be sold, bartered or exchanged by the owners. Ownership
may be transferred back to the Town only upon approval of the Madison
Board of Selectmen upon such terms as it deems reasonable.
C. Any and all money collected for the purchase of a lot shall be deposited
into the Cemetery Fund. The proceeds of the sales of plots shall be
applied solely to the management, superintendence, improvement and
maintenance of the cemetery and the avenues, paths, and structures
situated therein, and for the purchase of additional cemetery land.
D. Any and all money collected for perpetual care shall be deposited with
the Town Treasurer and invested and held in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 5706. Unless the instrument creating the trust prohibits, the
Treasurer may treat any two or more trust funds as a single fund solely
for the purposes of investment. After deduction of management
expenses, any interest earned or capital gains realized shall be prorated
among the various trust funds. The annual income, and only the annual
income, from the trust fund may be expended for the upkeep and
maintenance of the lot identified in the trust agreement and any
appurtenances to said lot, as well as the general ways, paths and open
spaces of the general cemetery in which said lot is located.
E. The Selectmen shall at the end of each year determine the amount of
money to be assessed to each trust account for the maintenance and
upkeep of the perpetual care plot. The amount assessed shall be
deducted from the annual earnings of each account. Any unexpended
income shall be placed in an unexpended income reserve category with
the individual accounts. Monies accumulated in the unexpended income
reserve category may be expended to cover cost assessed in excess of
the annual earning of the account. Cost assessed may include cost other
than annual maintenance cost, including but not limited to one-time
cost for replacement of monuments and additional work authorized by
the Town or owner.
F. The Town shall be responsible for keeping accurate accounting records
on individual trust fund balances, which shall identify on a yearly basis
§ 26-5 BUDGET ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 26-6
18:17
§ 26-7. Duties of the Selectmen.
The Madison Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for the following
items:
§ 26-8. When effective; amendment procedure.
§ 26-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this
chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
a decree or decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree
or decision shall not affect or impair the validity of any other action or
remaining portion of this chapter.
§ 26-10. Repealer.
Passage of this chapter shall supersede and replace any other ordinance,
bylaws, rules or regulations concerning cemeteries enacted by the Town or
it municipal officers and/or officials.
§ 26-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who continues to violate any provisions of this chapter after
receiving notice of such violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of up to $100 for each violation. Each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. The courts are urged to
require restitution in full of person convicted of damage to cemetery
property.
Chapter 44
the principal amounts, unexpended income reserve, yearly earnings,
yearly maintenance charge, and amount to be added or subtracted from
the unexpended income reserve. Said accounts shall be audited and the
cost against the trust funds.
A. Posting roads within the cemeteries for seasonal closing or establishing
weight limits.
B. Establishing standards for setting monuments, headstones and
memorials.
C. Establishment of the fees to be charged in accordance with § 26-6 of
this chapter.
A. This chapter shall become effective 90 days after approval at a Regular
or Special Town Meeting.
B. This chapter may be amended in accordance with provisions of state
law governing all ordinances.
§ 26-6 MADISON CODE § 26-11
44:18
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 44-1. Title; statutory authority.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency Management Ordinance of the Town of Madison," authorized
under 37-B M.R.S.A. § 782.
§ 44-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR (EMD) — The appointed Town
official responsible for performing the four phases of Emergency
Management (preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation) and for
liaison with the Somerset County Emergency Management Agency.
§ 44-3. Establishment of Office and Director.
The Madison Office of Emergency Management (OEM) and the position of
Emergency Management Director (EMD) for the Town of Madison is hereby
created. The Selectmen many appoint additional OEM staff members, as
needed.
§ 44-4. Appointment of Emergency Management Director; term;
removal.
The Selectmen shall appoint the EMD. This appointment shall be annual and
made by June 1 of each year. The Selectmen may remove the EMD for cause.
§ 44-5. Oath of Director.
Once the EMD has been appointed, the EMD shall take an oath of office
before assuming any duties, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2526.
§ 44-6. Duties of Director.
The EMD shall:
A. Prepare and update a hazard risk and vulnerability assessment.
B. Prepare and maintain the municipal Emergency Operations Plan.
C. Organize, activate and operate the municipal Emergency Operations
Center (EOC).
D. Prepare and maintain a list of disaster resources.
E. Develop procedures for the operation of the municipal EOC.
F. Coordinate and maintain written disaster mutual aid agreements with
the approval of the Selectmen.
§ 26-11 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 44-6
44:19
§ 44-7. Membership of Emergency Operations Center.
When directed by any one of the Selectmen or by the EMD, the EOC will be
established and manned. At the discretion of the Selectmen, Town Manager
or EMD, the following Town officials may be included on the EOC staff:
§ 44-8. Incident management.
The Town of Madison hereby establishes the National Incident Management
System (NIMS) as the municipal standard for incident management. This
system provides a consistent approach for federal, state, and municipal
governments to work together more effectively and efficiently to prevent,
prepare for, respond to and recover from domestic incidents, regardless
of cause, size or complexity. NIMS will utilize standardized terminology,
standardized organizational structures, interoperable communications,
consolidated action plans, unified command structures, uniform personnel
qualification standards, uniform standards for planning, training, and
exercising, comprehensive resource management, and designated incident
facilities during emergencies or disasters. The NIMS Incident Command
System (ICS) will be utilized by all municipal emergency and disaster
responders for incident management.
G. Provide emergency management training to Town officials, planners,
and responders.
H. Develop and implement a disaster exercise program.
I. Attend County Local Emergency Managers Group meetings.
J. Provide disaster preparedness information to Town residents.
K. Complete and report damage assessments to Somerset County EMA.
L. Complete and submit applications for FEMA disaster funds and grants.
A. Selectmen.
B. Town Clerk and Treasurer.
C. Town Constable.
D. Fire Warden.
E. Animal Control Officer.
F. Emergency Management Director.
G. Code Enforcement Officer.
H. Fire Chief or Deputy.
I. Road Commissioner.
J. Town Manager.
§ 44-6 MADISON CODE § 44-9
44:20
§ 44-9. Compensation of Director.
The EMD may be compensated for duties rendered by an annual stipend as
appropriated at Town Meeting.
§ 44-10. Training.
The EMD may take necessary training as provided by the Somerset County
Emergency Management Agency (STEMA), Maine Emergency Management
Agency (MEMA), and FEMA.
Chapter 49
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 49-1. Declaration of policy; applicability.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that Town Board
of Selectmen and their appointees be fair, impartial and responsive to the
needs of the people and each other in the performance of their respective
functions and duties; that decisions and policy be made in proper channels
of the Town's governmental structure; that public office not be used simply
for personal gain; and that such Selectmen and their appointees maintain
a standard of conduct that will inspire public confidence in the integrity of
the Town's government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics is
hereby established for all Town Selectmen, and all members and associate
members of the Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Advisory Board,
Recreation Committee, Recycling Committee, Cable Television Committee,
Community Development Advisory Committee, Board of Assessors,
Department of Electric Works Board of Directors, and Madison Library
Board of Trustees.
§ 49-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Board of Selectmen, Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Advisory
Board, Recreation Committee, Recycling Committee, Cable Television
Committee, Community Development Advisory Committee, Board of
Assessors, Department of Electric Works Board of Directors, and Madison
Library Board of Trustees.
BOARD MEMBER — Member or associate member of the Board of
Selectmen, Board of Appeals, Planning Board, Advisory Board, Recreation
Committee, Recycling Committee, Cable Television Committee, Community
Development Advisory Committee, Board of Assessors, Department of
Electric Works Board of Directors, and Madison Library Board of Trustees.
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint venture, or any other legal recognized entity organized for the
purposes of making a profit.
§ 44-9 ETHICS, CODE OF § 49-2
49:21
FINANCIAL INTEREST — A direct or indirect interest having monetary or
pecuniary value including, but not limited to, the ownership of shares of
stock.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, and the following, when living in the
household of a Selectmen or Board member: children, parents, brothers and
sisters.
MADISON BOARD OF SELECTMEN — For purposes of this code,
references to the "Madison Board of Selectmen" shall be construed to
mean the Madison Board of Selectmen and any of the committees or
subcommittees thereof.
SPECIAL INTEREST — A direct or indirect interest having value peculiar to
a certain individual or group, whether economic or otherwise, which value
may accrue to such individual or group as a result of the passage or denial
of any order, ordinance or resolution or the approval or disapproval thereof,
by any Board, and which interest is not shared by the general public.
TOWN EMPLOYEE — Any individual working for, on a permanent or
temporary basis, and drawing a salary from, the Town of Madison, except
employees of the School Department. The term "Town employee" shall not
include consultants or special personnel providing services on a short-term
contractual basis.
TOWN SELECTMEN — Member of the Madison Board of Selectmen.
§ 49-3. Standards of conduct.
A. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for
all Board members by setting forth those acts or actions deemed to be
in conflict or incompatible, or to create the appearance of conflict or
incompatibility, with the best interests of the Town of Madison.
B. Statutory standards. There are certain provisions of the general
statutes of the State of Maine which should, while not set forth herein,
be considered an integral part of this chapter. Accordingly, the
provisions of the following sections of the general statutes of the State
of Maine, as may be amended, are hereby incorporated by reference
and made a part of this Code of Ethics, and shall apply to all Board
members of the Town of Madison whenever applicable as if more fully
set forth therein, to wit:
(1) 17 M.R.S.A. § 3104, Conflicts of interest; purchases by the state.
(2) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 456, Tampering with public records or information.
(3) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 602, Bribery in official and political matters.
(4) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 603, Improper influence.
(5) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 604, Improper compensation for past action.
(6) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 605, Improper gifts to public servants.
§ 49-2 MADISON CODE § 49-3
49:22
(7) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 606, Improper compensation for services.
(8) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 607, Purchase of public office.
(9) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 608, Official oppression.
(10) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 609, Misuse of information.
(11) 17-A M.R.S.A. § 903, Misuse of entrusted property.
(12) 21-A M.R.S.A. § 504, Persons ineligible to serve [as election
officials].
(13) 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2605, Conflicts of interest.
(14) 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5122, Interest of public officials, trustees or
employees.
C. Contracts, purchases and employment.
(1) No Board member shall participate directly by means of
deliberation, approval or disapproval, or recommendation, in the
purchase of goods and services for the Town, and the award of any
contracts with the Town, except as permitted under the Town's
purchasing regulations and under the laws of the State of Maine,
where to his knowledge there is a financial interest, or special
interest other than that possessed by the public generally, in such
purchase or award, held by:
(a) Himself or a member of his immediate family;
(b) A business in which he or a member of his immediate family
serves as an officer, director, trustee, partner or employee in a
supervisory or management position; or
(c) Any other person or business with whom he or a member of his
immediate family are in business, or are negotiating or have an
arrangement concerning future employment.
(2) No Board member shall participate, by means of deliberation,
approval or disapproval, or recommendation, in the decision to
hire, promote, discipline, lay off or to take any other personnel
action in respect to any applicant for employment or employees, as
the case may be, where said applicant or employee is:
(a) A member of his immediate family; or
(b) A person with whom either he or a member of his immediate
family are in business.
D. Disclosure of confidential information. No Board member shall, without
proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning
the property, government or affairs of the Town; nor shall he use such
information to advance the financial or private interest of himself or
§ 49-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 49-3
49:23
others. For purpose of this subsection, the term "confidential
information" shall mean any information, oral or written, which comes
to the attention of, or is available to, such Board member only because
of his or her position with the Town, and is not a matter of public record.
Information received and discussed during an executive session of the
Board of Selectmen or any Board, called pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A. § 405
et seq., shall be considered within the constraints of this section, and
shall not be disclosed to any third party unless permitted by affirmative
vote of such body.
E. Gifts and favors. No Board member shall accept any valuable gift,
whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person
and/or business which is his knowledge is interested directly or
indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the
Town; nor shall any Board member: 1) accept any gift, favor or thing of
value of value that tends to influence him in the discharge of his or her
official duties; or 2) grant in the discharge of his or her official duties
any improper favor, service or thing of value. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the acceptance of gifts or favors by Board members from
members of their immediate families.
F. Use of Town property. No Selectmen shall use or permit the use of any
Town-owned property, including but not limited to, motor vehicles,
equipment and buildings, for any private purposes. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the use of Town buildings and equipment at rates and/or on
terms as may be established.7
G. Representing third party interest before Town agencies. No Selectman
shall either appear on behalf of any third party interest before any Town
agency, or represent a third party interest in any action, proceeding, or
litigation in which the Town or one of its agencies is a party. Nothing
herein shall prohibit a Selectman, on behalf of a constituent in the
course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate, or any
Selectman, on behalf of his or her personal interest, from appearing
before a Town agency. No Board member shall appear on behalf of any
third party interest before a Town agency of which he or she is a current
member. Nothing herein shall prohibit a Board member, on behalf of his
or her personal interest, from appearing before any Town agency
including that of which he or she is a current member.
H. Conflict of interest. Madison Board of Selectmen agenda items.
(1) Deliberation and vote prohibited. No Board member shall, in such
capacity, participate in the deliberation or vote, or otherwise take
part in the decision-making process, on any agenda item before his
or her collective body in which he or a member of his immediate
family has a financial or special interest, other than an interest held
by the public generally.
7. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 738, Town Property, Use of.
§ 49-3 MADISON CODE § 49-3
49:24
(2) Disclosure of conflict. Any Board member who believes that he or a
member his immediate family has a financial or special interest,
other than an interest held by the public generally, in any agenda
item before his or her collective body, shall disclose the nature and
extent of such interest, and the Town Clerk or designee shall make
a record of such disclosure. Additionally, any Board member who
believes that any fellow Board member, or a member of such Board
member's immediate family has a financial or special interest,
other than an interest held by the public generally, in any agenda
item before his or her collective body, shall disclose the nature and
extent of such interest, and the Town Clerk or designee shall make
a record of such disclosure.
(3) Determination of conflict. Once the issue of conflict has been
initiated relative to an individual Board member, and disclosure has
been made as provided above, such individual's fellow Board
members shall vote on whether or not such individual shall be
excused from participating in the deliberation or vote, or otherwise
taking part in the decision-making process, on the relevant agenda
item. Such individual shall be excused only upon a vote of majority
of his or her fellow Board members that a conflict of interest in fact
exists.
(4) Avoidance of appearance of conflict. To avoid the appearance of a
violation of this section, once any individual Board member is
determined to have a conflict of interest in respect to any agenda
item, said individual shall immediately remove himself or herself
from the meeting room or to the area of the room occupied by the
general public. He or she shall not return to his or her regular seat
as a member of the body until deliberation and action on the item is
completed. Nothing herein shall require an individual Board
member to remove himself or herself for any item contained on a
"Consent Agenda" on which there is no deliberation, the
individual's conflict has been determined by the other members,
and the right to abstain from voting on the item has been granted.
(5) Personal interest. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any
Board member from representing his or her own personal interest
by appearing before his or her collective body on any such agenda
item.
I. Disclosure statement by Town Selectmen.
(1) Within 15 days after each annual municipal election, every
Selectman shall file a completed disclosure form with the Town
Clerk within 30 days after his or her appointment, and every Board
member shall file completed disclosure forms shall be under oath
and shall contain the following information to the best of the
disclosing party's knowledge and belief:
§ 49-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 49-3
49:25
(a) The name of each person or entity, whether incorporated or
not, doing business with the Town in an amount in excess of
$1,000 during the preceding calendar year from which such
disclosing party or member of his or her immediate family has
received money or other thing of value in an amount in excess
of $1,000 during the preceding calendar year, including, but
not limited to, campaign contributions where applicable.
(b) The name of each entity, whether incorporated or not, doing
business with Town in an amount in excess of $1,000 for
preceding calendar year in which such disclosing party or
member of his or her immediate family has a financial interest
in an amount in excess of $1,000, including, but not limited to,
the ownership of shares of stock.
(c) The name of each nonprofit and/or for profit entity, whether
incorporated or not, for which such disclosing party or member
of his or her immediate family holds a position of officer or
member of any board. For each such entity, such disclosing
party shall provide the following information:
[1] A brief description of the purpose of each board and/or
office;
[2] A short summary of such disclosing party's or family
member's duties relative to any such board and/or office;
[3] The term of service on each such board and/or office; and
[4] Whether or not such disclosing party or family member
receives compensation for services on such board and/or
office and the extent to which such compensation exceeds
$100 in the aggregate annually.
(2) For purposes of this subsection, "compensation" shall include, but
not be limited to, monetary compensation, gifts, gratuities, perks,
fringe benefits, services, and any other thing of value.
(3) Every Board member shall amend his or her annual disclosure
statement as may be required from time to time to ensure the
continued accuracy thereof. Each such amendment shall be made
within 15 days following the occurrence which requires the
amendment.
(4) The Town Clerk shall deliver a copy of each completed disclosure
statement to every fellow member of the Board of each disclosing
party within 30 days after the expiration of the filing period.
(5) For purposes of this code, a list prepared by the Town Manager of
those person or entities doing business with the Town in an amount
in excess of $1,000 for the preceding year shall be determinative
for purposes of reporting under this section. Income from and
§ 49-3 MADISON CODE § 49-3
49:26
§ 49-4. Board of Ethics.
financial investments in, policies of insurance, and deposits in
accounts from commercial or savings banks, savings and loan
associations, or credit unions and the ownership of less than 5% of
the outstanding shares of stock in a publicly held corporation shall
not be considered to be a financial interest within the meaning of
this section.
J. Political activities. No Board member shall participate in any political
activity which would be in conflict or incompatible with the
performance of his or her official functions and duties for the Town. In
conjunction therewith:
(1) No Board member may use his or her official authority or position
for the purposes of influencing or interfering with or affection the
results of any election, nor shall be solicit funds or contributions or
accept or receive funds or contributions from Town employees for
political purposes. No Board member may distribute pamphlets or
handbills while he or she is performing official functions and duties
with the Town. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any
Board member from participating in the political process in his or
her capacity as a private citizen.
K. Incompatible employment of office. No Board member shall occupy any
other office, elected or appointed, in any other governmental entity,
when the duties of such office are incompatible with the proper
discharge of his or her official duties with the Town. For purposes of this
code, the occupancy of any office elected or appointed, with any other
governmental entity by any Board member is hereby prohibited in any
one of the following circumstances:
(1) Where the duties of the other office make it a physical impossibility
to discharge the duties of the Town position; or
(2) Where one office is subordinate of the other; or
(3) Where one office carries the power of removal of the other; or
(4) Where the occupancy of both offices is otherwise prohibited by law.
A. Board of Ethics established. There is hereby created and established a
Board of Ethics consisting of five members and two associate members
appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
B. Terms. All members shall be appointed for terms of three years each. All
associate members shall be appointed for terms of three years each.
Each member and associate member shall serve until his successor is
appointed and qualified. All members must be residents of the Town of
Madison. No member shall serve more than two complete consecutive
terms.
§ 49-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 49-4
49:27
§ 49-5. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies as may be provided by law,
violation of this code shall constitute cause for censure, after notice and
hearing conducted by the Board of Selectmen. A majority of the Madison
Board of Selectmen shall conduct such proceedings.
C. Other offices prohibited. No member or associate member of the Board
of Ethics shall hold any other Town office or position or be the member
of any Town agency to which the Board of Selectmen shall have
appointing authority.
D. Procedures and records. The Board of Ethics shall establish such rules
as it may determine to be necessary to govern its procedures. In
addition, the Board shall at all times maintain in the office of the Town
Clerk appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings.
E. Duties. The Board shall render advisory opinions to the Board of
Selectmen when there is doubt as to the applicability of any provisions
of this code to any particular situation. In the performance of its duties,
the Board shall limit its review and fact-finding only to those issues
referred to it by the Board of Selectmen. The Board shall also perform
such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the Board
of Selectmen.
F. Procedure. Any Selectman seeking advice as to whether a particular
situation constitutes a violation of this code shall first submit a written
statement in the form of a Board order describing the nature of the
matter to the Board of Selectmen. If the Board of Selectmen feels that
an advisory opinion is necessary, it shall adopt the order, by majority
vote, referring the matter to the Board of Ethics. A tie vote on the order
shall also cause the matter to be referred to the Board. If the Board of
Ethics finds any matter referred to it to have been based upon
allegations it determines to have been frivolous, unfounded or with
malice, it shall so advise the Selectmen. It is the purpose and intent of
this code to provide a mechanism by which all such matters may be
handled in an orderly and impartial fashion in such a manner as to
protect the best interest of the citizens of the Town of Madison and the
personal and private interests of its Selectmen.
G. Orientation. All members shall attend an annual orientation meeting to
be scheduled during the month of July of each calendar year.
H. Meetings and annual report. The Board of Ethics shall meet at least
semiannually and prior to June 30 of each calendar year, shall prepare
and submit to the Board of Selectmen an annual report outlining its
doing during the preceding twelve-month period.
§ 49-4 MADISON CODE § 49-6
49:28
§ 49-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the
remaining portions of this code.
Chapter 53
EXPENDITURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Selectmen's policy on expenditures of public
funds— See Ch. 572.
§ 53-1. Overdrafts.
It is the expression of the voters of the Town of Madison, in Annual Town
Meeting assembled, that none of its Town officials shall expend or incur
any obligations to expend any money in excess of the amount raised or
appropriated for their department for the year then current, except the
occasion for such expenditure be one of immediate great need or
emergency, or where delay will cause great loss or inconvenience; also
that the Selectmen of the Town shall draw no orders for the payment of
money in any department in excess of the amount raised or appropriated
for that department in excess of the amount raised or appropriated for
that department and for the year then current, except in cases as herein
provided.
Chapter 62
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 62-1. Establishment; title.
§ 62-2. Purpose.
The objectives of this Department shall be to:
A. There shall be created a department of the Town of Madison known as
the "Madison Fire Department."
B. This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Madison Ordinance
Regarding the Organization of the Madison Fire Department."
A. Protect lives and property endangered by fires, accidents, disasters,
and haz-mat incidents within the Town of Madison or neighboring
communities covered by mutual aid agreements;
§ 49-6 EXPENDITURES § 62-2
53:29
§ 62-3. Organization.
§ 62-4. Membership.
§ 62-5. Officers.
B. To be part of Emergency Medical Service System to provide care of
person's suffering from injury or sudden illness;
C. Increase the public awareness of the existence of conditions
constituting potential emergencies or hazards;
D. Maintain a properly equipped Department with adequately trained and
available personnel;
E. Assist in the planning for a safe community.
A. The Madison Fire Department shall include the East Madison Fire
Department and the Madison Village Fire Department.
B. The Madison Fire Department, located in Madison Village, shall be
composed of three companies, known as "Madison Company Number 1"
and "Madison Company Number 2" and "Madison Company Number 3,"
located in East Madison Village.
C. Additional companies may be established by vote of the Department
with the approval of the Madison Board of Selectmen.
A. The Town of Madison Personnel Policy procedures in effect apply.8
B. Any member not attending 25% or more of the calls in the previous year
shall have his or her name referred to the membership committee for
possible violation of this chapter. The membership committee shall
investigate whether a hearing is warranted or may dismiss the matter
without hearing.
C. It shall be the duty of each member of the Department to notify his or
her Captain or Lieutenant when leaving the Town of Madison for an
extended period of time.
A. The members shall elect annually a Fire Chief who shall be the principal
officer of the Department and shall preside at all meetings of the
Department. The Fire Chief shall exercise all powers and duties in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3153 unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter. The Fire Chief shall have responsibility for the general
care, management and control of the property of the Department and
shall be responsible for the operation of the Department in accordance
with established policies and ordinances of the Town. The Fire Chief
shall be responsible for assignment of members to the various
companies within the Department.
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 673, Personnel Policies.
§ 62-2 MADISON CODE § 62-5
53:30
B. Each Company shall elect annually a Deputy Chief who may perform all
the duties of the Fire Chief in his or her absence. The Deputy Chief may
perform such other duties as the Fire Chief may from time to time
delegate.
C. The members shall elect annually a Secretary/Treasurer who shall
perform the customary duties usually performed by officers of similar
organizations, and keeping accurate records of attendance at meetings
and preparing minutes of all meetings and keeping copies of all
correspondence by the clerks. All documents of the Department shall be
the property of the Town and all important correspondence shall have
copies forwarded to the Town Office where they shall be kept on file.
D. The Fire Chief and Deputy Chiefs of the Madison Fire Department shall
elect annually in June a Training Officer who shall be responsible for the
operational readiness skills level of the Departments. The Training
Officer shall keep accurate and current files on the qualifications of
each member; and will coordinate the training needs of the
membership with appropriate regional and state agencies. The Training
Officer shall be responsible for scheduling needed training sessions for
the membership as necessary and may designate various individuals to
assist him or her as required to maintain and upgrade the proficiency
levels of the membership.
E. The members shall elect annually a Captain for each company who shall
preside at all meetings of the company, have responsibility for the
general care, management and control of the property of the company,
and have command of his company at all times when assembled under
the direction of the Fire Chief or persons acting in this capacity.
F. The members shall elect annually a First Lieutenant for each company
who shall aid the Captain in the discharge of his or her duties and, in
case of absence, to take charge of the company.
G. The members shall elect annually a Second Lieutenant for each
company who shall aid the First Lieutenant in the discharge of his or
her duties and, in case of absence, to take charge of the company.
H. The members shall elect annually a Clerk for each section company who
shall keep a correct written record of the proceedings of each section
company meeting, call the roll at all meetings, and perform other
customary duties usually performed by officers of similar organizations.
I. The Fire Chief shall annually appoint a Safety Officer who will be
responsible for calling safety defects in equipment to the Fire Chief's
attention, and unsafe practices to the attention of all members of the
Department.
J. The members of the Department may elect other officers as necessary
who shall perform the duties usually performed by officers of similar
organizations and as may be required of them by vote of the
Department with the approval of the Madison Board of Selectmen.
§ 62-5 EXPENDITURES § 62-5
53:31
§ 62-6. Committees.
§ 62-7. Meetings.
K. Election of all officers shall take place at the annual meeting held in
June. All balloting shall be by secret ballot. All persons elected at the
annual meeting, excepting the Fire Chief, shall take office immediately,
and all officers, including the Fire Chief, shall serve until such time as a
replacement is elected or appointed. The Fire Chief designate's name
shall be presented to the Madison Board of Selectmen for confirmation
at their next regularly scheduled meeting. The Selectmen shall have the
power to confirm or reject the designee of the Department. In the event
of rejection, the Department shall hold a special election at either the
next regular meeting or at a special meeting. The Department shall not
nominate any person so rejected for confirmation by the Selectmen.
Upon confirmation by the Board, the Fire Chief shall be sworn in by the
Town Clerk.
L. In the event of vacancy due to resignation, death, disability or absence
from the municipality for an extended period of time, the Department
may hold a special election during the year to fill the vacancy.
A. The Membership Committee shall consist of the Fire Chief, (First
Assistant Chief) and (Second Assistant) Deputy Chiefs. The Committee
will meet on an as-needed basis for the purposes of reviewing
applications for membership; interviewing applicants; and to consider
disciplinary action against members charged with violation of this
chapter or any of the rules and regulations of the Department or
professional misconduct.
B. The Finance Committee shall consist of the Fire Chief, (First and
Second Assistant) and Deputy Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants, and
Secretary/Treasurer. This Committee will meet on an as-needed basis
for the purpose of preparing an annual budget and making
recommendations to the Selectmen on major capital expenditure items
for the Department.
C. Special committees may be established on an as-needed basis for a
limited time and members shall be approved to serve by the Fire Chief.
A. An annual meeting will be held each year during the month of June. The
purpose of this meeting will be to elect officers and adopt any rules or
regulations or amendments thereto. Fifty percent (50%) of the
membership shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of the annual
meeting. Seven-day notice prior to the meeting shall be provided to the
membership by Pager System 911.
B. Monthly meetings shall be held for the purposes of training the
membership and conducting any other business deemed appropriate by
the Fire Chief. One-third (1/3) of the membership shall constitute a
§ 62-5 MADISON CODE § 62-7
53:32
§ 62-8. Rules and regulations.
§ 62-9. Recognition.
Firemen with 10 or more years of service, upon departure from active duty
with the Department, shall have their names ascribed to a plaque, which
shall be maintained at Department expense. Ex-Fire Chiefs and officers
shall have special mention on said plaque.
quorum if any business matters are to be decided upon by the
membership. No quorum requirements apply for training sessions.
C. Special meetings shall be called at the discretion of the Fire Chief with
the same quorum requirements applying as for monthly meetings.
D. All actions of the Department shall be deemed approved by majority
vote of the membership in attendance provided the quorum
requirements are met.
E. Notice of special or monthly meetings may be provided by Pager
System 911. The Department by vote may designate a fixed monthly
meeting date, which shall be posted in the Fire Hall and shall satisfy the
notice requirements.
F. All members of the Department, unless prevented by sickness or other
unavoidable occurrence, shall be present at the annual, monthly or
special meetings of the Department. Any members of the Department
absent repeatedly without being excused by the Fire Chief or another
officer shall have his or her name referred to the Membership
Committee for possible violation of this chapter. The Membership
Committee shall investigate whether a hearing is warranted or may
dismiss the matter without hearing.
A. The Department shall be empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations necessary for the proper conduct of its affairs provided they
do not conflict with general Town policies, ordinances, or any state law.
B. Proposed rules and regulations shall be presented in writing and a copy
of the proposed rules and regulations shall be sent to each member at
least one month prior to any meeting at which they shall be considered
for adoption.
C. Any rules or regulations or amendments thereto shall be considered
either at the annual meeting of the Department or a special annual
meeting. The quorum necessary for the conduct of a special annual
meeting shall be the same as for the regular annual meeting.
D. A true copy of this chapter and any rules and regulations shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the building occupied by the
Department.
§ 62-7 EXPENDITURES § 62-10
53:33
§ 62-10. Jurisdiction.
The Madison Fire Department, its officers and members shall exercise all
power and duties incumbent upon them by state law within the Town of
Madison. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any other
fire department established within the Town from providing fire protection
service within this zone in accordance with state law.
§ 62-11. Amendment procedure.
This chapter may be amended in accordance with the applicable provisions
of state law.
§ 62-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this
chapter shall for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by a decree
or decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decree or decision
shall not affect or impair the validity of any other section or remaining
portion of this chapter.
§ 62-13. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately after adoption by the Town
at a Regular or Special Town Meeting.
§ 62-14. Repealer.
Upon approval of this chapter on June 13, 1994, the Town of Madison
Ordinance Regarding the Organization of the East Madison Fire
Department, previously adopted on March 17, 1981, is hereby repealed.
Chapter 95
LIBRARY, PUBLIC
§ 95-1. Name.
Said library shall be known by the name of "Madison Public Library" and
located in Madison Village in said Madison.
§ 95-2. Membership of Board of Trustees.
A. In addition to the officers now required by law to be elected by the
Town, there shall be elected at the Meeting adopting these bylaws, five
persons who shall be inhabitants of said Town, to be known as "Trustees
of Madison Public Library," who shall hold office, one until the next
Annual Meeting of the Town in 1907; one until the Annual Meeting in
1908; one until the Annual Meeting of the Town in 1909; one until the
Annual Meeting in 1910; and one until the Annual Meeting of the Town
in 1911, until their successors are elected and qualified, and annually
§ 62-10 MADISON CODE § 95-2
95:34
§ 95-3. Duties of Trustees.
thereafter one Trustee shall be elected to serve for five years. The term
of each of the five Trustees first elected shall be determined by lot
among themselves, and any vacancy occurring in the Board of Trustees
shall be filled by the remaining members until the next Annual Town
Meeting, and then the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the
term by the vote of the Town. A majority of the Trustees shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business and no business shall be
transacted at any meeting unless a quorum is present. Women shall be
eligible to membership on the Board of Trustees. All of said Trustees
shall be sworn. The Trustees shall serve without pay.
B. A vacancy shall be deemed to exist in the Board of Trustees by the
death, resignation or permanent removal from Town of any Trustee.
C. The Board of Trustees shall organize at its annual meeting by the choice
by ballot of a Chairman and Secretary.
A. The Trustees shall have full charge, control and management of the
library and library property, and for this purpose shall have the right to
make such rules and regulations for the care of the library property and
the government of the library, not inconsistent with law and these
bylaws, as they may think advisable and enforce the same by suitable
penalties. They shall elect a librarian and fix his pay and the manner
and times of payment and may also elect one or more assistants. They
shall also provide for the proper care and heating of the library building
and for the care of the library grounds. They shall make a written report
to the Town annually of the condition of the library, containing a
detailed account of the receipts and expenditures of money, which said
accounts shall be duly audited by the Auditor of the Town. They may
also incorporate in their report such other information as to the growth
and condition of the library as they think advisable and their report
shall be printed and distributed as a part of the Annual Town Report
with the officers of the Town.
B. All bills contracted on account of the library shall be approved before
payment by a majority of the Trustees and paid by the Town Treasurer
upon orders duly drawn by the Selectmen.
C. They may allow persons not inhabitants of the Town of Madison to have
the use of the library and to take books therefrom upon such terms and
under such regulations as they shall prescribe to insure the good use of
the same and the safe return of the books.
D. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees, but
in his absence a temporary Chairman may be chosen.
E. The Secretary shall keep a full and correct record of the organization
and all meetings of the Board of Trustees, and give notice of meetings
§ 95-2 LIBRARY, PUBLIC § 95-3
95:35
§ 95-4. Meetings.
§ 95-5. Amendments.
These bylaws may be amended or repealed, or additions made thereto, at
any Annual or Special Meeting of the Town, provided the Warrant for said
Meeting contains an article for that purpose and specifies the bylaw or
bylaws to be amended, repealed or added thereto.
§ 95-6. Overdue library books; violations and penalties.
Whoever detains any book, audio visual material or other property of the
Madison Public Library for seven days after written notice to return same,
delivered by certified mail or in-hand by a police officer, given after the
expiration of the time which by the rules of the Madison Public Library
such article or other property may be keep, has committed a civil violation
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $250, such fine to
be payable to the Town of Madison, Department of the Public Library.
Chapter 112
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use ordinances — See Part III, Ch. 422
et seq.
when requested by the Chairman, and shall perform such other duties
as may be required of him by vote of the Board of Trustees.
A. The annual meeting of the Board of Trustees shall be held at the library
building on the Saturday next after the annual meeting of the Town, at
2:00 p.m. in the afternoon, and at such meeting the organization of the
Board of Trustees shall be effected by the choice by ballot of a
Chairman and Secretary as hereinbefore prescribed and also at this
meeting, or some adjournment thereof, a librarian shall be chosen by
ballot, but any vacancy in the office of librarian may be filled at any
meeting and the assistant librarian or librarians may be chosen at any
meeting. The annual meeting of the Board of Trustees for the current
year may be held at the rooms now used by the library.
B. Special meetings of the Trustees shall be called by personal notice to all
members in Town, given by the Chairman or Secretary, or by mailing
written notices postage prepaid, to the last known addresses of all
members. Both of said notices shall state the business to be transacted
at such special meeting and shall be given a reasonable time before the
date of meeting. At any special meeting no business shall be transacted
other than that for which the meeting was called.
§ 95-3 MADISON CODE § 95-6
112:36
§ 112-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Art. VIII, Pt. 2, § 1, of the Maine Constitution and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001, the Town of Madison hereby establishes the Planning Board.
§ 112-2. Appointment.
§ 112-3. Organization and rules.
A. Board members shall be appointed by the municipal officers and sworn
by the Clerk or other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. The Board shall consist of five members and two associate members.
C. The term of each member shall be three years, except the initial
appointments which shall be: One for one year; two for two years, and
two for three years, respectively. The term of office of an associate
member shall be three years.
D. When there is a permanent vacancy, the municipal officers shall, within
60 days of its occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired
term. A vacancy shall occur upon the resignation or death of any
member, or when a member ceases to be a legal resident of the Town, or
when a member fails to attend four consecutive regular meetings, or
fails to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding twelvemonth
period. When a vacancy occurs the Chairperson of the Board
shall immediately so advise the municipal officers in writing. The Board
may recommend to the municipal officers that the attendance provision
be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy will then exist until the
municipal officers disapprove the recommendation. The municipal
officers may remove members of the Planning Board by unanimous
vote, for cause, after notice and hearing. [Note: This section may be
modified, in the case of elected Board members, to indicate that the
person appointed by the municipal officers serves only until the next
annual meeting (or some other time specified here).]
E. A municipal officer may not be a member or associate member.
A. The Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among
its members. The Board may either elect a Secretary from among its
members or hire a non-Board member to serve as Secretary. The term
of all officers shall be one year with eligibility for reelection.
B. When a member is unable to act because of interest, physical
incapacity, absence or any other reason satisfactory to the Chairperson,
the Chairperson shall designate an associate member to sit in that
member's stead.
§ 95-6 PLANNING BOARD § 112-3
112:37
§ 112-4. Duties; powers.
Chapter 120
RECALL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Complaints against elected officials — See Ch.
539, Art. I.
§ 120-1. Authority.
Any elected official in the Town of Madison, except a School Board member,
may be recalled and removed from office by the qualified voters of the Town
as herein provided.
§ 120-2. Affidavit of Petitioners Committee.
C. An associate member may attend all meetings of the Board and
participate in its proceedings, but may vote only when he or she has
been designated by the Chairperson to sit for a member.
D. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on
a particular matter shall be decided by a majority vote of members
except the member who is being challenged.
E. The Chairperson shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board
each month.
F. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consent of
three members or associate members authorized to vote. The Board
shall act by majority vote, calculated on the basis of the number of
members present and voting.
G. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and the
Secretary shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
correspondence, findings and determinations. All records shall be
public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
A. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are
provided by Madison ordinance and the laws of the State of Maine.
B. The Board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper
function within the limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
A. Any five or more qualified voters of the Town may commence recall
proceedings by filing with the Town Clerk a single affidavit:
(1) Stating the name of the five or more qualified voters who will
constitute the Petitioners Committee and be responsible for
§ 112-3 MADISON CODE § 120-2
120:38
§ 120-3. Recall petitions.
circulating the petition and filing it in proper form with the Town
Clerk;
(2) Stating the name and address of each member of the Petitioners
Committee;
(3) Stating the name and office of the person being petitioned for recall
and setting out, in full, the reasons for the recall; and
(4) Signed under oath by each member of the Petitioners Committee.
B. Within five municipal business days after the affidavit of the Petitioners
Committee is filed, the Town Clerk shall issue to the Petitioners
Committee recall petition blanks (the "petition") prepared by the Town.
A. Each page of the petition shall state the name and office of the person
whose removal is being sought, and the full text of the statement of the
reasons for the recall of the elected official;
B. All papers of the petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be
assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be
executed in ink or indelible pencil, shall include the signer's printed
name, and shall state the legal residence of the voter with street
address or other description sufficient to identify the place of
residence;
C. The petition for recall must contain only signatures of the registered
voters of the Town of Madison, equal in number to at least 10% of the
number of votes cast in the Town in the last gubernatorial election, but
in all cases no less than 75;
D. Each petition shall have attached to it, when filed with the Town Clerk,
an affidavit(s) executed by the circulator(s) of the petition stating:
(1) That the circulator personally circulated the attached petition (or
identified portions thereof);
(2) That the petition was at no time in the hands of any person other
than the circulator;
(3) That all signatures were affixed in the circulator's presence;
(4) The number of signatures thereon;
(5) That the circulator believes them to be the genuine signatures of
the persons whose names they purport to be; and
(6) That each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full
text of the statement of the reasons for the recall of the elected
official.
§ 120-2 RECALL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS § 120-3
120:39
§ 120-4. Procedure after filing of recall petition.
§ 120-5. Recall election and hearing.
§ 120-6. Form of recall ballot.
The form of the ballot for the recall election shall be as follows:
E. If the recall of more than one official is being sought, there shall be a
separate petition for each official whose removal is being sought; and
F. A recall petition must be completed and filed with the Town Clerk
within 30 calendar days from the date the petition was issued to the
Petitioners Committee by the Town Clerk.
A. Within five municipal business days after the petition is filed with the
Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall examine the petition and determine
whether the petition is signed by the required number of qualified
voters and is otherwise valid, and shall attach thereto the Clerk's
certificate showing the results of such examination. If found to be
sufficient, the Town Clerk shall attach thereto the Clerk's certificate
certifying the validity of the petition, shall submit the petition and the
Clerk's certifications to the Board of Selectmen at the Board's next
meeting, and shall notify in writing the official whose removal is being
sought.
B. If within 30 days from the date the recall petition is issued to the
Petitioners Committee the petition is not filed with the Town Clerk, does
not contain the required number of qualified signatures, or is otherwise
deemed invalid by the Town Clerk, the petition shall have no further
force or effect, and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
A. Within 10 municipal business days of receipt of the Town Clerk's
certification that a recall petition is valid, the Board of Selectmen shall
schedule a recall election, which election shall be held not less than 45
nor more than 60 calendar days from the date the Board of Selectmen
received the Clerk's certification.
B. If the official sought to be recalled so requests, the Board of Selectmen
shall schedule a public hearing on the matter, said hearing to take place
not less than seven calendar days prior to the recall election.
§ 120-3 MADISON CODE § 120-6
120:40
"Shall [insert name of person subject to recall] be recalled from
the office of [insert name of office]?"
and shall contain two separate boxes, one for a "Yes" vote and one for a
"No" vote. There shall be a separate question for each official whose
recall is being sought. Under the question(s) there shall appear the word
"CANDIDATES" and the direction "VOTE FOR [insert number of
officials subject of recall election]", and beneath this the names of
candidates nominated, listed alphabetically by last name. In the event that
a municipal official is recalled, the candidate(s) receiving the greatest
number of votes shall be deemed elected.
§ 120-7. Nomination of candidates.
Any official whose recall is being sought shall not be a candidate at the
recall election. The nomination of candidates, the publication of the Warrant
for the recall election, and the conduct of the recall election shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the State of
Maine.
§ 120-8. Incumbent to continue duties during recall process.
Unless the official whose recall is being sought resigns, the incumbent
official shall continue to exercise all of the privileges and duties of the
office until the results of the recall election are certified. If not recalled,
the official shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term,
subject to subsequent recall only as provided in § 120-9 of this chapter. If
recalled in the recall election, the official shall be deemed removed from
office upon the certification of the recall election results.
§ 120-9. Limitation on recall petitions.
No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official within four months
after such official first takes office. In the case of an official subject to a
recall election and not removed thereby, no recall petition shall be filed
against the official until at least six months after the recall election.
§ 120-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other
provision.
Chapter 126
TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Selectmen meeting policies — See
Ch. 644.
§ 120-6 TOWN MEETINGS § 120-10
126:41

ARTICLE I
Special Town Meeting Quorum
[Adopted 3-3-1975; amended 3-3-1986]
§ 126-1. Number for quorum.
VOTED: A quorum is 50 for a Special Town Meeting.
§ 126-1 TOWN MEETINGS § 126-1
126:43
Part II: Regulatory Ordinances
Chapter 134
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 7.
Special amusement permits — See Ch. 142.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 308.
Site review — See Ch. 484.
§ 126-1 MADISON CODE § 126-1
126:44
ARTICLE I
Legislative Findings; Purpose
§ 134-1. Legislative findings.
§ 134-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial
exploitation and to regulate dress as a form of conduct and not to impede
the free exchange and expression of ideas. In view of the foregoing
legislative findings, and for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety and welfare, the Town of Madison hereby adopts the following
regulations of commercial nudity.
A. A number of commercial premises in Maine offer nude dancing and
other nude performances as a form of public entertainment.
B. Recently, there has been an interest in locating such an establishment
in the Town of Madison.
C. The types of nude entertainment offered by such establishments and
regulated by this chapter are a purely commercial activity, unrelated to
free expression and the exchange of ideas.
D. Unlimited commercial exploitation of nudity can induce individuals to
engage in prostitution, sexual assaults, breaches of the peace and other
criminal activity.
E. Persons under the age of 18, by reason of their age and inexperience,
are especially susceptible to prostitution and other criminal activity if
employed by or allowed entrance as patrons of commercial premises
offering nude entertainment.
F. Commercial premises offering nude entertainment should be sited in
locations that minimize their negative effects on public health, safety
and welfare.
§ 134-1 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-2
126:45

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 134-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT —
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — Any commercial premises to
which any member of the public is invited or admitted and where an
entertainer provides live adult entertainment to any member of the public.
ALCOHOL — The substance known as ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of
ethyl or spirit of wine which is commonly produced by the fermentation or
distillation of grain, starch, molasses, sugar, potatoes or other substances,
and includes all dilutions and mixtures of these substances.
APPLICANT — The individual or entity seeking an adult entertainment
business permit in the Town of Madison.
APPLICANT CONTROL PERSONS — All partners, corporate officers and
directors and any other individuals in the applicant's business organization
Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted on
premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a
person who is unclothed or in such costume, attire, or clothing as to
expose any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola
or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals,
or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates
the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of
the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or
genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered;
A.
Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted on
premises where such exhibition, performance or dance is distinguished
or characterized by a predominant emphasis on the depiction or
simulation of sexual conduct or activities, including fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female
breast; or
B.
Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually
stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular
basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but
is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed
for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the
public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid,
either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance
and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing,
taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing.
C.
§ 134-3 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-3
126:47
who hold a significant interest in the adult entertainment business, based
on responsibility for management of the adult entertainment business.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (CEO) — Such Town employees or agents
as the Board of Selectmen shall designate to administer this chapter, or any
designee thereof.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and
independent contractors who work in or at or render any services directly
related to the operation of any adult entertainment business.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides adult entertainment within an
adult entertainment business as defined in this section, whether or not a fee
is charged or accepted for entertainment.
LIQUOR — Spirits, wine, malt liquor or hard cider, as those terms are
defined in Title 28-A, Section 2, of the Maine Revised Statutes, or any
substance containing liquor, that is intended for human consumption and
that contains more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume.
MANAGER — Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge
of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult
entertainment occurring at any adult entertainment business, and includes
assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to
carry out such purposes.
MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC — Any customer, patron, club member, or
person, other than an employee as defined in this section, who is invited or
admitted to an adult entertainment business.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting or maintaining an adult
entertainment business.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or
unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental
entity, or other entity or group of persons however organized.
§ 134-3 MADISON CODE § 134-3
126:48
ARTICLE III
Permits
§ 134-4. Permit required.
§ 134-5. Application.
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult
entertainment business unless such person is the holder of a valid and
subsisting permit from the Town to do so, obtained in the manner
provided in this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly
work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment
directly related to the operation of an unpermitted adult entertainment
business.
C. It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult entertainment
business unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting
permit from the Town to do so.
D. It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult entertainment
business unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting
permit from the Town to do so.
A. All applications for an adult entertainment business permit shall be
submitted to the CEO in the name of the person or entity proposing to
conduct an adult entertainment business on the business premises and
shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of
perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the
Town, which shall require the following information:
(1) For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide:
names, any aliases or previous names, driver's permit number, if
any, social security number if any, and business, mailing, and
residential address, and business telephone number.
(2) If a partnership, whether general or limited, and, if a corporation,
date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing
under the laws of Maine, and name and address of any registered
agent for service of process.
(3) Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director
of the applicant holds any other permits under this chapter or any
permit for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented
business, including motion picture theaters and panoramas, from
the Town or another municipality, county or state, and, if so, the
names and addresses of each other permitted business.
(4) A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant
control persons in owning or operating adult entertainment or
other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses
§ 134-4 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-5
126:49
and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any
business permit or adult entertainment permit has been revoked or
suspended, and the reason therefor.
(5) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all
criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses
or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction,
nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition.
(6) For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of
business, occupation or employment history for the three years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
(7) Authorization for the Town, its agents and employees to seek
information to confirm any statements set forth in the application.
(8) The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult
entertainment business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, and telephone number, together with the
name and address of each owner and lessee of the property.
(9) Two two-inch-by-two-inch color photographs of the applicant and
applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of
application showing only the full face.
(10) A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant
control person, by Madison Police Department employees.
(11) A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises for the proposed adult entertainment business, including
a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance
areas, seating areas, manager's office and stations, restrooms and
service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An
application for a permit for an adult entertainment business permit
shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with
Chapter 484 of the Town of Madison's Code of Chapters.
B. An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant's provision
of all information requested above, including identification of "none"
where that is the correct response, and the applicant's verification that
the application is complete. The CEO may request other information or
clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application
where necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. A nonrefundable application fee must be paid at the time of filing an
application in order to defray the costs of processing the application.
D. Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the
information contained in the application is true.
§ 134-5 MADISON CODE § 134-5
126:50
E. If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult
entertainment business permit, a significant interest based on
responsibility for management or operation of the permitted premises
or the permitted business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided
in writing to the Town CEO, no later than 21 days following such
acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required
for the original adult entertainment business permit application.
F. The adult entertainment business permit, if granted, shall state on its
face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the
expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the
permitted adult entertainment business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment
business so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open.
G. No person granted an adult entertainment business permit pursuant to
this chapter shall operate the adult entertainment business under a
name not specified on the permit, nor shall any person operate an adult
entertainment business under any designation or at any location not
specified on the permit.
H. Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the CEO shall provide
copies to the Police and Fire Departments for their investigation and
review to determine compliance of the proposed adult entertainment
business with the laws and regulations which each department
administers. Each department shall, within 30 days of the date of such
application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a
written report to the CEO whether such application and premises
comply with the laws administered by each department. No permit may
be issued unless each department reports that the application and
premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not
yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to
premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the
application. Any adult entertainment business permit approved prior to
premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may
not open for business until the premises have been inspected and
determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings
submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial
of a permit under this subsection if it finds that the proposed adult
entertainment business is not in conformance with the requirements of
this chapter or other law in effect in the Town. A recommendation for
denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws.
I. An adult entertainment business permit shall be issued by the CEO
within 30 days of the date of filing a complete permit application and
fee, unless the CEO determines that the applicant has failed to meet
any of the requirements of this chapter or provide any information
required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application
for a permit. The CEO may grant an extension of time in which to
provide all information required for a complete permit application upon
§ 134-5 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-5
126:51
§ 134-6. Adult entertainment manager and entertainer permits.
the written request of the applicant. If the CEO finds that the applicant
has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult
entertainment business permit, the CEO shall deny the application in
writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable
law.
A. No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at
an adult entertainment business without an entertainer's or manager's
permit from the Town. Each applicant for a manager's or entertainer's
permit shall complete an application on forms provided by the Town
containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable
application fee of $100 shall accompany the application. A copy of the
application shall be provided to the Police Department for its review,
investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager's or
entertainer's permit shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be
true under penalty of perjury. The manager's or entertainer's permit
application shall require the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date
and place of birth, fingerprints taken by Madison Police
Department employees, social security number, and any stage
names or nicknames used in entertaining.
(2) The name and address of each business at which the applicant
intends to work.
(3) Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years.
Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age:
(a) A motor vehicle operator's permit issued by any state bearing
the applicant's photograph and date of birth;
(b) A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth;
(c) An official passport issued by the United States of America;
(d) An immigration card issued by the United States of America;
or
(e) Any other identification that the Town determines to be
acceptable.
(4) A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any
misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other town, county,
or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions.
(5) A description of the applicant's principal activities or services to be
rendered.
§ 134-5 MADISON CODE § 134-6
126:52
§ 134-7. Adult entertainment business permit fees.
(6) Two two-inch-by-two-inch color photographs of the applicant, taken
within six months of the date of application showing only the full
face.
(7) Authorization for the Town, its agents and employees to investigate
and confirm any statements set forth in the application.
(8) Every adult entertainer shall provide his or her permit to the adult
entertainment business manager on duty on the premises prior to
his or her performance. The manager shall retain the permits of the
adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the Town at
any time during business hours of the adult entertainment
business.
B. The CEO may request additional information or clarification when
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
C. An adult entertainment business manager's permit or an adult
entertainer's permit shall be issued by the CEO within 14 days from the
date the complete application and fee are received unless the CEO
determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information
required to be supplied according to this chapter, has made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application,
or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a permit
under this chapter. If the CEO determines that the applicant has failed
to qualify for the permit applied for, the CEO shall deny the application
in writing and shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including
applicable laws.
D. An applicant for an adult entertainer's permit shall be issued a
temporary permit upon receipt of a complete permit application and
fee. Said temporary permit will automatically expire on the 14th day
following the filing of the complete application and fee, unless the CEO
has failed to approve or deny the permit application in which case the
temporary permit shall be valid until the CEO approves or denies the
application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial
of the application. In no event may the CEO extend the application
review time for more than an additional 20 days.
A. Any person desiring to obtain an adult entertainment business permit
shall first pay a permit fee of $700 per year.
B. Any person desiring to obtain an adult entertainment business
manager's permit shall first pay a permit fee of $100 per year.
C. Any person desiring to obtain an adult entertainment business
entertainer's permit shall first pay a permit fee of $100 per year.
§ 134-6 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-7
126:53

ARTICLE IV
Standards of Conduct and Operation
§ 134-8. Standards of conduct and general requirements.
The following standards of conduct and general requirements shall apply to
any adult entertainment business:
A. No employee or entertainer, while in any area viewable by members of
the public, except on the performance area as defined in this chapter,
shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire,
costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female
breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region,
anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals.
B. No employee or entertainer, while on the performance area as defined
in this chapter, shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and
complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion
of the female areola or any portion of male or female genitals.
C. No male employee or entertainer shall at any time appear with his
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the
same.
D. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall
wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the
breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of
the pubic region, or buttocks.
E. No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle or erotically touch any
member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or
permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch
any employee or entertainer.
F. No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of
sexual conduct or any act which constitutes a violation of Maine law.
G. No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public shall
conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the non-stage
area of the adult entertainment business unless that dance,
performance or exhibition is performed at a distance of no less than
four feet from any member of the public.
H. No tip or gratuity offered to or accepted by an adult entertainer may be
offered or accepted prior to any performance, dance or exhibition
provided by the entertainer. No entertainer performing upon any stage
area shall be permitted to accept any form of gratuity offered directly to
the entertainer by any member of the public. Any gratuity offered to any
entertainer performing upon any stage area must be placed into a
receptacle provided for receipt of gratuities by the adult entertainment
business or provided through a manager on duty on the premises. Any
§ 134-8 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-8
126:55
§ 134-9. Responsibilities of manager.
The responsibilities of the manager of an adult entertainment business shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
gratuity or tip offered to any adult entertainer conducting any
performance, dance or exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the
adult entertainment business shall be placed into the hand of the adult
entertainer or into a receptacle provided by the adult entertainer, and
not upon the person or into the clothing of the adult entertainer.
I. Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years or more.
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in
charge of an adult entertainment business to knowingly permit or allow
any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such
premises.
J. Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other
pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the
breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair,
buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult
entertainment business.
K. No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into
any of the nonpublic portions of the adult entertainment business,
which shall include but are not limited to the dressing rooms of the
entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and
the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and
materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to
the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into
nonpublic areas to the extent required to perform their job duties.
L. A permitted manager shall be on duty at an adult entertainment
business at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members
of the public are present on the premises. The name and permit of the
manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The
manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who
provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current
and valid entertainer's permit.
M. The consumption of alcohol or liquor, or beverages containing alcohol
or liquor, shall not be permitted on the premises for a period of time
beginning two hours prior to the use of the premises for any activities
regulated by this chapter, and extending one hour beyond the use of the
premises for any activities regulated by this chapter.
A. The permitted manager on duty shall not be an entertainer.
B. The manager or an assistant manager permitted under this chapter
shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all
times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of
the adult entertainment business. Where there is more than one
§ 134-8 MADISON CODE § 134-9
126:56
§ 134-10. Specifications for premises.
The following specifications apply to the premises upon which any adult
entertainment business is licensed:
performance area, or the performance area is of such size or
configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to
visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee,
and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager
permitted under this chapter shall be provided for each public or
performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually
separated from other portions of the adult entertainment business.
C. The manager shall be responsible for and shall assure that the actions
of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other
employees shall comply with all requirements of this chapter.
A. Performance area. The performance area of the adult entertainment
business where adult entertainment as defined herein is provided shall
be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of
the patron seating areas, and shall be separated by a distance of at least
eight feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public
have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and
located at least eight feet from all points of the performance area shall
separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage
and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult
entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the
premises and at least one manager's station. Visibility shall not be
blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever.
B. Seating. All seating that is intended to provide a view of the
performance area shall be permanently affixed and arranged facing the
performance area such that patrons have an unobstructed view of the
adult entertainment.
C. Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed
throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are
plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal,
measured at 30 inches from the floor and on ten-foot centers is hereby
established for all areas of the adult entertainment business where
members of the public are admitted.
D. Signs. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one inch
high shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area(s) of the
premises stating the following:
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED BY THE
TOWN OF MADISON. ENTERTAINERS ARE:
(1) NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL
CONDUCT
§ 134-9 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-10
126:57
(2) NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE EXCEPT
ON STAGE
(3) NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN
ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE
(4) NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS
WHILE PERFORMING UPON ANY STAGE AREA
E. Recordkeeping requirements.
(1) All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this
chapter shall be open to inspection by the CEO during the hours
when the permitted premises are open for business, upon two days'
written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to
determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) Each adult entertainment business shall maintain and retain for a
period of two years the name, address, and age of each person
employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the
premises as an adult entertainer, including independent
contractors and their employees, as an entertainer. This
information shall be open to inspection by the CEO during hours of
operation of the business upon 24 hours' notice to the permittee.
F. Inspections. In order to insure compliance with this chapter, all areas of
permitted adult entertainment businesses which are open to members
of the public shall be open to inspection by Town agents and employees
during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose
of such inspections shall be to determine if the permitted premises are
operated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. It is
hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary
to insure compliance with this chapter.
§ 134-10 MADISON CODE § 134-10
126:58
ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties; Appeals
§ 134-11. Violations and penalties.
§ 134-12. Appeal.
Any aggrieved party wishing to appeal the CEO's denial, suspension or
revocation of a permit shall have 30 days from the date of the CEO's
written denial, suspension or revocation to appeal to the Board of Appeals
in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 7 of the Town of
Madison Code of Chapters.
A. Any violation of this chapter by an applicant control person, manager or
operator of any such establishment regulated by this chapter shall be
subject to a minimum fine of $500 for each offense. In addition, the CEO
may suspend or revoke the permit for any establishment offering nude
entertainment in violation of this chapter, or in violation of conditions
contained in the permit.
B. Any violation of this chapter by a person other than an applicant control
person, manager or operator of a premises regulated by this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 for the first offense,
and not less than $1,000 for the second and subsequent offenses.
C. Attorneys' fees and costs. If a court determines that an applicant
control person, manager or operator or any other person has violated
this chapter, the violator(s) shall pay the Town's attorneys' fees, court
costs and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Town in any
enforcement action undertaken to correct a violation. Violators shall be
jointly and severally liable for such fees and costs as a court may award
pursuant to this subsection.
§ 134-11 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-12
126:59

ARTICLE VI
Applicability; severability
§ 134-13. Applicability.
After the effective date of this chapter, all commercial establishments
offering adult entertainment that wish to remain in operation shall apply for
a permit as provided herein, and shall not operate unless and until a permit
has been issued.
§ 134-14. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter.
§ 134-13 TOWN MEETINGS § 134-14
126:61
Chapter 137
ALARMS
§ 134-14 MADISON CODE § 134-14
137:62
ARTICLE I
False Alarms or Reports
[Adopted 6-13-1994]
§ 137-1. Purpose and authority.
This article recognizes the need for proper use of equipment and to
minimize false alarms or other interference with orderly conduct of Town
business. This article is adopted pursuant to home rule powers, as provided
for in Article VIII of the Maine Constitution; 17-A M.R.S.A. § 509.
§ 137-2. False alarm prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to report the existence of a fire or other
emergency to the Police, Fire Department, or any other agency empowered
to deal with an emergency when such person knows the report to be false.
This section shall include ambulance calls.
§ 137-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this article by a court shall be subject to
a fine not less than $50 nor more than $100, and shall also be liable to
reimburse the Town and its officials for all costs incurred by the Town and
its officials in connection with this violation, including but not limited to
compensation for any officer of the Town for mileage expenses at the rate of
$0.22 per mile.
§ 137-1 ALARMS § 137-3
137:63
Chapter 142
AMUSEMENT PERMITS, SPECIAL
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENTERTAINMENT — Any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion
for the patrons of the premises, whether provided by professional
entertainers or by full- or part-time employees of the premises whose
incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
LICENSED PREMISES — Any building, structure or area which shall host
any entertainment, amusement, or show, for which a special amusement
permit has been issued.
LICENSEE — Shall include the holder of a state-issued liquor license; any
person, individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal
entity; or any agent or employee of any such licensee acting on behalf of
said licensee or left in charge or control of such licensee's premises.
PERSON — Shall include any corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association or any other entity.
§ 142-2. Permit required; fee.
A. No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed
premises shall permit on said premises any music except radio or other
mechanical device for any dancing or entertainment as defined in
§ 142-1, definition of "entertainment," unless the licensee shall have
first obtained from the Town of Madison a special amusement permit
signed by a majority of the Board of Selectmen.
B. Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing
to the Board of Selectmen and shall state the name of the applicant, his
residence address, the name and address of his business, the nature of
his business, the location to be used, all places of residence of the
applicant during the past five years, whether the applicant has ever had
a license to conduct special amusement and/or liquor license either
denied or revoked, and if so, a specific description of the circumstances,
whether the applicant, including all partners or corporate officers, has
ever been convicted of a felony, and, if so, a complete description of the
circumstances, any information needed by the Board of Selectmen,
including, but not limited to, a copy of the applicant's current liquor
license and whether the applicant has ever had liquor license revoked.
C. No permit shall be issued if the premises and building(s) to be used for
the purposes do not fully comply with all ordinances, articles, bylaws, or
rules and regulations of the Town of Madison.
§ 137-3 MADISON CODE § 142-2
137:64
§ 142-3. Conduct constituting offenses by licensee.
§ 142-4. Inspections.
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
issuance of a special amusement permit are provided for or required by
ordinance or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with or
violations of any ordinance provision(s), it shall be the duty of the licensee,
D. The fee for a special amusement permit is listed in the Town of Madison
Fee Schedule at the Town office. [Amended 6-10-2019]
E. The Board of Selectmen shall, prior to granting a permit and after seven
days' notice to the Town of Madison and the applicant, hold a public
hearing at which testimony of the applicant and that of any interested
members of the public shall be taken.
F. The Board of Selectmen shall grant a permit unless they find that
issuance of the permit will be detrimental to public health, safety and
welfare, or would violate any other municipal ordinances, rules,
regulations, articles, bylaws or provisions of this chapter.
G. A permit shall be valid only for one year from date of issuance.
A. Tumultuous conduct. The license shall not knowingly allow on any
licensed premises any person or person to disturb, tend to disturb or
aid in disturbing the peace of others of ordinary sensibilities or to be
disorderly by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, or
to permit or gather a crowd or audience of patrons to witness any
entertainment, amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition
because of fire or other risks in derogation of the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety or welfare.
B. Riots. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises any public
entertainment, amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote a riot or disturbance.
C. Unnecessary noise. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed
premises the making, creation or maintenance of excessive or
unnecessary or unnaturally loud noises so as to disturb, annoy, injure,
prejudice, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of:
(1) Individuals of ordinary sensibilities or the public in general;
(2) The property rights of others which noises affect and are
detrimental to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare
an/or the prosperity of the residents of Madison.
D. Nuisances. The licensee shall not allow any licensed premises to be so
conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact under any
ordinances, or any articles, bylaws, rules or regulations of Madison, or
statutes of the State of Maine.
§ 142-2 ALARMS § 142-4
137:65
or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto,
for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer, official or employee of
the Town of Madison duly authorized or directed by the Board of Selectmen
to make such inspection at any reasonable time requested, and to assure
that said person performing the inspection shall not be interfered with nor
harassed in any way.
§ 142-5. Suspension or revocation of permit.
§ 142-6. Safety requirements.
§ 142-7. Maintenance of safety requirements.
A. The Board of Selectmen may suspend or revoke any special amusement
permits which have been issued or are to be issued under this chapter
on the grounds that the music, dancing or entertainment permitted so
constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare or is in
violation of any articles, bylaws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the
Town of Madison.
B. Any licensee whose permit has been suspended or revoked may, within
30 days of the suspension or revocation, seek review of such action
pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. The
Superior Court may reinstate the permit if it finds that the permitted
activity would not constitute a detriment to the public health, safety or
welfare, or that the revocation or suspension was arbitrary and
capricious.
A. The requirements of this section apply to both new and existing places
of assembly.
B. An existing place of assembly whose occupancy capacity and safety
requirements were established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance may have its used continued if: 1) it conforms to, or 2) if it is
made to conform to this chapter to the extent that, in the opinion of an
agent of the State Fire Marshal, reasonable safety against the hazards
of fire, explosions and panic is provided and maintained.
C. The licensee or his agent shall be responsible for having complete fire
and safety inspection completed by an agent of the State Fire Marshal's
Office, as shall submit with his application for an amusement permit, a
documented copy of the inspection results, including the changes, if
any, to be made in seating, exits, capacity, safety equipment and/or any
other changes required by the State Inspector.
A. All exit lighting, emergency lighting, and panic hardware shall be
continuously in peak operational condition.
B. Systems shall be under supervision of a qualified person possessing an
adequate knowledge of the proper test and intervals at which these
tests must be conducted.
§ 142-4 MADISON CODE § 142-7
137:66
§ 142-8. Permit and appeal procedures.
§ 142-9. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 for the first offense, nor more than $500 for each
subsequent offense, to be recovered on complaint, to the use of the Town
of Madison, and revocation of the licensee's permit pursuant to § 142-5A of
this chapter.
§ 142-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this chapter shall have no reflection on the
validity of any other part thereof.
§ 142-11. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be immediately upon adoption by the
public at either a Special or Annual Town Meeting.
Chapter 148
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Selectmen animal control
regulations — See Ch. 514.
C. All systems and equipment shall be subject to inspection by the local
Fire Chief at any reasonable time.
A. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit shall be notified in
writing of a decision within 15 days from the date the request is
received. In the event that a licensee is denied a permit, the licensee
shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in writing, and shall
not be eligible to reapply for a permit within 30 days after an
application for a permit has been denied.
B. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied may,
within 30 days of the denial, seek review of such action or failure to
comply in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule
80B. The Superior Court may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds
that the permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the
public health, safety or welfare, or that the denial was not based on
evidence of a violation of any article, bylaw, rule, regulation or
ordinance of the Town of Madison.
§ 142-7 ALARMS § 142-11
137:67

ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 6-21-1977; printed as last amended 6-7-19999]
§ 148-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates:
AT LARGE — Shall be intended to mean off the premises of the dog's owner,
and not under the control and restraint of the dog's owner or a member
of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain, "at heel," or under
command.
DOG — Shall be intended to mean both male and female dogs.
OWNER —
§ 148-2. Running at large.
§ 148-3. Barking or howling dogs. [Amended 6-11-2018]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Town which, by frequent
and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and
disturbing noises of such a character, intensity and duration of at least 30
minutes continuously or intermittently for one hour or more. Any person
who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged or fed within any
dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which he occupies or owns, shall be
considered as harboring such a dog.
Shall be intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping, harboring or in possession of or having
the control of a dog.
A.
Shall also be intended to mean and include, when used in this article,
the parent or parents or guardian of a minor who owns, keeps or has in
his possession a dog.
B.
A. No owner shall cause or permit any dog owned or kept by him, or in his
possession or under his control to run at large within the Town. A dog,
while in or on any public way or place, or in or on any other place,
except as hereinafter provided, shall be under restraint, within the
meaning of this article, if it is controlled by a leash, cord, chain or "at
heel" or under the control of a person and obedient to that person's
command, or on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the
streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
B. Nothing in this article shall be held to require the leashing or restraint
of any dog while on its owner's or keeper's premises, or in or on any
premises used or occupied as a dwelling house.
9. Editor's Note: Interim amendments to this ordinance were adopted 3-6-1989, 6-10-1996
and 4-12-1999.
§ 148-1 ALARMS § 148-4
137:69
§ 148-4. Removal and disposal of dog excrement.
§ 148-5. License required.
No dog may be kept within the limits of the Town of Madison unless the dog
has been licensed by its owner or keeper in accordance with the laws of the
State of Maine. Failure to so license the dog is a violation of this article.
§ 148-6. Fees. [Amended 6-11-2018]
Any person who owns or keeps a dog within the Town that has been picked
up and transported by the Animal Control Officer will be charged a fee to
cover any mileage expenses, boarding, and medical expenses for the care of
the dog. All fees required by this article shall be established by the Board
of Selectmen and published within a schedule of fees, which the Selectmen
may amend from time to time according to the procedures required for
taking actions at meetings of the Board. Failure to pay such fee within 30
days of billing date is a violation of this article.
§ 148-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this article by a court shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200, and shall also be liable to
reimburse the Town and its officials for all costs incurred by the Town and
its officials in connection with this violation, including but not limited to
compensation for the Animal Control Officer at the rate paid by the Town,
mileage expenses, the actual cost of boarding the dog in question, and
reasonable attorney's fees. In no event will the fine assessed by the court
be less than expenses incurred by the Town in process of violation of this
article. After three violations of this article the court will require the owner
to keep animal leashed or restrained at all times. In addition, the violator
shall pay the dog license fee required by state law.
A. No person shall cause or permit any dog excrement to be cast or
deposited by the animal upon the premises of any public park, beach,
sidewalk, or other recreational property owned by the Town or upon
property owned by another individual or business entity.
B. This section shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped
person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to
comply with the requirement of this article.
C. Failing to immediately remove and lawfully dispose of any dog
excrement left upon a public park, beach, sidewalk, or recreational
property owned by the Town, or upon property owned by another
individual or business entity, is a civil violation for which a forfeiture
may be adjudged for each offense (see § 148-7, Violations and
penalties).
§ 148-4 MADISON CODE § 148-7
137:70
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Animals Not Dogs or Cats
[Adopted 6-11-2018]
§ 148-8. Animals on residential properties.
§ 148-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-10-2019]
A. Animals kept incidental to a residential use of a property shall be kept
in accordance with the following:
(1) Horses, donkeys, cattle, oxen, goats, sheep, llamas, pigs and fowl
(i.e., emu, ostrich, turkey, duck, geese and rooster):
(a) Require a minimum of 65,500 square feet (1.5 acres) of land.
(b) Farm buildings, sheds, feedlots, fenced pens used for shelter
and containment shall be kept no closer than 15 feet to the
property line, 100 feet to existing neighboring residences.
(c) Farm buildings, sheds, feedlots, fenced pens used for shelter
and containment must be clean, dry and free from offensive
odor, kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times in a
manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of abutters
due to noise, offensive odor or other adverse impacts.
(d) At all times, animals shall be contained in suitable safe housing
and pens.
(2) Chickens and rabbits.
(a) No more than 12 hens and/or rabbits shall be kept as pets or
for personal use on residential lots of less than one acre.
(b) Chickens and rabbits shall be kept in clean and secure
enclosures at all times on lots less than one acre.
(c) Chickens shall be secured in a well-maintained henhouse
during nondaylight hours on lots less than one acre.
(d) Safe and suitable housing for chickens and rabbits shall meet
the minimum setback of 15 feet from any property line on lots
less than one acre.
(e) The outdoor slaughtering of animals is prohibited on lots less
than one acre.
B. Any structure, feedlot or pen which is subject to the provisions of
§ 148-8A(2), and which existed prior to the enactment of this article
shall not be considered to be in violation of this article but shall not be
expanded or relocated so as to reduce the property line setback
requirements set forth in this section.
§ 148-8 ALARMS § 148-9
137:71
§ 148-10. Variance application. [Added 6-10-2019]
A residential property owner may apply for a variance to the acreage
requirement in § 148-8A(1) or the number of animals in § 148-8A(2).
Variance applications will require an inspection by a designated municipal
official. The Madison Appeals Board is authorized to grant or deny a
variance to this article.
A. On complaint, a designated municipal official shall give notice to any
owner, keeper, or person so keeping the livestock, fowl or domestic
animal to abate the nuisance within 30 days.
B. Any violation of this article after 30 days by the owner or person
keeping such livestock, fowl or domestic animal shall be subject to a
civil forfeiture in an amount not to exceed $200. Each day the violation
continues constitutes a separate offense
§ 148-9 MADISON CODE § 148-10
137:72
Chapter 154
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 327.
§ 154-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate controls to ensure that
automobile graveyards and junkyards do not have a deleterious impact on
the Town's health, safety and general welfare.
§ 154-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3754-A.
§ 154-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all automobile graveyards and junkyards as
defined in state law, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3752, within the Town of Madison.
§ 154-4. Requirements for all new automobile graveyards and
junkyards.
A. Any person wishing to locate a new automobile graveyard or junkyard
within the Town shall apply to the Selectmen for a permit required by
state law pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3751 et seq. The application shall
present either a permit from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection or a letter from the DEP stating that a permit is not required.
B. Map requirements. The site plan map must consist of three blueline
prints to be retained by the Town, with a maximum size of 30 inches by
48 inches and at a scale of between one inch equals 40 feet and one
inch equals 100 feet. The map must include the following:
(1) Date, title, scale, North arrow, name of project.
(2) A boundary outline with dimensions and lot area, in relation to
surrounding streets, walls and adjoining land and land uses.
(3) Names and addresses of present landowners and abutting
landowners.
(4) Locations of existing buildings and other structures, fire hydrants,
streetlights, utility poles, underground water and sewer facilities,
existing trees greater than 10 inches in diameter and other natural
landscape features.
§ 148-10 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 154-4
154:73
§ 154-5. Performance standards for all new junkyards and
automobile graveyards.
(5) Preliminary design drawings of site plans, floor plans, elevations in
sufficient detail to show access, layout and building construction or
modification.
(6) Location and dimension of all proposed buildings and private and
public utilities.
(7) Location map.
(8) All necessary easements, shown on plan.
(9) The location of any sand and gravel aquifer or aquifer recharge
area, as mapped by the Maine Geological Survey, or a licensed
geologist.
(10) The location of any residences or schools within 500 feet of the
area where cars or junk will be placed.
(11) The location of any water bodies on the property or within 200 feet
of the property lines.
(12) The boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain.
A. An effective visual screen at least six feet in height shall be located and
maintained around all sides of the area where junk or automobiles are
deposited or along all property lines.
B. No vehicles or junk shall be stored within 300 feet of any water body or
inland wetland.
C. No vehicles or junk shall be stored within 500 feet of any residence,
private well or school.
D. No vehicles or junk shall be stored over a sand and gravel aquifer or
aquifer recharge area as mapped by the Maine Geological Survey or by
a licensed geologist.
E. No vehicles or junk shall be stored within the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
F. Upon receiving a motor vehicle, the battery shall be removed, and the
engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant
shall be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be
recycled or disposed of according to all applicable federal and state
laws, rules and regulations regarding disposal of waste oil and
hazardous materials. No discharge of any fluids from any motor vehicle
or junk shall be permitted into or onto the ground.
G. All vehicles or junk shall be located no closer than 100 feet to all lot
lines.
§ 154-4 MADISON CODE § 154-5
154:74
§ 154-6. Existing automobile graveyards and junkyards.
§ 154-7. Administration; fees.
§ 154-8. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with state law. Any violation of this chapter shall also be deemed
H. To reduce noise, all dismantling of motor vehicles with power tools shall
be done after 7:00 a.m. and before 9:00 p.m.
I. All federal and state hazardous waste laws and regulations shall be
complied with.
A. Any automobile graveyard or junkyard in existence at the time this
chapter is enacted may remain in operation on the parcel of land it is
presently located on, providing it meets all pertinent statutory
requirements.
B. Any existing junkyard or graveyard shall not expand into a parcel of
land described in a separate deed unless all of the provisions of this
chapter are met on the separate parcel.
C. Within three years of the enactment of this chapter, all existing
graveyards and junkyards shall be enclosed by an effective visual
screen six feet high located and maintained around the area where the
automobiles or junk are being deposited or along all property lines.
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Selectmen. No automobile
graveyard or junkyard permit shall be issued under 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3751 et seq. unless the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
The Selectmen may attach reasonable conditions to any permit issued
to insure compliance with the performance standards and other
requirements of this chapter.
B. Permits shall be renewed annually to remain valid. Once the site plan is
approved it does not have to be resubmitted. The municipal officers
shall annually inspect, or cause to be inspected, the site to ensure that
the provisions of this chapter and state law are complied with.
C. Application and expert's fee. A nonrefundable application fee of $100
shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for same shall
accompany the application. An additional fee may be charged if the
Board of Selectmen needs the assistance of a professional engineer or
other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the Town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to
pay the bill shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be grounds
for the issuance of a stop-work order. An expert shall not be hired by the
municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity
to be heard on the subject.
§ 154-5 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 154-8
154:75
a nuisance, and the violator shall be subject to the penalties set forth in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 154-9. Amendment procedure.
This chapter may be amended by vote of the legislative body.
§ 154-10. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective on the date of adoption.
§ 154-11. Conflict with other provisions.
If the provisions of this chapter conflict with statutory provisions and
regulations enforced by the Department of Environmental Protection, the
state laws shall supersede.
§ 154-12. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be declared invalid, that invalid
provision shall not affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 165
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property Assessed Clean Energy — See Ch.
288.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 422.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 478.
Site review — See Ch. 484.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 490.
§ 154-8 MADISON CODE § 154-12
154:76
ARTICLE I
Building Safety
[Adopted 6-11-2012]
§ 165-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the health and safety of the citizens
of Madison, and to present in a unified format those state statutes effecting
building safety that the citizens are responsible for complying with. By
combining varied state laws under one local ordinance, the citizens will
have a single document rather than many separate and unconnected
statutes.
§ 165-2. Legislative authority.
This article is authorized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001. Further
authority is derived from 25 M.R.S.A. § 2351.10
§ 165-3. Applicability.
This article is applicable to all new structures, both principal and accessory,
that are intended for human habitation or occupancy, including
manufactured and prefabricated structures, and to the renovation and
repair of existing structures.
§ 165-4. When effective.
This article is effective when approved by the voters of the Town of Madison.
§ 165-5. Availability.
Copies of this article are available free of charge at the municipal building.
§ 165-6. Severability.
Copies of this article are available free of charge at the municipal building.
§ 165-7. Conflicts with other ordinances.
Whenever a provision of this article conflicts with, or is inconsistent with,
the provisions of this or any other ordinance, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
§ 165-8. Amendments.
This article may be amended by vote of the legislative body. Amendments
may be proposed by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), the Fire Chief,
the Selectmen, or by citizen petition.
10.Editor's Note: 25 M.R.S.A. § 2351 was repealed by Laws 2009, c. 261, § B-1, effective
12-1-2010.
§ 165-1 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 165-9
154:77
§ 165-9. Nonconforming structures.
§ 165-10. Standards.
All structures constructed, placed, expanded, reconstructed or repaired,
after the effective date of this article and any amendments thereto, shall
meet those chapters of the National Fire Protection Association adopted
by the Department of Public Safety, State Fire Marshal's office; the Maine
State Plumbing Code; National Electrical Code; and the Madison Floodplain
Management Ordinance.12
A. Purpose: This section allows the continued use of legal nonconforming
structures that existed prior to the enactment of this article and that
are determined not to be a hazard.
B. General: A structure is considered nonconforming if it was erected or
placed prior to the effective date of this article, without an inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Fire Chief and for which a
certificate of occupancy has not been issued.
C. Nonconforming structures: Any nonconforming structure can be used,
and occupied, providing it meets, to the greatest extent possible, the
standards of this article. Nonconforming structures may be expanded,
and a certificate of occupancy may be issued, provided that the
expansion does not further increase the nonconformity of the structure.
If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, flood, or other cause,
it may be rebuilt, and a certificate of occupancy may be issued,
provided that the new structure meets the provision of this article to the
greatest extent possible; and provided that any structure in the special
flood hazard area that is destroyed by 50% or greater is elevated at
least one foot above the base flood elevation as is required by the
Floodplain Management Ordinance.11
D. Nonconforming lots: Any nonconforming lot of record in existence prior
to the effective date of this article may be used and built upon, provided
that all provisions of this article except setback can be met.
A. Setbacks.
(1) All new principal and accessory structures, and expansions of
existing structures that do not have common walls, or firewalls and
sprinklers, must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from side and
rear property lines and from the front line a distance to be
determined by the Road Commissioner, but not less than 10 feet.
[Amended 6-12-2017]
(2) The physical location of the property lines is the responsibility of
the property owner or his or her agent.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 422, Floodplain Management.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 422, Floodplain Management.
§ 165-9 MADISON CODE § 165-10
154:78
§ 165-11. Administration; inspections; enforcement.
B. Buildings with common walls: Any new principal or accessory structure
that has a common wall with a structure on an adjacent lot may be
constructed without a setback from the property line, provided that the
building is a sprinkled structure and/or is fire-resistant construction as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief, or their
designee. All other setbacks must be maintained except for the common
wall(s).
C. Buildings with fire walls: Any new principal or accessory structure, or
expansion of an existing structure, that has a fire wall as defined in the
most recent edition of the National Fire Protection Association Section
5000 (NFPA 5000) and is a sprinkled structure may be constructed
without a setback from the rear or side property lines, provided that the
construction and the building plans are approved, in writing, by the
Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief prior to the start of
construction.
D. Any building, except a single-family residential structure, that has early
detection devices (fire alarms and/or sprinklers) shall have an
emergency access box, approved by the Fire Chief and installed per
manufacturer's instructions.
A. Administering agents: The following individuals shall be responsible for
the administration of this article:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO).
(2) The Fire Chief.
B. Notification required: Anyone constructing, or placing, a new principal
or accessory structure and anyone repairing, renovating or
reconstructing an existing structure must notify the administering
agents on forms provided by the Town, prior to starting work.
C. Procedure for conducting inspections: Within 48 hours of receiving
notice that a building is ready for inspection, the administering agents
shall conduct an inspection in accordance with the specifications of the
ordinances identified in § 165-10.
D. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(1) Upon successful completion of the inspection and upon payment of
an inspection fee as determined by the administering agents(s), the
administering agents shall issue a certificate of occupancy for the
structure inspected.
(2) If an inspection identifies defects or problems, a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued until the problems or deficiencies are
corrected. In addition, for those ordinances that require legal
action to be taken, such action will commence if the problems or
§ 165-10 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 165-11
154:79
§ 165-12. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this article shall have their customary dictionary
meanings unless specifically defined in the individual standards identified
in § 165-10.
deficiencies are not corrected within the time frame established by
this article or the ordinance being enforced, whichever is shorter.
E. Appeals: The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
(1) Administrative appeals: to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirements, decision,
or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Fire Chief on the enforcement or
administration of this article. No administrative appeal shall be
considered a "de novo" action.
(2) Variance appeals: to authorize variances upon appeal, provided
that said variances will protect to the greatest extent possible the
health and safety of the citizens of Madison.
F. Enforcement: The administering agents will enforce the provisions of
this article. When the CEO or Fire Chief finds that this article is being
violated, the following procedure will be used:
(1) A written notification will be given to the violator, with the action
necessary to correct the problem. The violator will be given a
maximum of 30 days to complete the correction.
(2) If the violation is not corrected after the second notification, the
administering agent shall inform the Selectmen. The Selectmen are
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violators and
the imposition of fines that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this article in the name of the
municipality. The Selectmen can authorize the CEO to prepare an
administrative consent agreement for the Town to enter into, with
the violator, for the purpose of eliminating violations of this article,
and recovering fines without court action. Such agreements shall
not allow an illegal structure to continue unless there is clear and
convincing evidence that the illegal structure was constructed as a
direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal
official and there is no evidence that the violator acted in bad faith,
or unless the removal of the structure will result in a threat or
hazard to public health and safety.
§ 165-11 MADISON CODE § 165-12
154:80
ARTICLE II
Uniform Building and Energy Code
[Adopted 6-11-2012]
§ 165-13. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Maine Uniform Building
and Energy Code Administrative Ordinance" of the Town of Madison, Maine.
§ 165-14. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this article is to establish administrative and enforcement
provisions in relation to the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
(MUBEC). The Town has authority to enact building code provisions relating
to local enforcement, per 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724(5).
§ 165-15. Administration.
In accordance with 25 M.R.S.A. § 2373, the MUBEC must be enforced in the
Town of Madison beginning July 1, 2012. The Town is required to enforce
the MUBEC through inspections that comply with the code. In accordance
with 25 M.R.S.A. § 2373(4), the Town has chosen the Building Official
option. The MUBEC shall be administered within the Town of Madison by
the Town's duly appointed Building Official.
§ 165-16. Duties of Building Inspector.
The Building Official's duties shall be as outlined in the MUBEC, and shall
include but are not limited to:
A. Receive permit applications, examine construction documents and
issue permits for the erection and alterations of buildings and
structures.
B. Inspect premises for which permits are issued. Make all required
inspections, or accept reports of inspection by approved agencies.
C. Enforce compliance with the provisions of the code and issue notices or
orders to ensure compliance, including suspending or revoking permits.
D. Render interpretations of the MUBEC and adopt policies and
procedures to clarify the application of its provisions.
E. Keep official records or applications received, permits and certificates
issued, fees collected, reports of inspections and notices and orders
issued.
F. Collect any fees due.
G. Refer permits requiring subdivision, site plan review and shoreland
zoning review to the Planning Board as required.
§ 165-13 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 165-16
154:81
§ 165-17. Building permits required.
Building permits are required as per the MUBEC and shall expire as
specified therein. No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Inspector until such time that the applicant submits a completed building
permit application. Such application shall:
§ 165-18. Permit approval.
The Building Official shall examine applications and shall either issue the
requested permit or transmit notice of refusal to the applicant, in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. All other permits required for the proposal
shall be obtained prior to issuance of the building permit.
§ 165-19. Inspections.
In accordance with the MUBEC, upon notification, the Building Official shall
make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the
construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit
holder wherein the same fails to comply. Any portions that do not comply
shall be corrected, and such portion shall not be covered or concealed
until authorized by the Building Official. Work shall not be done beyond the
point indicated in each inspection without first obtaining the approval of the
Building Official.
§ 165-20. Fees.
H. Investigate complaints and act on violations as outlined herein.
I. Issue certificates of occupancy as per 25 M.R.S.A. § 2357-A and the
MUBEC.
A. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made.
B. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal
description, street address or similar description that will readily
identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
C. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
D. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as
required by MUBEC.
E. State the valuation of the proposed work.
F. Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent.
G. Give such other data and information as required by the Building
Official.
§ 165-16 MADISON CODE § 165-20
154:82
§ 165-21. Permit modifications.
After issuance, any modifications to a permit application shall require a
revised permit application and a revised permit prior to beginning work.
§ 165-22. Certificate of occupancy.
The Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy per 25 M.R.S.A.
§ 2357-A and in accordance with the MUBEC prior to a building or structure
being used or occupied and prior to a change in the existing occupancy
classification.
§ 165-23. Enforcement.
Enforcement and penalties shall be consistent with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove,
demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the
MUBEC, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of
any of the provisions of the MUBEC. If the Building Official finds that any
of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall serve a notice of
violation on the person responsible for the violation. Such notice shall direct
the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of
the violation. The Building Official shall be responsible for initial efforts to
enforce the provisions of this article, but enforcement cases shall be turned
over to the Board of Selectmen if the matter requires prosecution in court.
§ 165-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of any building
or premises or part thereof who violates any of the provisions of this
article commits a civil violation and is subject to civil penalties under 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted
to exist, after notification of the Building Official, shall constitute a separate
violation. All fines shall be paid to the Town of Madison.
§ 165-25. Appeals.
In accordance with 25 M.R.S.A. § 2356 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4103(5), an
appeal may be taken, in writing, from any order or direction of the Building
Official to the municipal officers. Fees for appeals shall be established as
outlined above.
A. Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall be required to pay a
nonrefundable application fee. No building permit shall be issued until
all fees due have been paid.
B. All fees required by this article shall be established by the Board of
Selectmen and published within a schedule of fees, which the
Selectmen may amend from time to time according to the procedures
required for taking actions at meetings of the Board.
§ 165-20 AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS § 165-26
154:83
§ 165-26. After-the-fact permits. [Amended 6-12-2017; 6-10-2019]
In the event that any person is found to have begun work prior to obtaining
a permit as required, the permit fees otherwise set forth in the schedule of
fees shall be doubled.
§ 165-27. Severability.
If any provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this article.
§ 165-28. Effective date.
The effective date of this article shall be July 1, 2012.
§ 165-26 MADISON CODE § 165-28
154:84
Chapter 168
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 168-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for Town regulation and use
of the community antenna television system, including its construction,
operation and maintenance in, along, upon, across, over and under the
streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated,
and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the Town of Madison,
including poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, conductors
and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Town
of Madison, of the community antenna television system, and to provide
conditions accompanying the grant of franchise; and providing for the Town
regulation of CATV operation.
§ 168-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — Any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling, operating, managing or leasing a CATV system within the Town
of Madison, sometimes referred to as "the company."
CATV — Any community antenna television system or facility that, in whole
or in part, receives directly or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or
otherwise modifies signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more
television or radio stations, or originates its own signal or signals produced
through any of its community access channels and distributes such signals
by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such
services, but such term shall not include any such facility that serves
only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under common
ownership, control or management.
TOWN — The Town of Madison, organized and existing under the laws of
the State of Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
§ 168-3. Franchise required.
No person, firm or corporation shall install, maintain or operate within the
Town or any of its public ways or other public areas any equipment or
facilities for the operation of a CATV system unless a franchise authorizing
the use of said public ways or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and unless said franchise is in full force and effect.
§ 168-4. Franchise contract; filing fee.
A. The municipal officers of the Town may contract on such terms,
conditions and fees as they deem in the best interests of the Town and
its residents with one or more cable television companies for the
§ 165-28 CABLE TELEVISION § 168-4
168:85
§ 168-5. Public comment periods.
operation of a CATV system within the Town, including the granting
of a franchise or franchises for the operation thereof for a period not
to exceed 15 years, and each franchise shall contain the following
provisions:
(1) The area or areas to be served;
(2) A line extension policy;
(3) A provision for renewal, the term of which shall not exceed 15
years;
(4) Procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints by
the cable television company; and
(5) Such other terms and conditions which are in the best interest of
the Town.
B. Applicants for a franchise shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee to the
Town of $250 to defray the cost of public notice and advertising
expenses relating to such application. The applications shall be filed
with the Town Clerk and shall contain such information as the Town
may require, including, but not limited to, a general description of the
applicant's proposed operation, a schedule of proposed charges,
sufficient financial information to determine the applicant's financial
capacity, and estimated ten-year financial projection of its proposed
system, its proposed annual Town franchise fee, if any, or the basis for
same, and a statement detailing the prior operational experience of the
applicant in both CATV and microwave service, including that of its
officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed
operation.
C. Any franchise contract may be revoked by the municipal officers for
good and sufficient cause, after due notice to the company and a public
hearing thereon, with the right to appeal to the Superior Court under
Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
A. Before issuance of a request for proposals, the Town shall hold a public
hearing with at least seven days' advance notice for the purpose of
determining any special local needs or interests regarding cable
television.
B. Any proposal submitted by a prospective CATV franchise shall be filed
in triplicate with the Town Clerk's office, shall be deemed a public
record, shall be available for a period of not less than 30 days prior to
the Town's taking any formal action thereon, and public notice of the
filing shall be given.
C. Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise contract, the
municipal officers shall review the applicant's character, financial and
§ 168-4 MADISON CODE § 168-5
168:86
§ 168-6. Financial guarantee and insurance coverage.
Chapter 173
technical qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its
qualifications to operate a CATV system within the Town, and shall
conduct a public hearing thereon with at least seven days' advertised
notice prior to said public hearing.
A. Upon the execution of any such franchise contract the cable television
company shall file a financial guarantee in an amount not less than
$25,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of said contracts
and full compliance with any laws, ordinances, regulations governing
said franchise, including cost of dismantling the system, and also
evidence of such public liability, copyright infringement and other
insurance coverage as the municipal officers may require. When the
cable television company has completed its proposed system as set
forth in its proposal, and in compliance with its franchise agreement,
the municipal officers shall permit the company to cancel said
guarantee except for an amount to cover cost of dismantling the
system.
B. The financial guarantee options are:
(1) A performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to
do business, which bond shall be payable to the Town.
(2) An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable
institution satisfactory to the municipal officers and in a form
satisfactory to them, which letter of credit shall certify the
following:
(a) That the creditor does guarantee funds in a specified amount
and for a specified duration; and
(b) That, in case of failure on the part of the company to
satisfactorily perform said contract within the required time
period, the creditor shall pay to the Town immediately, and
without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance
the proper completion and dismantling of the system, up to the
credit limit stated in the letter.
(3) Evidence that cash has been deposited in an escrow account at a
bank or other reputable institution acceptable to the municipal
officers, and the escrow agreement acceptable to the municipal
officers. The agreement shall provide that in case of failure on the
part of the company to satisfactorily perform said contract within
the required time period, the escrow agent shall pay to the Town
immediately, and without further action, such funds as are
necessary to finance the proper completion and dismantling of the
system, up to the amount of the escrow account.
§ 168-5 CURFEW § 168-6
173:87
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Chs. 285
and 667.
§ 173-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 173-2. Purpose and findings.
This is an updating of the Town of Madison ordinance prescribing, in
accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the
conduct of minors on streets at night, effectively enforced, taught in the
homes, internalized and adhered to for generations, all for the good of
minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good,
safety and welfare.
§ 173-3. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
A. Effect on juvenile delinquency. The Madison Board of Selectmen finds
that the curfew meets a very real local need, has been over the years a
significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency and should be
updated and amplified in the light of the Town's local situation and
facts, including the following.
B. Proper time for outdoor activities. This community sense of the proper
time for cessation of outdoor activities by minors on the streets is
reflected in the curfew hours declared by this chapter which takes into
consideration also the danger hours for nocturnal crime and for
accumulations of minors with potential risks incident to immaturity.
C. No commercial recreational facilities. Commercial recreational
facilities for juveniles are almost nonexistent and there is little or
nothing for minors to do outdoors but roam the streets after the curfew
hours which this chapter declares.
D. Parental responsibility. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of
children is the norm, legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have
had a demonstrated effectiveness over the years, as parental control
increases likelihood of juvenile delinquency decreases, and there is a
continuing need for the nocturnal curfew for minors which has achieved
and will continue to achieve under local conditions the purposes
hereinbefore stated.
§ 168-6 MADISON CODE § 173-3
173:88
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18, or, equivalent phrasing often
herein employed, any person 17 or less years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets for ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage
or going home. To implement that thought with additional precision and
precaution, numerous exceptions are expressly defined in § 173-5 so that
this is not a mere prohibitory or presence type curfew ordinance. More
and more exceptions become available with increasing years and advancing
maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation which is
intended by use of the meaningful phrase "be or remain" as relating to a
curfew ordinance of the "remaining" type.
STREET — A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case
of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes the
legal right-of-way, including but not limited to the cartway or traffic lanes,
the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or
other grounds found within the legal right-of-way, including but not limited
to the cartway or traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks, whether paved or
unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal rightof-
way of a street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it is called
or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise.
TIME OF NIGHT — Referred to herein is based upon the prevailing
standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight
Saving Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the Town,
prima facie the time then observed in the Madison Town Office and Police
Station.
TOWN — The Town of Madison, Somerset County, Maine.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to (but not
including the day of) the next, such as the 18th, birthday, making it clear
that 18 years of age. The latter phrase in practice, unfortunately, having
confused a number of persons into the mistaken thought that 18 year olds
might be involved. Similarly, for example, 11 or less years of age means
"under 12 years of age."
A. As a natural or adoptive parent;
B. As a legal guardian;
C. As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
D. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
§ 173-3 CURFEW § 173-4
173:89
§ 173-4. Curfew for minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person 17 or less years of age (under 18) to be
or remain in or upon the streets within the Town at night during the period
ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning at 10:00 p.m.
§ 173-5. Exceptions.
In the following exceptional cases a minor on a Town street during the
nocturnal hours for which § 173-4 is intended to provide the maximum limits
of regulation (and a clear general guide for minors, their parents and their
fellow citizens) shall not, however, be considered in violation of this chapter:
A. Parent. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. Authorized adult. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a
parent of such minor to take the parent's place in accompanying the
minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified
area.
C. First Amendment rights. When exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall
evidence the bona fides of such exercise by first delivering to
communications center personnel at the Police Station, where and by
whom high priority messages to the Police Chief are regularly received,
a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned if
practicable by a parent of such minor with their home address and
telephone number, addressed to the Police Chief, specifying when,
where and in what manner the minor will be on the streets at night
(during hours when this chapter is otherwise applicable to the minor) in
the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication.
D. Reasonable necessity. In case of reasonable necessity but only after
such minor's parent has communicated to the Town Police Station
personnel the facts establishing such reasonable necessity relating to
specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose,
including points of origin and destination. A copy of such
communication, or of the police record thereof, duly certified by the
Chief of Police to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the time it
was received and of the names and address of such parent and minor,
shall be admissible evidence.
E. Sidewalk near residence. When the minor is on the sidewalk of the
place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door
neighbor not communicating an objection to the Police Officer.
F. Returning home. When returning home, by a direct route from (and
within 30 minutes of the termination of) a school activity, or an activity
of a religious or other voluntary association, of which prior notice,
indicating the place and probable time of termination, has been given in
§ 173-4 MADISON CODE § 173-5
173:90
writing to, and duly filed for immediate reference by, the Chief of
Police or the officer assigned by him on duty at the Police Station, thus
encouraging (here as in other exceptional situations) conduct on the
part of minors involved in such activities and striking a fair balance for
any somewhat conflicting interests.
G. Special permit: Police Chief. When authorized by special permit from
the Police Chief, carried on the person of the minor thus authorized, as
follows: When necessary nighttime activities of a minor may be
inadequately provided for by other provisions of this chapter, the
recourse may be had to the Police Chief, either for a regulation as
provided in Subsection H or for a special permit as the circumstances
warrant. Upon the Police Chief's finding of necessity for the use of the
streets to the extent warranted by a written application signed by a
minor and by a parent of such minor if feasible, stating a) the name, age
and address of such minor, b) the name, address and telephone number
of a parent thereof, c) the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and
other physical characteristics of such minor, d) the necessity which
requires such minor to remain upon the streets during the curfew hours
otherwise applicable, and e) the street or route and the beginning and
ending of the period of time involved by date and hour, the Police Chief
may grant a permit in writing for the use by such minor of such streets
at such hours as may be necessary. In an emergency this may be
handled by telephone, or other effective communication, with a
corresponding record being made contemporaneously, either to the
Police Chief, or if unavailable, to the police officer authorized by the
Chief to act on his behalf in an emergency, at the Police Station.
H. By regulation. When authorized, by regulation issued by the Police
Chief, in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly handled
but adapted to normal or necessary nighttime activities of more minors
that can readily be dealt with on an individual special permit basis.
Normally such regulation by the Police Chief or permitting use of the
streets should be issued sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate
publicity through news media and through other agencies such as the
schools, and shall define the activity, the scope of the use of the streets
permitted, the period of time involved, not to extend more than 30
minutes beyond the time for termination of such activity, and the reason
for finding that such regulation is reasonably necessary and is
consistent with the public interest and the purposes of this chapter.
I. Employment. When the minor carries a certified card of employment,
renewable each calendar year, signed by the Chief of Police and briefly
identifying the minor, the address of his home and of his place of
employment, and his hours of employment.
J. In motor vehicle. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor
vehicle, this contemplates normal travel. From excess of caution, this
clearly exempts bona fide interstate movement through Madison,
particularly on normal routes. This also exempts interstate travel
beginning or ending in Madison.
§ 173-5 CURFEW § 173-5
173:91
§ 173-6. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control, to allow, such minor to be or remain
upon any Town street under circumstances not constituting an exception
to, or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter. The term "knowingly"
includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody.
It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to
a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an
objective test. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 173-7. Police procedures.
K. Additional exceptions. Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their
several limitations such as provisions for notification, are severable, as
hereinafter provided, but here reemphasized; and additional, also
severable, exceptions, broadening with the progress toward maturity of
minors enrolled respectively in elementary, junior high and high
schools, will be considered by the Selectmen as warranted by future
experience illuminated by the views of student government
associations, school personnel, citizens, associations and neighborhood
spokesmen, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned
positively with minors as well as with juvenile delinquency.
A. General. A policeman of the Town, upon finding or having attention
called to any minor on the streets in prima facie violation of this
chapter, normally shall take the minor to the Town Police Station, where
a parent shall immediately be notified to come for such minor,
whereupon they shall be interrogated. This is intended to permit
ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, of relevant facts and to
centralize responsibility in the officer there and then on duty for
accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform enforcement and
recording, thus making available experienced supervisory personnel,
the best of facilities and access to information and records. In the
absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate, a police
officer on the street shall in the first instance use his best judgment in
determining age.
B. Refinement. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of
experience and may provide, inter alia, that the police officer may
deliver to a parent thereof a minor under appropriate circumstances,
for example, a minor of tender age near home whose identity and
address may readily be ascertained or are known.
C. Written report. In any event, such police officer shall within 24 hours
file a written report with the Chief of Police, or shall participate to the
extent of the information for which he is responsible in the preparation
§ 173-5 MADISON CODE § 173-7
173:92
§ 173-8. Violations and penalties.
Prevailing community standards and the real internalization thereof or
interpersonal sanctions therefor that in practice count for much, as to
when minors should be off the streets, reflected in this chapter, are hereby
undergirded with the following legal sanctions.
by himself and the officer involved is such case, and in the filing, of such
report within 24 hours.
D. Release of minor. When a parent, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the minor, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then
the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except to the
extent that in accordance with police regulations, approved in advance
by juvenile authorities, the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a
relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent assume
the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the availability or
arrival of a parent.
E. First violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Chief of
Police shall, by first-class mail or hand delivered by an officer, send to a
parent written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of this chapter,
including enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable
penalties.
A. First offense by parent. If, after the warning notice pursuant to § 173-7
of a first violation by a minor, a parent violated § 173-4 (in connection
with a second violation by the minor), this shall be treated as a first
offense by the parent. For such first parental offense a parent shall be
fined $50 and for each subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be
increased by an additional $50, e.g., $100 for the second, $150 for the
third offense. The Twelfth District Court Judge, upon finding a parent
guilty, shall sentence the parent to pay such fine and the costs of
prosecution, and upon refusal to pay such fine and costs to be
imprisoned in the jail of Somerset County for a period not exceeding 10
days.
B. Third offense by minor. Any minor who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter more than three times shall be reported by
the Police Chief to a society or organization whose purpose it is to take
charge of incorrigibles and delinquents and proceedings shall then be
taken before the Juvenile Court for the treatment, supervision and
rehabilitation of such minor.
C. Fines ineffective. A like procedure, before the juvenile authorities, shall
be followed in any case where the imposing of a fine upon a parent shall
not be effective, or where for any other reason the provisions of this
§ 173-7 CURFEW § 173-8
173:93
§ 173-9. Severability; construal of provisions.
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this
chapter. If any provision, including inter alia any exception, part, phrase
or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held
invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby and the validity of this chapter in any and all other respects
shall not be affected thereby. From excess of caution, the Police Chief is
authorized to give advisory opinions, in writing or immediately reduced to
writing, which shall be binding, and shall be adhered to by the police, until
the chapter is amended in such respect, interpreting terms, phrases, parts
or any provision. Normally such advisory opinions shall be in response to
good faith, signed letters addressed to him at the Police Station, questioning
a) as ambiguous, b) as having a potentially chilling effect on constitutional
rights specifically invoked, or c) as otherwise invalid, in all three categories
with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This administrative
remedy must be exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question
in any of the three categories. The Town does not intend a result that is
absurd, impossible of execution, or unreasonable. It is intended that this
chapter be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application
would be unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and
shall be given. The Town does not intend to violate the Constitution of the
State of Maine or the Constitution of the United States of America.
§ 173-10. Continuing evaluation.
The Town will continue its evaluation and updating of this chapter as
follows:
chapter cannot be made effective by the imposing of penalties under
this section.
A. Reports to Selectmen. Accordingly, there shall be compiled and
informally reported to the Selectmen through effective channels (such
as the normal monthly distribution by the Town Manager and Town
Clerk, to each Selectmen, the Town Manager and the Town Attorney, of
noteworthy material) all exceptional cases hereunder of reasonable
necessity, the notices of school and other activities, the Police Chief's
special permits and the Chief's regulations hereinbefore authorized,
and the Police Chief's advisory opinions, for consideration by the
appropriate committee and by the Selectmen in further updating and
continuing evaluation of this chapter.
B. Volunteer programs. For the same reasons, as well as for the
implementation beyond these legal aspects of the basic purposes,
hereof, the Town Manager and relevant committees of the Town
through their respective chairman in coordinated efforts, shall work
with existing, and may organize, voluntary groups, and shall stimulate
volunteer leadership, in programs or research and of action dealing
constructively on neighborhood and local bases, with juvenile
§ 173-8 MADISON CODE § 173-10
173:94
Chapter 180
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
delinquency, and the prevention, control or containment thereof, in all
its ramifications and with practicable steps toward the good life, and
a better life, for minors 17 years of age, and with the working of this
chapter, community-wise and in individual cases, as one much needed
legal tool toward that end as well as for continuing present protection
of minors and of other persons, and of property and other interests,
important to the welfare of the people of the Town of Madison.
§ 173-10 CURFEW § 173-10
173:95

ARTICLE I
Retail Marijuana Establishments
[Adopted 6-11-2018]
§ 180-1. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7
M.R.S.A. c. 417; and Municipal Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII,
pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS (including retail marijuana stores,
retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products
manufacturing facilities and retail marijuana testing facilities, and retail
marijuana social clubs) — Defined as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
§ 180-3. Prohibition on retail marijuana establishments, social
clubs and retail gifting.
§ 180-4. Effective date; duration.
This article shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal
legislative body unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it
is amended or repealed.
A. Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores,
retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products
manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities, and
retail marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in this
municipality.
B. No application for a proposed retail marijuana establishment or retail
marijuana social club shall be processed.
C. No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that
engages in retail or wholesale sales or gifting of a retail marijuana
product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
D. The practice of "retail gifting" whereby a retail facility would offer a gift
of marijuana product in exchange for an additional purchase or service
is expressly prohibited in this municipality.
E. Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession
or conduct pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22
M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
§ 180-1 CURFEW § 180-5
173:97
§ 180-5. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee.
Violations of this article shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 180-5 MADISON CODE § 180-5
173:98
Chapter 189
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street design and construction
standards — See Ch. 339.
Fill and earthen material — See Ch. 588.
Maintenance of public ways — See Ch. 679.
Roads and highways — See Ch. 694.
§ 189-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EXCAVATION — Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any
manner whatsoever, except an opening in a lawful structure below the
surface of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface
and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage
to the public place.
FACILITY — Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or
character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed, or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or
over any public place.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED OR RECONSTRUCTED STREET — Any street
which has been newly built or rebuilt within the preceding three years.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park,
square, plaza, or any other similar property owned or controlled by the
Town, and dedicated to public use.
SUBSTRUCTURE — Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried
cable or wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of
any public place.
TOWN — The Town of Madison or its Town Manager.
UTILITY — A private company, corporation or quasimunicipal corporation
under the direction and control of the Public Utilities Commission.
§ 189-2. Excavation permit.
No person or utility shall make any excavation or fill any excavation in any
public place without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Town, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit to make an excavation or
§ 180-5 CURFEW § 189-2
173:99
fill an excavation in any public place shall be issued except as provided in
this chapter.
§ 189-3. Fees for permits and street and sidewalk openings.
§ 189-4. Cash deposits.
A. A permit fee shall be paid to the Town; a copy of the receipt shall
accompany the application. The Town may charge reasonable costs of
replacement of street and sidewalk openings. All fees required by this
article shall be established by the Board of Selectmen and published
within a schedule of fees, which the Selectmen may amend from time to
time according to the procedures required for taking actions at
meetings of the Board. [Amended 6-11-2018]
B. Special conditions:
(1) There will be a minimum charge made for any street or sidewalk
opening equivalent to three square yards, assessed at the
appropriate unit rate above.
(2) Where three or more street openings are made in sequence (15 feet
or less, center to center, between each adjacent opening) the
permittee shall be charged for one opening measured from the first
opening to the last opening.
(3) For street openings exceeding 100 square yards, a utility company
or contractor may request the Town's permission to contract
privately for the street or sidewalk repairs. If the Town agrees, the
utility company or contractor shall post a bond for the estimated
amount of the street opening times the appropriate unit rate above.
Street repair work must be done to Town specifications, and it is
subject to inspection by the Town Manager.
A. Special deposits. The application for an excavation permit to perform
excavation work under this chapter shall be accompanied by a cash (or
check) deposit, payable to the Town of Madison, Maine, to be deposited
with the Town Treasurer in accordance with the rates set forth herein.
B. Any special deposit made hereunder shall serve as payment for the
permanent repair of the excavation, after the excavation is completed
and proper time has elapsed for settlement and the repair of said
settlement by the permittee.
C. Refund or billing. Upon the completion of the excavation work and after
settlement has stabilized, a measurement shall be made by the Town of
the size of the opening and a bill or refund will be mailed to the
permittee depending upon the costs of said opening to be repaired.
Cost of repair of openings will be a factor of the total number of square
yards multiplied by the rate set forth herein.
§ 189-2 MADISON CODE § 189-4
173:100
§ 189-5. Clearance for vital structures.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water
gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, traffic signal cables
and all other vital equipment as designated by the Town.
§ 189-6. Protective measures and routing of traffic.
D. Public utility companies. Where excavations are made by public utility
companies operating under a franchise issued by the Town or under the
supervision of the Public Utility Commission or utilities operated by
governmental agencies, a permit may be granted without making such
deposits. In such cases, the utilities shall be liable for the cost of the
repair of the opening, which is a factor of the total amount of square
yards multiplied by the rate set forth herein. However, the Town may, in
the future, require such deposit from any utility if a bill rendered in
accordance with this section remains unpaid 60 days after the date of
billing.
A. The permittee shall in general maintain safe crossings for two lanes of
vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe
crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 200 feet. If any
excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate
crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the
street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using
part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least 1/2 of the sidewalk
width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line.
B. It shall be the duty of every permittee cutting or making an excavation
in or upon any public place, to place and maintain barriers and warning
devices necessary for safety of the general public. Traffic control in the
vicinity of all excavations affecting vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle
traffic shall be subject to final review and approval of the Town
Manager or his designated representative.
C. Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the latest edition
of the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices." Warning lights
shall be electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to
traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Electrical
flashers or markers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency
to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflective
material may be used to supplement, but not to replace, light sources.
D. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near
normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the
general public.
§ 189-4 CURFEW § 189-6
173:101
§ 189-7. Relocation and protection of utilities.
E. When traffic conditions permit, the Town Manager or his designated
representative, with the approval of the Police and Fire Departments of
the Town, may by written approval, permit the closing of streets and
alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his
opinion it is necessary. The written approval of the Town Manager may
require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies
and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not
be valid until such written notice is given.
F. Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction
operation to alert traffic within a public street, and cones or other
approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with
the instructions of the Town Manager, after his review of the proposed
traffic control measures for the project.
G. The permittee shall hereby be informed that the Town may require
special police protection at the location where the permittee, by his
work, interferes with these designated school walk routes or crossing
locations.
A. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the
written consent of the Town Manager and the owner of said facility. If it
becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by
its owner. No facility owned by the Town shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by
the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned facilities shall be
similarly borne by the permittee unless other arrangements are made
with the owner of the facility. The permittee shall support and protect
by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other
apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work and
do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under,
over, along or across said work. The permittee shall secure approval of
method of support and protection from the owner of the facility. In case
any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus should be
damaged, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement
devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, the permittee
shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall be
repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such
repairs shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this
subsection that permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone due to such
facility damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual
obligation of the permittee.
B. The only exception will be such instances where damage is due,
exclusively, to the negligence of the owning utility. The Town shall not
be made a party to any action because of this subsection. The permittee
shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground
facilities and protect the same against damage.
§ 189-6 MADISON CODE § 189-8
173:102
§ 189-8. Protection of public property.
The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in the street area without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate
Town department or Town official having control of such property.
§ 189-9. Care of excavated material.
§ 189-10. Breaking through pavement in streets.
§ 189-11. Breaking through pavement in sidewalks.
A. All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or
in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to
endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the
streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those
using the streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area
being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated
material beside the trench, the Town shall have the authority to require
that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and
then haul it back to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be
the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and
make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites.
B. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the
trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified
by the Town. Whenever necessary in order to abate the dirt or dust
nuisance, the application of calcium chloride may be required by the
Town, at the expense of the permittee.
A. All excavations on paved street surfaces shall be precut in a neat
straight line with pavement breakers or saws.
B. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Town when
the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
C. Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the
trench line.
D. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the center line of the trench.
E. Unstable pavement shall be removed over caveouts and overbreaks and
the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
A. All parts of § 189-10 shall apply to this section in all cases except gravel
sidewalks.
§ 189-8 CURFEW § 189-11
173:103
§ 189-12. Backfilling of excavation.
Fine material, free from lumps, stones larger than three inches in any
diameter, and any frozen material selected from the spoil shall be
thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level
of such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill
material shall be placed in lifts of eight inches to 10 inches and compacted
thoroughly by approved mechanical compactors. Within 18 inches of the
subgrade of the pavement, backfill shall be of good, clean, bank-run gravel,
compacted in eight-to-ten-inch lifts. The Town may require soil tests to be
furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional
engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in its opinion, the backfill
for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the
resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material
meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the Town. All expense
for such tests shall be borne by the permittee.
§ 189-13. Restoration of surface in streets.
B. On concrete sidewalks, all cuts shall be made from the nearest joint or
score line on one side of the excavation to the nearest joint or score line
on the on the other side of the excavation.
A. By the Town. Permanent resurfacing of excavations shall be made by
the Town. The top surface of the backfill shall be covered with three
inches compacted depth of bituminous temporary resurfacing material,
by the permittee. Such temporary paving material shall be cold mix,
except that the permittee may use or the Town may require hot mix. All
temporary paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of
the adjoining paving surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard
enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as
well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed.
The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period not
exceeding six months after all backfilling is completed, unless
additional time is required by the Town and shall keep same safe for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been
resurfaced with permanent paving, by the Town, except that if it is not
possible to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe
condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee
shall maintain barriers and lights where required herein.
B. By the permittee. Upon completion of the backfilling and temporary
resurfacing of an excavation within a public place for the installation or
removal of a substructure, the Town, at its option, may allow the
permittee to permanently resurface that portion of the street surface
damaged by the permittee's excavation. In which event, permanent
resurfacing shall be done in a manner and under specifications
prescribed by the Town and subject to inspection by the Town and shall
be completed within a period of 90 days after such authorization to
§ 189-11 MADISON CODE § 189-13
173:104
§ 189-14. Restoration of surface sidewalks.
§ 189-15. Trenches.
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be 200
feet, and no greater length shall be opened for pavement removal,
excavation, construction, backfilling, patching or any other operation
without the written permission of the Town.
§ 189-16. Prompt completion of work.
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with
diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation
permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street as
specified herein. The permittee shall perform such restoration work so as
not to obstruct, impede or create a safety hazard to public travel by foot or
vehicle.
§ 189-17. Urgent work.
When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public, or
public interest require that the excavation work be performed as emergency
work, the Town shall have the full power to order, at the time the permit
is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the
permittee beyond the normal working hours including up to 24 hours a day
to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
§ 189-18. Emergency action.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such
excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or
for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs provided
that the person making such excavation shall apply to the Town for such
a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. Before
any excavation is started, the person or utility excavating must contact all
utilities for on-the-spot locations.
complete the final resurfacing. If such permanent resurfacing is
satisfactory to the Town, all charges for resurfacing will be canceled.
A. By the Town. Permanent resurfacing of excavations in the sidewalk area
shall be made by the Town. If a large amount of square yardage is
involved (100 square yards or more) the permittee may repair the
sidewalk area under the direct supervision and specifications of the
Town.
B. By the permittee. Upon completion of the backfilling, the permittee
shall place one inch of temporary paving material (cold mix) on the top
surface of the backfill to protect the pedestrian travel on the sidewalk
excavated and shall maintain such temporary patch for 90 days after
backfilling is completed.
§ 189-13 CURFEW § 189-19
173:105
§ 189-19. Noise, dust and debris.
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the
general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall
take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris.
§ 189-20. Preservation of monuments.
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of
any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or
a permanent survey bench mark within the Town, shall not be removed
or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the Town to do so. Permission to remove or
disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall be granted
only when no alternate route for the proposed substructure or conduit
is available. If the Town is satisfied that no alternate route is available,
permission shall be granted only upon condition, by an agreement in writing
that the person or utility applying for such permission shall pay all expenses
incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the Town.
§ 189-21. Granite curb.
No person or utility shall remove, damage, haul away or cause misalignment
of any granite curbing, including radius curb and catch basin stones, for
any reason whatsoever without first receiving written permission from the
Town. Any curb missing, damaged, or misaligned shall be replaced or
aligned by the permittee.
§ 189-22. Bituminous curb.
Any bituminous curbing damaged during the course of excavation work or
any other reason shall be replaced by the permittee.
§ 189-23. Excavation during winter.
No person or utility shall be granted a permit to excavate or open any
street or sidewalk from the time of December 1, each year, to March 31,
of the following year, unless an emergency condition exists and permission
is obtained in writing from the Town. Any person or utility wishing to
obtain a street opening permit between these dates shall first explain to the
Town, fully, in writing, the emergency situation existing, before issuance is
granted. If a hazardous condition which could endanger life and/or property
exists, excavation work shall not be delayed by this section of this chapter;
however, a written explanation shall be delivered to the Town as soon as
possible and a street opening permit for the opening made.
§ 189-19 MADISON CODE § 189-24
173:106
§ 189-24. Depth of structures.
No person or utility shall, without written permission of the Town, install
any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts and catch
basins at a vertical distance less than:
§ 189-25. Inspections; rules and regulations.
The Town shall make inspections as are reasonably necessary in the
enforcement of this chapter. The Town shall have the authority to
promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be
reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this chapter.
§ 189-26. Nonliability of Town.
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the Town or any
official or employee any liability of responsibility for damages to any person
injured by the performance of an excavation work for which an excavation
permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the Town or any official or employee
thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by
reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or
the approval of any excavation work.
§ 189-27. Violations and penalties.
A. Streets: 24 inches below the established flow line of the nearest gutter.
(1) If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at a
minimum of 24 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost
edge of the traveled portion of the street.
B. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be 18 inches below the
top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at
right angles to the parkway.
C. Other public places. The minimum depth of any substructure on any
other public place shall be 18 inches below the surface; provided,
however, that the Town may permit a lesser depth in special cases.
A. Any person who continues to violate any provision of this chapter after
receiving notice of such violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of up to $100 for each violation. Each day such a
violation is continued is a separate offense.
B. If the work or any part thereof mentioned in the preceding sections of
repairing or backfilling the trenches or excavations aforesaid shall be
unskillfully or improperly done, the Town shall cause the same to be
skillfully and properly done, and shall keep an account of the expense
thereof, and in such case, such person or utility shall pay the Town an
amount equal to the whole of said expense incurred by said Town with
an additional amount of 50%. Thereafter, upon completion of the work
and the determination of the costs thereof, the Town shall issue no
§ 189-24 CURFEW § 189-27
173:107
Chapter 200
GENERAL ASSISTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Social services appropriations policy — See
Ch. 707.
Property tax abatement – See Ch. 724, Art. I.
further or new permits to any person or utility until it has received
payment of said costs.
C. Any person or utility continuing to violate any section of this chapter
shall receive no further permits until such time as the Town is satisfied
that the person or utility shall comply with the terms of this chapter.
§ 189-27 MADISON CODE § 189-27
173:108
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
§ 200-1. Applicability; legislative authority; policy.
A. The Municipality of Madison administers a program of general
assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive
assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided
within this chapter, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)
GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
B. Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while
encouraging self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible
persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting the work incentive.
When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial
through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the
personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any
unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality, religion,
sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed to
including qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services,
programs, and activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA
program that, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities. GA applicants with physical or
mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order to
access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to
provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the
accommodation request.
C. The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all
applications for assistance and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants
will be provided information regarding their rights and responsibilities
under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an application, the
administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or
not assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the
decision. The administrator will also provide the applicant written
notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing
authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is
determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted
except when the administrator issues nonemergency assistance
conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment.
(See § 200-23 of this chapter.)
D. The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records
pertaining to each applicant and recipient. These records are
confidential as a matter of law. (See 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306.)
E. The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the
administrator will be available. The administrator, or other designated
person/entity, will be available to take applications in the event of an
§ 200-1 CURFEW § 200-1
173:109
emergency at all other times. A copy of this chapter and Maine General
Assistance Law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
§ 200-1 MADISON CODE § 200-1
173:110
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 200-2. Word usage.
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this chapter will have
their common meaning.
§ 200-3. Special definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person who has submitted, either directly or through
an authorized representative, an application for general assistance or who
has, in an emergency, requested assistance without first completing an
application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an authorized
application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been
granted shall be considered applicants.
APPLICATION FORM — A standardized form used by the general assistance
administrator for the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general
assistance and confirming the fact that a person has made application. The
application form must be signed by the applicant to be considered complete.
BASIC NECESSITIES —
Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, nonelective essential medical
services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic
telephone service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property
taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of
the applicant's place of residence, and any other commodity or service
determined essential by the municipality.
A.
"Basic necessities" do not include:
(1) Phone bills.
(2) Cable or satellite dish television.
(3) Mail orders.
(4) Vehicle payments.
Credit card debt. (NOTE: Repayments of loans or credit will be
treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(5)
(6) Furniture.
Loan repayments. (NOTE: Repayments of loans or credit will be
treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(7)
(8) Cigarettes.
B.
§ 200-2 CURFEW § 200-3
173:111
CASE RECORD — An official file containing application forms;
correspondence; narrative records and all other communications pertaining
to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding eligibility including
reasons for those decisions as well as the types and amounts of assistance
provided; and all records concerning an applicant's request for fair hearing
and those fair hearing decisions.
CATEGORICAL ASSISTANCE — All state and federal income maintenance
programs.
CLAIMANT — A person who has requested a fair hearing.
DEFICIT — An applicant's deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level
of assistance for the household as provided in § 200-34 of this chapter less
the household income as calculated pursuant to § 200-33 of this chapter,
provided such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household
income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance,
the household has no deficit.
DISABLED PERSON — A person who is presently unable to work or
maintain a home due to a physical or mental disability that is verified by a
physician or qualified mental health provider.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof used for separate living
quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 2).
ELIGIBLE PERSON — A person who is qualified to receive general
assistance from the municipality according to the standards of eligibility set
forth in this chapter (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 3). "Eligible Person"
does not include a fugitive from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201,
Subsection 4.
EMERGENCY — Any life-threatening situation or a situation beyond the
control of the individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could
reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of a person;
at the municipality's option, a situation which is imminent and which may
(9) Alcohol.
(10)Pet care costs.
(11)Vacation costs.
(12)Legal fees.
(13)Late fees.
(14)Key deposits.
Security deposits for rental property (except for those situations
where no other permanent lodging is available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver, deferral or installment arrangement
cannot be made between the landlord and tenant to satisfy the
need for the immediate payment of the security deposit or payment
in full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 1).
(15)
§ 200-3 MADISON CODE § 200-3
173:112
result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual or
municipality if not resolved immediately (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection
4, 4308, Subsection 2, and 4310).
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ADMINISTRATOR — A municipal official
designated to receive applications, make decisions concerning an
applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare records and
communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an elected
overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director,
or caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 12).
GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM — A service administered by a
municipality for the immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide
the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families. A
general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for
defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a
continuing "grant-in-aid" or "categorical" welfare program. This definition
shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is
found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301, Subsection 5).
HOUSEHOLD — An individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more
individuals, even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between
individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive
assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the
shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of
assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata share is
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the
entire household by the total number of household members. The income
of household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to
the applicant only when there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301,
Subsection 6).
INCOME —
Any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household
including:
(1) Net remuneration for services performed.
(2) Cash received on either secured or unsecured credit.
(3) Payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits.
(4) Veterans' pensions and/or benefits.
(5) Retirement accounts or benefits.
(6) Workers' compensation.
(7) Unemployment benefits.
A.
§ 200-3 CURFEW § 200-3
173:113
(8) Federal and/or state tax returns.
Benefits under any state or federal categorical assistance program,
such as, TANF, supplemental security income, social security and
any other payments from governmental sources (unless specifically
prohibited by any law or regulation).
(9)
(10)Court-ordered support payments, e.g., child support.
(11) Income from pension or trust funds.
Household income from any other source, including relatives or
unrelated household members.
(12)
(13)Student loans.
(14)Rental income.
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that
must be liquidated for the purposes of deriving income:
Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade,
governmental entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by
state or federal law;
(1)
Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard
deduction, such as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union
dues, transportation costs to and from work, special equipment
costs and child care expenses; or
(2)
Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are fulltime
students and who are not working full time.
(3)
B.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the
calculation shall be a thirty-day period commencing on the date of
the application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an
applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities,
provided that the income does not exceed the income standards
established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 7).
C.
Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being
counted as income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
(1) Food stamps [7 U.S.C.A. § 2017(b)].
(2) Li-Heap (42 U.S.C.A. § 8624).
(3) Family development accounts (22 M.R.S.A. § 3762).
(4) AmeriCorps VISTA program benefits [42 U.S.C.A. § 5044(f)].
Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness
Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic
necessities (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 7).
(5)
D.
§ 200-3 MADISON CODE § 200-3
173:114
INITIAL APPLICANT — A person who has not applied for assistance in this
or any other municipality is considered an initial applicant.
JUST CAUSE — A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from
complying with one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending
a scheduled fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection 8, 4316-A,
Subsection 5).
LUMP SUM PAYMENT — A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of
money issued to an applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes,
but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions of social security
benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits,
disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money
received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards,
property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment
includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after payment
of required deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. A
lump sum payment does not include conversion of a nonliquid resource to
a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been used or is intended to be
used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 8-A).
MATERIAL FACT — A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some
bearing on the determination of an applicant's general assistance eligibility,
and which would, if disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable
effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
MAXIMUM LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE — The amount of financial assistance
for a commodity or service as established in § 200-34 of this chapter or the
actual cost of any such basic necessity, whichever is less.
MISCONDUCT — For purposes of the GA work requirement (See 22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A.), "misconduct" shall have the same meaning as
"misconduct" defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043, 23. (See Appendix 113 of this
chapter for the official definition of misconduct.) Generally, employees are
guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her duties or
obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer's interest may also
be found guilty of misconduct.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, town or plantation administering a general
assistance program.
MUNICIPALITY OF RESPONSIBILITY — The municipality which is
financially liable for the support of an eligible person at the time of
application (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection 9, 4307).
NEED — The condition whereby a person's income, money, property, credit,
assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for the
(6) Aspire support service payments (10-144 CMR Ch. 323).
13.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-3 CURFEW § 200-3
173:115
individual and the individual's family are less than the maximum levels of
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection 10, 4308).
NET GENERAL ASSISTANCE COSTS — Those direct costs incurred by
a municipality in providing assistance to eligible persons according to
standards established by the municipal officers. These do not include the
administrative expenses of the general assistance program (22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4301, Subsection 11, 4311).
PERIOD OF ELIGIBILITY — The time for which a person has been granted
assistance. The period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of
assistance provided, however, in no event shall this period extend beyond
one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 1).
POOLING OF INCOME — The financial relationship among household
members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities
may by ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons
sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are
requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one
or more household members are not pooling their income have the burden
of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
REAL ESTATE — Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other
things affixed to the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 13).
RECIPIENT — A person who has applied for and is currently receiving
general assistance.
REPEAT APPLICANTS — All applicants for general assistance that are
not initial applicants are repeat applicants. For purposes of this chapter,
"repeat" and "subsequent" shall have the same meaning.
RESIDENT — A person who is physically present in a municipality with the
intention of remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish
a home and who has no other residence. A person who applies for assistance
in a municipality who is not a resident of that municipality or any other
municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first
applies. That municipality must take an application and grant assistance to
the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new residence
in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
RESOURCES —
Include any program, service, or other sources of support which are
an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two
kinds of resources: "available" and "potential." "Potential resources"
are programs, services, nonliquid assets, or trusts that typically require
people to apply in writing and/or wait a period of time before eligibility
is determined or the potential income is released.
A.
"Potential resources" include but are not limited to any state or federal
assistance program, employment benefits, governmental or private
pension program, available trust funds, support from legally liable
B.
§ 200-3 MADISON CODE § 200-3
173:116
THIRTY-DAY NEED — An applicant's "thirty-day need" is the sum of the
household's prospective thirty-day costs, from the date of application, for
the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this calculation, the thirtyday
cost for any basic need shall be the household's actual thirty-day
cost for the basic necessity or the maximum thirty-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this chapter, whichever is less.
UNFORESEEN REPEAT APPLICANTS — Repeat applicants who have not
applied for assistance within the last 12 months and who have been
regularly employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private
source and who have unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault
of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have
ceased through no fault of their own.
UNMET NEED — An applicant's "unmet need" is the household's thirtyday
need as established by § 200-32 of the ordinance less the household
income as calculated pursuant to § 200-33 of this chapter, provided such
a calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is greater
than the household's thirty-day need, the household does not have an unmet
need.
WORK REQUIREMENTS — Those obligations the municipal administrator
places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing
potential eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in
ineligibility when violated, and are not merely optional, discretionary, or
advisory. Work requirements include registering for work, looking for work
relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources where
the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317). "Potential resources" include the TANF (previously
known as AFDC) program, food stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP),
subsidized housing, and similar programs.
"Available resources" include resources which are immediately
available to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured by the
applicant without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank accounts,
assets for which there is an immediate and available market, or support
from relatives which is being made available at the time of application
and for which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable
steps to secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region). At the
discretion of the GA administrator, a necessary minimum balance
required by a financial institution in order to obtain free checking or
in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
C.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients
of services, commodities or facilities made available by private
organizations or charities. Although GA applicants/recipients may be
informed of the existence of a charitable resource and/or organization,
GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a private
charitable resource(s).
D.
§ 200-3 CURFEW § 200-3
173:117
in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers, maintaining employment,
performing workfare, and participating in training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing
employment.
§ 200-3 MADISON CODE § 200-3
173:118
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
§ 200-4. Establishment.
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general
assistance.
§ 200-5. Confidentiality of information.
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient
of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the
general public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what
information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306).
§ 200-6. Maintenance of records.
A. Release of information. Applicants, recipients and their legal
representatives have the right to review their case records. No record
will be released to a third party, however, unless the administrator
receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing
the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in
the applicant's file stating to whom the record was released and the
date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the
reproduction of any records when appropriate.
B. Information from other sources; penalty.
(1) Information furnished to the municipality by the Department of
Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution,
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general
assistance administrator will also comply with laws relating to the
confidentiality of vital statistic records such as those concerning
birth, marriage and death (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
(2) Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks)
or any employer of a general assistance applicant who refuses to
provide necessary information to the administrator in order to
verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for
the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information,
without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who
knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a material
fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4314, 4315).
C. Misuse of information. Misuse of any information relating to an
applicant or recipient is a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42,
Subsection 2).
§ 200-4 CURFEW § 200-6
173:119
A. The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate
general assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are
necessary to:
(1) Provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
(2) Document and support decisions concerning an applicant or
recipient; and
(3) Ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a
fair hearing or judicial review of a decision by the general
assistance administrator.
B. Case records.
(1) The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case
record, either in paper format or digital format for each applicant
or recipient. Each case record will include at least:
(a) Household applications.
(b) Budget sheets.
(c) Information concerning the types and amounts of assistance
provided.
(d) Narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency
situation whenever general assistance is granted in amounts
greater than the applicant's mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need, whichever is less).
(e) Written decisions.
(f) Requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority
decisions.
(g) Workfare participation records.
(h) Repayments to the municipality.
(i) Narrative writings documenting the need for general
assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information,
referrals, changes in status.
(j) Client authorization(s) for the release of GA information and/or
reason(s) for the release of confidential information.
(k) Adjustments in aid, and suspension or termination of eligibility.
(l) Physician's documentation.
(m) Supplemental security income (SSI) interim assistance
reimbursement authorization forms.
(n) Vendor forms.
§ 200-6 MADISON CODE § 200-6
173:120
(2) Case records will not include information or material that is
irrelevant to either the applicant's or recipient's application or the
administrator's decisions.
C. Retention of records. General assistance records shall be retained for a
minimum of three full years. The three-year period shall coincide with
the state's fiscal year which begins July 1 and ends on the following
June 30. Records may be destroyed after three years by one of the two
preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/
destruction process. In the event a client's records contain SSI
reimbursement forms, the client's records should be maintained so that
the municipality may seek reimbursement.
§ 200-6 CURFEW § 200-6
173:121

ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
§ 200-7. Right to apply.
A. Who may apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of
the family, any other responsible household member, or an authorized
representative must apply in person, except in special emergency
situations as provided in § 200-15 of this chapter or except when the
applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has
made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304,
Subsection 3). In such cases, the administrator may require a
representative to present a signed statement documenting that he/she
is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf of the
named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a
written application and any other required forms so that the
administrator can determine eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305, 4308).
With notice, all members of the household receiving general assistance
may be required to physically present themselves to the administrator.
Note that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
B. Application via telephone. When a person has an emergency but is
unable to apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of child care,
lack of transportation or other good cause, and he/she cannot send an
authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application
by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the
applicant's home with his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
C. Written application upon each request. Each request for assistance will
be administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator
will make an independent determination of eligibility for general
assistance each time a person applies (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308, 4309).
D. Applications accepted; posted notice. Application forms will be
available during regular business hours at the municipal office and
when the general assistance administrator is conducting interviews
with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people
may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to
take emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted
notice shall include the fact that the municipality must issue a written
decision on all applications within 24 hours, and the DHHS toll-free
telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints.
Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only
during the regular hours established and posted by the administrator.
In an emergency, however, the administrator or his or her designee will
be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
§ 200-7 CURFEW § 200-8
173:123
§ 200-8. Application interview.
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will
interview each applicant personally before making a decision. The interview
will be conducted in private, although the applicant may be accompanied by
a legal representative, friend or family member.
§ 200-9. Contents of application.
§ 200-10. General assistance administrator's responsibilities at
time of application.
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their
rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements
associated with applying for and receiving general assistance, including
A. At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory
information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, date of birth, social security
number or appropriate United States Customs and Immigration
Services (USCIS) documentation, and phone number;
(2) Names, date(s) of birth, and social security number(s) or
appropriate USCIS documentation of other household members for
whom the applicant is seeking assistance;
(3) Total number of individuals living with the applicant;
(4) Employment and employability information;
(5) All household income, resources, assets, and property;
(6) Household expenses;
(7) Types of assistance being requested;
(8) Penalty for false representation;
(9) The applicant's permission to verify information;
(10) The signature of the applicant and the date.
B. In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification
records (e.g., social security card/number) because the record may
have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the initial applicant may be
provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in order
to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant
makes a good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required
to cure an immediate and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In
such cases, the municipality may elect to provide only a prorated
amount of GA, e.g., five days' worth, while the applicant proceeds to
obtain the required information.
§ 200-8 MADISON CODE § 200-10
173:124
application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant rights, and
applicant reimbursement obligations.
A. Application requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill
out the application form as described in the preceding section. The
administrator will inform the applicant of any other information or
documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for the
administrator to evaluate the applicant's eligibility for assistance. The
administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of
information form or reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain
the applicant's signature or written authorization.
B. Eligibility requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally
or in writing, the applicant of the eligibility requirements of the
program, including:
(1) The income standard of need;
(2) The applicant's ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resourcerelated
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately
below;
(3) The financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of
spending household income on nonbasic necessities; and
(4) The disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud,
failing to perform work-related assignments without just cause, or
failing to make a good faith effort to secure potential resources
when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has
been explained to the applicant in writing.
C. Applicant rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their
rights to:
(1) Review the municipal General Assistance Ordinance and Maine
General Assistance Law;
(2) Apply for assistance;
(3) Receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of
applying for assistance;
(4) Confidentiality;
(5) Contact the DHHS;
(6) Challenge the administrator's decision by requesting a fair hearing.
D. Reimbursement/recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant
that he/she must reimburse the municipality for the amount of general
assistance he/she has been granted in the event of a subsequent ability
to pay. The municipality may also, as appropriate, contact the client's
legal representative to inform him or her of the client's obligation to
repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
§ 200-10 CURFEW § 200-10
173:125
§ 200-11. Applicant's responsibilities at time of application.
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the
amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous 12
months from any relative legally liable for the applicant's support
(spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article VIII,
Recovery of Expenses) (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4318, 4319). Whenever
applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens a
municipality may place against a recipient's real or personal property,
such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the workers'
compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI "interim assistance
agreement" lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, Recovery
of Expenses.
A. The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to
provide accurate, complete and current household information and
verifiable documentation concerning:
(1) Income.
(2) Resources.
(3) Assets.
(4) Employment.
(5) Use of income.
(6) Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the
applicant's support.
(7) Any change in this information from a previous application that
would affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
B. In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable
documentation that shows the applicant:
(1) Has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work
without just cause or been discharged from employment for
misconduct;
(2) Has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or
employed on a part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of
employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare
assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments;
(3) Has made use of all available and potential resources when
directed in writing to such a program by the administrator,
including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs or
the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and
(4) Has participated in any training, retraining, educational or
rehabilitative program when appropriate and when directed in
§ 200-10 MADISON CODE § 200-11
173:126
§ 200-12. Action on applications.
§ 200-13. Withdrawal of application.
An application is considered withdrawn if:
§ 200-14. Temporary refusal of application.
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may
temporarily refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
writing to such a program by the administrator, in order to diminish
the applicant's need for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4316-A,
4317).
A. Written decision. The general assistance administrator will give a
written decision to the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within
24 hours after the applicant submits a written application. Assistance
will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period except when
the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to § 200-23 of this
chapter) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion
of a workfare assignment (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A
written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether
assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.
B. Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
(1) The type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the
applicant's ineligibility;
(2) The period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
(3) The specific reasons for the decision;
(4) The applicant's right to a fair hearing; and
(5) The applicant's right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the
municipality has acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
A. The applicant requests in writing that his or her application be
withdrawn; or
B. The applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other
form needed by the general assistance administrator.
A. When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or
when the applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these
situations, the applicant will be asked to leave, and, if the applicant
refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The applicant will be
informed that an application will only be accepted when his or her
conduct is under control.
§ 200-11 CURFEW § 200-14
173:127
§ 200-15. Emergencies.
B. If the administrator believes that an applicant's behavior presents a
threat to the health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee,
or if such behavior is violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive,
disruptive or harassing behavior and has been required to leave on
more than one occasion, then the applicant may be required to
designate a third party to apply for assistance on his or her behalf and
the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal building;
C. When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant,
that person may be required to provide written verification that he/she
has been duly authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A. An emergency is considered to be any life-threatening situation or a
situation beyond the control of the applicant which if not alleviated
immediately could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health
or safety of the applicant or a member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301, Subsection 4). Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for
assistance to alleviate an emergency may be granted assistance, except
as provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources
to meet an actual emergency need and have not had sufficient income
and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
B. A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the
municipality determines that an emergency is imminent and that failure
to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and unnecessary
costs to either the client or the municipality.
C. Disqualification.
(1) A person who is currently disqualified from receiving general
assistance due to a violation of § 200-22, 200-23, 200-24, 200-25,
200-26 or 200-30 of this chapter is ineligible to receive emergency
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308, Subsection 2A). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance.
For the purposes of this section, "dependents" are defined as:
(a) A dependent minor child;
(b) An elderly, ill or disabled person; or
(c) A person whose presence is required to provide care for any
child under the age of six years or any ill or disabled member of
the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 3).
(2) In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified
and assistance is requested for the remaining dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the
§ 200-14 MADISON CODE § 200-15
173:128
maximum level of assistance available to the entire household by
the total number of household members.
D. Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the
administrator that he/she needs assistance immediately, the
administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance within 24
hours, provided that:
(1) After interviewing the applicant, the administrator has determined
that the applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a
verification of information is completed; and
(2) The applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his
or her need. The administrator may contact at least one other
person to confirm the applicant's statements about needing
emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized
until the applicant's eligibility is confirmed (22 M.R.S.A. § 4310).
E. Telephone applications.
(1) If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due
to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and
if there is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of
the applicant, the administrator shall accept an application over
the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
(2) The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a
telephone application if the applicant refuses to allow the
administrator to verify the information either by visiting his or her
home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her
eligibility through any other means.
F. Limitation on emergency assistance.
(1) Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency assistance.
If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all
or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which
are not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general
assistance to replace the misspent money (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308,
Subsection 2 and 4315-A).
(2) All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator
with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant did
not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation.
According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the
amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the
emergency and the amount of income available to the household
during the applicable time period.
(a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the
application for emergency assistance, except in those cases
§ 200-15 CURFEW § 200-15
173:129
§ 200-16. Residence.
where the emergency was created by a negative account
balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage
or utility payments), and the negative account balance was
created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the
applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time
the account balance has been in the negative.
(b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information
pertinent to the applicant's ability to provide for his or her
basic necessities for the applicable time period, including
evidence of all income and resources received over that period
of time.
(c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household's
basic necessities during the applicable time period, per month,
in accordance with the maximum levels established by this
chapter for the specific basic necessity or the actual monthly
cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with
averting the particular emergency situation for which the
applicant is seeking assistance.
(d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the
applicable time period, the administrator shall subtract the
total income and lump sum payments available to the
household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time
period.
(e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency
assistance to the difference yielded by the computation in
Subsection F(2)(d), even when such a grant will not totally
alleviate the emergency situation.
(f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency
assistance in life-threatening situations or for initial
applicants; that is, persons who have never before applied for
general assistance.
(g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a
municipality from electing to alleviate an emergency situation
in the most cost-effective manner available, provided such a
determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in
conformance with general assistance law.
A. The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible
persons applying for assistance who are residents of this municipality. A
resident is a person who has no other residence and is physically
present in this municipality and who intends to remain here and
establish a household.
§ 200-15 MADISON CODE § 200-16
173:130
B. The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance
to eligible persons who apply here and who are not residents of this
municipality or any other municipality. If a person who is not a resident
of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator
will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance
until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
C. Moving/relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or
transporting an applicant or recipient into another municipality unless
the person requests assistance to relocate to another municipality. If
the administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants
financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this
municipality will be responsible for providing assistance to the
applicant for 30 days after he/she moves, provided the recipient
remains eligible.
D. Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution
located in another municipality (such as a group home, shelter,
rehabilitation center, nursing home, or hospital) and requests
assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of
this municipality for up to six months after he/she enters the institution
if the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4307 and 4313 are met. The
municipality thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an
institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this
municipality to which he/she intends to return. The municipality also
recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering
the institution (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307, Subsection 4).
E. Temporary housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary
lodging are considered institutions if the municipality grants financial
assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises or encourages an
applicant to stay in temporary lodging. [Note: Municipalities which
illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the
applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant
for up to six months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4307, Subsection 4).]
F. Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a
resident of another municipality but that municipality disputes its
responsibility, the administrator will notify the DHHS in Augusta
(287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility
and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded
which municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another
municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover the amount due
from the other municipality, (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4307, Subsections 5 and 6).
§ 200-16 CURFEW § 200-16
173:131

ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
§ 200-17. General eligibility.
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has
complied with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
§ 200-18. Initial application; subsequent applicants.
§ 200-19. Eligibility for categorical assistance.
A. Initial application.
(1) For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general
rule, as provided by law, applies to all applicants, including initial
applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting
employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (26 M.R.S.A. § 1043, Subsection 23)
(See § 200-22 of this chapter.) and to fugitives from justice as
defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201, Subsection 4 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301,
Subsection 3). An initial applicant is a person who has never before
applied for general assistance in any municipality in Maine (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308, Subsection 1).
(2) "Need" means that the applicant's income (including prorated
income, where applicable), property, credit, assets or other
resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance
contained in § 200-34 of this chapter or the applicant's thirty-day
need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
B. Subsequent applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are
repeat applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for
general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also
people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at
any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was not
a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible
for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other
eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be
adversely affected to the extent they have not used their income and
resources to secure basic necessities.
A. Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from
receiving general assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible.
Benefits received from other assistance programs will be considered as
income when determining need, with the exception of food stamps,
which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken
into consideration when determining need [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)]. In
addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will
§ 200-17 CURFEW § 200-19
173:133
§ 200-20. Personal property.
not be considered as income; that is, the administrator will always
compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or
ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs associated with his or her fuel
needs [42 U.S.C. § 8624(f)]. The calculation of general assistance for
heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with Subsection C(3) under "Types
of income" at § 200-33 of this chapter. For several additional exceptions
please refer to Subsection D of the definition of "Income" in § 200-3 of
this chapter.
B. Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within
seven days after being advised in writing to do so by the general
assistance administrator. Persons who, without just cause, make no
good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from
receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
A. Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash,
including but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of
deposit, retirement accounts, life insurance policies and other
marketable security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and
until he or she uses these assets to meet his or her basic needs, and
thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA administrator, liquid
assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance necessary for
obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per household
may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
B. Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property,
such as but not limited to: a motor vehicle (except as provided
immediately below in Subsection C), or a boat, trailer, recreation
vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are
nonessential to the maintenance of the applicant's household, will be
eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person
is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in § 200-3 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to
cash at fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock,
farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of income
are exempt from the above category and are not considered available
assets.
C. Automobile ownership.
(1) Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person
ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment,
obtaining medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or for
any other reason the GA administrator determines reasonable for
the maintenance of the applicant's household. Recipients of
§ 200-19 MADISON CODE § 200-20
173:134
§ 200-21. Ownership of real estate.
general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8,000 may be required, with written, seven-day
notice, to make a good faith effort to trade that automobile for an
automobile with a market value of less than $8,000. Any income
received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade down must
be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or
trade down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in
disqualification (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
(2) The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car
payment or vehicle maintenance cost, including insurance, for
which the applicant is responsible. However, provided the vehicle
value is $8,000 or less and the applicant is utilizing the vehicle for
any of the above-mentioned "essential" reasons, the municipality in
its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable car payments,
reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as "misspent" income. General assistance for travelrelated
needs shall be computed in accordance with
§ 200-34B(7)(g), (h) Work related/Travel expenses.
D. Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a
noncontributory basis or that is required as a condition of employment
will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general assistance. Life
insurance with a cash surrender value may, at the discretion of the GA
administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
E. Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair
market value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing
eligibility for general assistance will not be granted general assistance
to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance
will be denied within a one-hundred-twenty-day limit up to the
uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a onehundred-
twenty-day disqualification will be issued. There will be a
presumption that the applicant transferred his or her assets in order to
be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less
than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30 days
prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can
demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
A. Principal residence.
(1) For purposes of general assistance solely, the applicant's principal
residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment,
job training, education, illness or disaster, provided there is
demonstrated an intent to return. If the applicant owns land in
excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or district in which the
§ 200-20 CURFEW § 200-21
173:135
home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
(a) The applicant has received general assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
(b) The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any
mortgagee will release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to
the sale, zoning or other land use laws do not render the sale
illegal or impracticable); and
(c) The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any
necessary surveys); and
(d) The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of
the household; and
(e) A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land
in question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount
which will aid the applicant's financial rehabilitation; and
(f) No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be
unduly burdensome or inequitable.
(2) If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may
condition the receipt of future assistance on the applicant's good
faith efforts to sell, or render salable, land which could be used to
provide necessary support for the applicant (e.g., the applicant
owns 100 "excess" acres; sale of 10 of the acres would provide for
the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be sold at
the present time). Assistance shall not be denied during the time
that the applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render
salable the land in question.
(3) Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance, the obligations
under this section shall also cease.
B. Other property.
(1) If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will
depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:
(a) Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert
the property into cash which can be applied toward meeting
present need; or
(b) Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet
present need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to
a third party in order to become eligible for general assistance
will be ineligible.
§ 200-21 MADISON CODE § 200-21
173:136
§ 200-22. Work requirement.
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for
work, work to the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the
work requirements, unless the applicant is exempt from such requirements
as provided below.
(2) If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage
payment or capital improvement payment, the municipality may
claim a lien against the property. The lien shall not be enforceable
until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the
recipient (See also § 200-34 of this chapter.) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320).
A. Employment; rehabilitation.
(1) All unemployed applicants and members of their households who
are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school
diploma will be required to accept any suitable job offer and/or
meet with job counselors, attend employment workshops and
rehabilitative services, except as provided below. (See Subsection I,
Exemptions.) Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator
that they are available for work and are actively seeking
employment.
(2) A "suitable job" means any job which the applicant is mentally and
physically able to perform. "Available for work" means that
applicants must make themselves available for work during normal
business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying
with the work requirement.
B. Verification.
(1) Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis
will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit
of employment at the time of each application. At a minimum, such
documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted,
the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. "Pursuit of employment"
means actually submitting a written application or applying for a
job in person when reasonable, or submitting a written application
or letter of inquiry to employers.
(2) For the duration of any repeat applicant's period of unemployment
or partial employment, the administrator will establish the number
of employers per week to whom each nonexempt applicant shall be
required to apply in order to fulfill his or her work search
requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required
by the administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of
potential employers in the region and the number of hours in the
§ 200-21 CURFEW § 200-22
173:137
week the applicant has available for work search activities after
considering all time the applicant must devote to existing
employment obligations, workfare obligations, and required
classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not
be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a
condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
C. Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial
application, applicants will be considered ineligible for further
assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause:
(1) Refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
(2) Refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is
reasonable and appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek
work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered to be
performing a diligent work search and will be disqualified;
(3) Refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
(4) Refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or
rehabilitation program that would assist the applicant in securing
employment;
(5) Fail to be available for work; or
(6) Refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the
municipal work program. (See § 200-23.)
D. Ineligibility due to job quit or discharge for misconduct. No applicant,
whether an initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time
or part-time job without just cause or who has been discharged from
employment for misconduct. (See Appendix I, 14 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043,
Subsection 23, for the definition.) will be eligible to receive general
assistance of any kind for a one-hundred-twenty-day period from the
date of separation from employment (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection
8, 4316-A, Subsection 1-A).
E. Just cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if
they refuse to comply with the work requirements of this section
without just cause. With respect to any work requirement, just cause
will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable
evidence that:
(1) The applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which
prevents him/her from working;
(2) The work assignment pays below minimum wages;
(3) The applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
14.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-22 MADISON CODE § 200-22
173:138
(4) The applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required
job tasks, or to meet piece work standards;
(5) The applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a
training or rehabilitation program;
(6) The applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care
of ill or disabled family members; or
(7) Any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of
Labor, or any other verifiable reason the administrator considers
reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just cause (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A, Subsection 5).
F. Applicant's burden of establishing just cause. If the administrator finds
that the applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of
just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
G. Eligibility regained.
(1) Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they
become employed or otherwise satisfy the administrator that they
are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work
requirement or requirements they violated.
(2) For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed,
"employment" shall mean employment by an employer as defined in
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq., or the performance of a service for an
employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax
pursuant to federal law.
(3) The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain
eligibility after a disqualification for workfare violations are
detailed in § 200-23 of this chapter, under Subsection G, Eligibility
regained.
H. Dependents.
(1) Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the
person's household who is not capable of working, including:
(a) A dependent minor child;
(b) An elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
(c) A person whose presence is required in order to provide care
for any child under six years of age or for any ill or disabled
member of the household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 3).
(2) In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified
and assistance is requested for those remaining members of the
§ 200-22 CURFEW § 200-22
173:139
§ 200-23. Municipal work program.
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working
may be required to perform work for the municipality, including work
for a nonprofit organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A, Subsection 2). As part of the municipal work program,
the municipality can require recipients to participate in training, education,
or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient in securing
employment. The work requirement provisions found in § 200-22 regarding
just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal
workfare program.
household who are dependents, the eligibility of those dependents
will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance
available to the entire household by the total number of household
members.
I. Exemptions.
(1) The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is
elderly, physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose
presence is required to care for any preschool age child or for any
ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these
requirements.
(2) The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to
interfere with an applicant's existing employment, ability to pursue
a bona fide job offer, ability to attend an interview for possible
employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma,
classroom or on-site participation in a training program which is
either approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the
Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degreegranting
program operated under the control of the Department of
Labor.
A. Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a
form stating that they understand the requirements of general
assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the form, the
administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read it
themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants
must work and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the
work assignment is calculated. In addition, the consent form shall
describe the consequences of failing to adequately perform part or all of
the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
B. Subtracting value of workfare performed from client's GA debt.
Pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, individuals owing the municipality
funds for general assistance provided to them are obligated to repay
the municipality when and if they become able. (See Article VIII.)
§ 200-22 MADISON CODE § 200-23
173:140
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the
workfare performed deducted from any and all GA debt including GA
liens (e.g., workers' compensation settlement, SSI retroactive payment,
capital improvement, home mortgage) that might exist against their
settlements, payments or other such property.
C. Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following
limitations (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A, Subsection 3).
(1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any
amount of work that exceeds the value of the net general assistance
that the person receives under municipal general assistance
standards. Any person performing work under this subsection shall
be provided with net general assistance, the value of which is
calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under
state or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
(2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit
organization if that work would violate the participant's basic
religious beliefs.
(3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this
subsection replace regular municipal employees.
(4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with
an eligible person's:
(a) Existing employment;
(b) Ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
(c) Attendance at an interview for possible employment;
(d) Classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational
program intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
(e) Classroom or on-site participation in a training program which
is approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the
Department of Labor to be reasonably expected to assist the
person in securing employment, or classroom participation in a
degree-granting program administered by the DHHS or the
Department of Labor.
(5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40
hours per week. An eligible person who has full- or part-time
employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the
extent that the work requirement in combination with his or her
regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
(6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work
beyond his or her capabilities. However, when an illness or
disability is claimed, an eligible person may be required as a
§ 200-23 CURFEW § 200-23
173:141
condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor's statement
detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor's statement to verify an
applicant's illness or disability and the applicant is not currently
under the care of a provider, the municipality may pay for the
doctor's evaluation if the applicant has no means to pay for the
exam. However, in such a case, the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the
municipality may elect to refer the client to such a resource. The
administrator will not require verification of medical conditions
which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a
reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316, Subsection 5).
(7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a
person in an emergency situation who has not been disqualified
from receiving assistance for committing a program violation) be
required to perform work under this subsection prior to receiving
general assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate needs
upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that he/
she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance.
When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation
may be required prior to receiving general assistance in
accordance with the following "workfare first" policy.
D. "Workfare first" policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A,
Subsection 2D, the administrator may, in accordance with the following
guidelines, require a recipient of general assistance to perform a
workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general
assistance benefit conditionally granted.
(1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an
applicant is eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory
performance of workfare.
(2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a
written decision, as otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of
submitting an application for general assistance and prior to
performing any workfare for the municipality associated with that
request for assistance. That written decision must include:
(a) A specific description of the amount of general assistance
being conditionally granted to the household and for which
basic needs;
(b) The period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant
is being issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
(c) The rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the
prevailing minimum wage), upon which the duration of the
workfare assignment is calculated;
§ 200-23 MADISON CODE § 200-23
173:142
(d) The actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be
performed, in hours, before the general assistance grant will
be actually issued;
(e) The specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the
general nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s)
of work site, date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare
supervisors' names and contact telephone numbers; and
(f) Any other pertinent information related to the workfare
assignment(s) the recipient will be expected to perform.
(3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants
under this policy must sign a consent form that informs the
participant of his or her workfare-related rights and
responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform
all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
(4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily
performed but there has been a failure to perform the remainder of
the assignment, without just cause, the administrator shall issue a
grant of general assistance in the amount of the number of
workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate used
to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to
any disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of
the conditionally issued general assistance grant shall be
terminated, and notice of the partial termination, and the reasons
therefor, will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance
with § 200-36 of this chapter.
(5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed
because the workfare participant was temporarily unable to
perform the assignment for just-cause reasons shall be reassigned
or excused at the discretion of the GA administrator.
E. Work-related expenses. A participant's expenses related to work
performed under this section will be added to the amount of net general
assistance to be provided to the person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A,
Subsection 2E). The municipality will provide any special clothes or
equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
F. Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or
willfully performs below average standards the work assigned by the
municipality, will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A, Subsection 1). As soon as the administrator knows that a
recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will
notify the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days
starting from the last date of authorized assistance unless the recipient
can show just cause. The burden of demonstrating a just cause failure
to perform a workfare assignment falls on the workfare participant.
G. Eligibility regained.
§ 200-23 CURFEW § 200-23
173:143
(1) Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program
may regain their eligibility under the following conditions.
(a) Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work
assignment they have been given will be disqualified from
receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible. (See § 200-22H,
Dependents.)
(b) If during the one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification period
the recipient requests an opportunity to perform the work
assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to
perform, the disqualified recipient will be given one
opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator will give the
recipient a work assignment as soon as possible. If under such
a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need
and the administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment
in time to alleviate the emergency, the administrator will
provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert the
emergency. However, the provision of such emergency
assistance will not bar the administrator from subsequently
enforcing the previously issued one-hundred-twenty-day
disqualification if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by
satisfactorily performing the work assignment. The amount of
emergency assistance granted will be considered in the
computation of the total number of hours the recipient must
work.
(2) Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their
eligibility during a one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification period
and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their
municipal work assignment will be considered to have acted in bad
faith. In such a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the
one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification for the term of its initial
duration.
(3) If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is
subsequently disqualified within the initial one-hundred-twenty-day
period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the municipal work
program, that participant will be ineligible for a new one-hundredtwenty-
day period beginning with the new disqualification date, but
will be provided no opportunity to requalify.
(4) Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property,
harasses or harms other employees or who otherwise conducts
themselves in a disruptive manner and is discharged by the work
supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise
becoming employed and meeting the definition of need.
§ 200-23 MADISON CODE § 200-23
173:144
§ 200-24. Use of resources.
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize
every available or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for
general assistance. (See § 200-3 for the definition of "resources.") People
who refuse or fail to make a good faith effort to secure a potential resource
after receiving written notice to do so are disqualified from receiving
assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are
required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
H. Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been
provided to persons who work for the municipality in reports to the
DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A, Subsection 2).
A. Minors.
(1) A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a
dependent child or children will be eligible to receive general
assistance only if the minor is residing in the home of his or her
parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the
entire household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this
limitation on eligibility will be made when:
(a) The minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or
other adult-supervised supportive living arrangement; or
(b) The minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of both the
parents are unknown; or
(c) No parent will permit the minor to live in the parent's home; or
(d) The minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one
year before the birth of any dependent child; or
(e) The DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or
safety of the minor or the minor's dependent child or children
would be jeopardized if the minor and his or her child or
children lived with a parent; or
(f) The DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that
there is good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 4).
(2) Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from
his or her parents for general assistance will be informed that until
he or she reaches the age of 25, the applicant's parents are still
legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has the
right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance
granted to such a recipient to the extent his or her parents are
§ 200-23 CURFEW § 200-24
173:145
§ 200-25. Period of ineligibility.
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended
prior to being given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing
financially capable of repaying the municipality (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4319).
(3) With regard to such application, the municipality may seek
verification of the applicant's need for general assistance by
contacting his or her parents. If the applicant's parents declare a
willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs
directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the applicant
would be jeopardized by relying on his or her parents for basic
needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in need of
general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be
provided by a legally liable relative.
B. Mental or physical disability. Any applicant who has a mental or
physical disability must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical
or rehabilitative services which have been recommended by a
physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant
and would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to
the individual.
C. Written notice; disqualification. The administrator will give each
applicant written notice whenever the applicant is required to utilize
any specific potential resource(s). Any applicant who refuses to utilize
potential resources, without just cause, after receiving written sevenday
notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made
a good faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance
will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if
the applicant has made, or is in the process of making, a good faith
effort to obtain the resource.
D. Forfeiture of benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a
reduction in benefits from another public assistance program due to
fraud, misrepresentation, a knowing or intentional violation of program
rules or a refusal to comply with that program's rules without just cause
will be ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited
benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered income
under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of
the forfeiture. To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in
the form of income but, rather, in the form of a specific, regularly issued
resource of a calculable value, that resource, up to its forfeited value,
need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of 120 days
from the date of the forfeiture, unless the municipality is prohibited by
federal or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available
with respect to local public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
§ 200-24 MADISON CODE § 200-25
173:146
(22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4321 to 4322). Each person will be notified in writing of
the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any person disqualified for not
complying with this chapter will be informed in writing of the period of
ineligibility.
§ 200-26. Unemployment fraud.
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation
benefits because of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant
to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051, Subsection 1, is ineligible to receive general
assistance to replace the forfeited unemployment compensation benefits for
the duration of the forfeiture established by the Department of Labor (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
A. Work requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a
work requirement are disqualified from receiving assistance for a
period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility). (See §§ 200-22,
200-23.) If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance and does not
comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the
grant of assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are disqualified as soon as the administrator has
sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision of
ineligibility.
B. Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving
assistance for a period of 120 days. (See § 200-30, Fraud.) The
administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is
issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of
ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period
covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered after the
period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of
ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of
ineligibility.
§ 200-25 CURFEW § 200-26
173:147

ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
§ 200-27. Recognition of dignity and rights.
Any determination or investigation into an applicant's eligibility will be
conducted in a manner that will not violate the applicant's privacy or
personal dignity or violate his or her individual rights.
§ 200-28. Determination; redetermination.
§ 200-29. Verification.
A. The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of
eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The administrator will make a redetermination of eligibility
at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to administer the
program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility
on the basis of a thirty-day prospective analysis, but may elect to
disburse that applicant's assistance periodically, e.g., weekly,
throughout a thirty-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
B. The administrator may redetermine a person's eligibility at any time
during the period he or she is receiving assistance if the administrator
is notified of any change in the recipient's circumstances that may alter
the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a recipient
has been granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or
rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient
explaining the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an
opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309).
A. Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall
determine eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The period of eligibility will not exceed one month. At the
expiration of this period applicants/recipients may reapply for
assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
B. Applicant's responsibilities.
(1) Applicants and recipients for general assistance are responsible for
providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to
demonstrate eligibility, the applicant must have the first
opportunity to provide the specific information or documentation
required by the overseer. When information required by the
overseer is unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative
available information, which is subject to verification.
§ 200-27 CURFEW § 200-29
173:149
(2) Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of
application and continuing thereafter to provide complete,
accurate and current information and documentation concerning
his/her:
(a) Need.
(b) Income.
(c) Employment.
(d) Use of income.
(e) Expenses.
(f) Assets and liabilities.
(g) Use of available resources.
(h) Household composition.
C. Initial applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or
any other municipality are considered initial applicants and must have
their eligibility determined solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants
are not subject to eligibility conditions placed on repeat applicants.
(See below.) However, such applicants are still responsible for
providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable
documentation adequate to verify that there is a need for assistance. In
addition, initial applicants must also comply with both lump sum and
relevant work rules (e.g., job quit).
D. Repeat applicants.
(1) All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be
determined on the basis of need and all other conditions of
eligibility established by law and this municipal chapter.
(2) The administrator will require documentation of a repeat
applicant's income, use of income, assets and resources plus actual
bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical
services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search
results, i.e., provide a list of the employers contacted, the date and
time of the application contact, and the name of the employer
representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
(3) Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of
information reported on previous applications, including changes
in his/her household or income that may affect his/her eligibility.
E. Unforeseen repeat applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are
applicants who have not applied for assistance within the last 12
months and who have been regularly employed or receiving support
§ 200-29 MADISON CODE § 200-29
173:150
from a public benefit or private source who have unexpectedly become
unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income and/or
benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through
no fault of their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be
considered initial applicants for purposes of verification requirements
and misspent income if the administrator finds that imposing the
general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed
on repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
F. Overseer's responsibilities.
(1) In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and
documentation from the applicant. Once the applicant has
presented the necessary information, the overseer is responsible
for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification
necessary to determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility,
the overseer may contact sources other than the applicant for
verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of the
applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records
without the applicant's knowledge and consent. Appropriate
sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not
limited to:
(a) DHHS and any other department/agency of the state or
nonprofit organizations.
(b) Financial institutions.
(c) Creditors.
(d) Utility companies.
(e) Employers.
(f) Landlords.
(g) Physicians.
(h) Persons with whom the applicant/recipient is a cohabitant.
(i) Legally and non-legally liable relatives.
(2) Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling
to supply the overseer with necessary information, documentation,
or permission to make collateral contacts, or if the overseer cannot
determine that eligibility exists based on information supplied by
the applicant or others.
G. Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's
eligibility at any time during the period that person is receiving
assistance if the overseer is informed of any change in the recipient's
circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to which the
§ 200-29 CURFEW § 200-29
173:151
§ 200-30. Fraud.
recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided
that once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific
time period, a reduction in assistance for that time period may not be
made without prior written notice to the recipient with the reasons for
the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a fair hearing
upon the proposed change.
H. Penalty for refusing to release information. Any person governed by 22
M.R.S.A. § 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator after it has been requested must state in writing the
reasons for the refusal within three days of receiving the request. Any
such person who refuses to provide the information, without just cause,
commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false
information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E crime (22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4314, Subsection 5, 4314, Subsection 6, 4315).
A. It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false
representation of a material fact to the administrator in order to receive
general assistance or cause someone else to receive general assistance
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4315).
(1) False representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and
willfully:
(a) Making a false statement to the general assistance
administrator, either orally or in writing, in order to obtain
assistance to which the applicant or the applicant's household
is not entitled;
(b) Concealing information from the general assistance
administrator in order to obtain assistance to which the
applicant or applicant's household is not entitled; or
(c) Using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that
for which they were intended.
(2) No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false
representation prior to being given an opportunity for a fair
hearing.
B. Period of ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds
that a person has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts
for the purpose of making himself or herself eligible for general
assistance, the administrator shall notify that applicant in writing that
he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for 120 days.
For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false
statement about eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of
the assistance would not be or would not have been granted. The
§ 200-29 MADISON CODE § 200-30
173:152
§ 200-31. Period of eligibility.
notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the
applicant of his or her right to appeal the administrator's decision to
the fair hearing authority (FHA) within five working days of receipt. The
period of ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of
the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received or
upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
C. Right to a fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for
making a false representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal
the decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) in accordance with
Article VII of this chapter. No recipient shall have his or her assistance
reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified
and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is
dissatisfied with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the
Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 3).
D. Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair
hearing authority determines that a recipient did make a false
representation, the recipient will be required to reimburse the
municipality for any assistance received to which he/she was not
entitled.
E. Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this
section serve to disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309, Subsection 3). In the event one or more members of a
household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the
remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the
entire household by the total number of household members.
A. The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a
period that is sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant
of assistance cover a period in excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed application the
administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a
thirty-day prospective analysis.
B. When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due
to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
administrator, the GA administrator shall render a notice of
"ineligibility" and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to
reapply as soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as
soon as is practicable for the applicant.
C. Although eligibility is determined on a thirty-day basis, for reasons of
administrative efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an
applicant's assistance for shorter periods of time, such as weekly,
throughout the thirty-day period of eligibility. When the administrator
§ 200-30 CURFEW § 200-31
173:153
§ 200-32. Determination of need.
elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than
30 days, subsequent grants of assistance during that thirty-day period
may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the
applicant's financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant
a redetermination of eligibility.
A. Calculation.
(1) The period of time used to calculate need will be the next thirty-day
period from the date of application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection
7). The administrator will calculate the applicant's expenses
according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the
maximum levels for the specific necessities allowed in § 200-34,
whichever is less. The sum of these expenses, as calculated for a
prospective thirty-day period, is the applicant's thirty-day need.
Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other
resources exceed this calculation except in an emergency (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308, Subsection 2). (See § 200-15 of this chapter.)
(2) Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance
if their income, property, credit, assets or other resources available
to provide basic necessities for their household are greater than
the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in the
beginning of § 200-34 (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301, Subsection 10, 4305,
Subsection 3-B). The difference between the applicant's income
and the overall maximum levels of assistance established by this
chapter is the applicant's deficit.
(3) Once an applicant's deficit has been determined, the specific
maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity (See
Appendixes A to H15 of this chapter.) shall be used by the
administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the
applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for
each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient to
help recipients maintain a standard of health and decency (22
M.R.S.A. § 4305, Subsection 3-A).
B. Income for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their
income for basic necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant
is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that was spent within
the thirty-day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and
services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on goods and
services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to
the applicant and combined with the applicant's prospective thirty-day
income for the purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A).
Applicants who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities
but who use that income to purchase goods or services which are not
15.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-31 MADISON CODE § 200-32
173:154
basic necessities will not be considered eligible for assistance. Persons
who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that
their income does not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
C. Use-of-income requirements.
(1) The administrator may require that anyone applying for general
assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of canceled checks and/or
receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all
household income received over the last thirty-day period. Except
as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for "unforeseen"
repeat applicants (See § 200-29 of this chapter.), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic
necessities. Income expended that cannot be verified will generally
be considered available and in such case will be added to the thirtyday
prospective income.
(2) Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/
mortgage); the cost of heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the
ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the base rate if the
household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which
are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement, hospital free
care or insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing and
nonprescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
(3) Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be
allowed in the budget computation include: Internet services; cable
or satellite television; cellular phones; cigarettes/alcohol; gifts
purchased; pet care costs; costs of trips or vacations; paid court
fines; repayments of unsecured loans; legal fees; late fees; credit
card debt.
(4) The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income
requirements to any applicant, other than an initial applicant, who
fails to use his or her income for basic necessities or fails to
reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the
following manner:
(a) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all
of his or her income, at the time it becomes available, toward
specific basic necessities. The administrator may prioritize
such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant's income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage),
energy (i.e., heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic
necessities;
§ 200-32 CURFEW § 200-32
173:155
(b) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the
specific use-of-income requirements placed on them;
(c) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how
the applicant's income was spent, or it is determined that some
or all of the applicant's income was not spent as directed and
was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will not
be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
(d) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed,
but can show with verifiable documentation that all income
was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the
applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant's
eligibility and need.
D. Calculation of income and expenses.
(1) When determining eligibility, the administrator will subtract the
applicant's net income from the overall maximum level of
assistance found at the beginning of § 200-34. If income is greater
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant will not
be eligible except in an emergency. (See § 200-15.) If income is less
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
(2) The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the
deficit to the extent the applicant also has an unmet need and is in
need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant assistance
in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in § 200-34 of this
chapter for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or
when the administrator elects to consolidate the applicant's deficit,
as provided immediately below.
E. Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their
deficit, applicants will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity
up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount allowed for that
necessity in this chapter or the actual thirty-day cost of the necessity,
whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may
consolidate the applicant's deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity
in an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
(1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a
basic necessity in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum
shall be the exception rather than the rule;
(2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit
unless the applicant is in an emergency situation; and
(3) The need for the application of the recipient's consolidated deficit
toward a basic necessity was not created by the recipient
§ 200-32 MADISON CODE § 200-32
173:156
§ 200-33. Income.
misspending his or her income or resources in violation of the useof-
income requirements of this chapter.
A. Income standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall
maximum level of assistance provided in § 200-34 shall not be eligible
for general assistance except in an emergency. The administrator will
conduct an individual factual inquiry into the applicant's income and
expenses each time an applicant applies.
B. Calculation of income.
(1) To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator will
calculate the income they will receive during the next thirty-day
period commencing on the date of application, and identify any
assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all
applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also
consider as available income any income that was not spent during
the previous thirty-day period on basic necessities, as well as any
income that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess
of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household's income exceeds the amount of the household's need for
basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in § 200-34,
applicants will not be considered in need.
(2) Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may
necessitate that the maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4308). (See § 200-15 of this chapter.) To calculate weekly income
and expenses, the administrator will use actual income received or
actual anticipated income.
C. Types of income. Income that will be considered in determining an
applicant's need includes:
(1) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant
through wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether selfemployed
or as an employee, is considered earned income. If a
person is self-employed, total income will be computed by
subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will
be the income available after taxes, social security and other
payroll deductions required by state, federal, and local law. Rental
income and profit from produce that is sold is considered earned
income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the
applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered as
earned income. [NOTE: Actual work-related expenses such as
union dues, transportation to and from work, special equipment or
work clothes, and child-care costs will be deducted from an
applicant's income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 7).]
§ 200-32 CURFEW § 200-33
173:157
(2) Income from other assistance or social services programs.
(a) State/federal categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments,
social security payments, VA benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, and payments from other government
sources will be considered as income, unless expressly
prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits
food stamps and fuel assistance payments made by the Home
Energy Assistance Program (HEAP and EPIC) from being
considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general
assistance the applicant is eligible to receive. Although
applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general
assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently received
HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or
otherwise prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective
thirty-day period. The administrator's obligation is to always
compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received
HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her total fuel
costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget
for the household's heating energy needs according to actual
usage, up to the ordinance maximums, but the administrator
may, with written notice to the applicant, hold in reserve the
heating energy portion of the applicant's deficit until such a
time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a
demonstrable need for the disbursement of heating energy
assistance; that is, the applicant's fuel tank can accept a
minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a positive
credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality
is not obligated to divert any recipient's heating energy
allowance toward non-heating purposes solely on the basis of
the recipient's receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
(b) Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes
of GA eligibility include:
[1] Family development accounts (22 M.R.S.A. § 3762).
[2] Americorps VISTA program benefits [42 U.S.C.A.
§ 5044(f)].
[3] Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax
Fairness Credit program, only so long as the money is
spent on basic necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301,
Subsection 7).
(3) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support
payments will be considered income only if actually received by the
applicant. The general assistance administrator will refer cases
where support payments are not actually received to the State
Department of Health and Human Services' Child Support
§ 200-33 MADISON CODE § 200-33
173:158
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants
being referred to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be
required to follow through with such services. Because child
support payments are considered a resource, applicants must make
a good faith effort to secure such payments.
(4) Income from other sources. Payments from pensions and trust
funds will be considered income. Payments from boarders or
lodgers will be considered income as will cash or in-kind
contributions provided to the household from any other source,
including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 7).
(5) Earnings of a son or daughter. Earned income received by sons and
daughters below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who
are not working full time will not be considered income. The
unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered
available to the household.
(6) Income from household members. Income from household
members will be considered available to the applicant, whether or
not the household member is legally obligated for the support of
the applicant, if the household members pool or share their income
and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide
support to one another.
(7) The pooling or non-pooling of income. When two or more
individuals share the same dwelling unit but not all members of the
household are applying for general assistance, the administrator
shall make a finding under a rebuttable presumption that the entire
household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 12-A).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the
presumption that all household income is being pooled by providing
the administrator with verifiable documentation affirmatively
demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for the duration of the
shared living arrangement. Such documentation would include
evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank
statements, canceled checks, receipts, landlord statements or
other vendor accounts clearly supporting a claim that the applicant
has been and is presently solely and entirely responsible for his or
her pro rata share of household costs. If the applicant is unable to
successfully rebut the municipality's presumption that all
household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire
household will be determined based on total household income. If
the applicant successfully rebuts the municipality's presumption
that all household income is being pooled, the applicant's eligibility
will be determined on the basis of his or her income and his or her
pro rata share of actual household expenses.
(8) Lump sum income.
§ 200-33 CURFEW § 200-33
173:159
(a) A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or recipient
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance will be considered as income available to the
household. However, verified required payments (i.e., any third
party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the
lump sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the
purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and any
amount of the lump sum payment which the applicant can
document was spent on basic necessities, as described below,
will not be considered available income.
(b) Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance, the administrator will assess the need for prorating
an applicant's eligibility for general assistance according to the
following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsections 7, 8-A):
[1] Identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
[2] Subtract from the lump sum payment all required
payments;
[3] Subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can
demonstrate was spent on basic necessities, including all
basic necessities as defined by the general assistance
program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or burial
expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs
related to the illness or death of a family member; repair
or replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other
natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor vehicle
essential for employment, education, training or other dayto-
day living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit,
the proceeds of which can be verified as having been spent
on basic necessities; and payment of bills earmarked for
the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsections 7, 8-A);
[4] Add to the remainder all income received by the household
between the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and
the date of application for general assistance; and
[5] Divide the sum created in Subsection C(8)(b)[4] by the
verified actual monthly amounts for all of the household's
basic necessities (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305, Subsection 3-B).
(c) This dividend represents the period of proration determined by
the administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the
lump sum payment. The prorated sum for each month must be
considered available to the household for 12 months from the
date of application or during the period of proration, whichever
is less.
§ 200-33 MADISON CODE § 200-33
173:160
§ 200-34. Basic necessities; maximum levels of assistance.
(d) The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible
for emergency assistance may not be denied emergency
assistance to meet an immediate need solely on the basis of the
proration of a lump sum payment (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A. Overall maximum levels of assistance. Notwithstanding any of the
maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities listed in
Appendices B to H16 of this chapter, an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or her income
from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix
A17 for the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305, Subsection
3-B). The difference yielded by this calculation shall be the applicant's
deficit. Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the
calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is unable to otherwise
provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their
families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for general
assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
emergency general assistance will be determined according to § 200-15
of this chapter.
B. Maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities.
(1) The municipality will grant assistance to eligible applicants for
basic necessities according to the maximum levels for specific
types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in
consultation with the applicant, may apply the amount of the
applicant's deficit toward assistance with any one or combination of
necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These maximum levels
will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to
exist, in which case these absolute levels will be waived in order to
meet immediate needs. In all cases either the actual expenses the
applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum amount
allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in
determining need.
(a) In roommate situations, the applicant's need for common living
expenses for rent, fuel, electricity, etc., will be presumed to be
reduced by an amount equal to the other household members'
proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which
has been or will be paid by another person. In addition, as a
general rule the municipality will not provide a benefit toward
a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living
with the applicant's household or that has otherwise been
16.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are on file in the Town offices.
17.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-33 CURFEW § 200-34
173:161
incurred by a person who has not been found eligible to receive
assistance.
(b) Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the
administrator in the following circumstances:
[1] A recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent
absence of a former household member in whose name the
bill was customarily issued;
[2] The applicant and members of the applicant's household
were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid
with general assistance; and
[3] The applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the
vendor to issue future bills in the name of the applicant or
other responsible person residing in the household.
(2) Food.
(a) The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible
persons up to the allowed maximum amounts designated by
the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate household
size. For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by
reference the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the
Maine Department of Health and Human Services on or about
October of each year. See Appendix B18 of this chapter for the
current year's food maximums.
(b) In determining need for food the administrator will not
consider the value of the food stamps an applicant receives as
income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301, Subsection 7A; 7 U.S.C.
§ 2017(b)]. The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used
solely for approved food products.
(c) The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary
for households having members with special dietary needs.
The administrator may require a doctor's statement verifying
there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for
food that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
(3) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or
mortgage payments that are reasonable and/or within the allowed
maximum levels. See Appendix C19 of this chapter for the current
year's housing maximums. It is the applicant's responsibility to find
suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will
18.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
19.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-34
173:162
inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to assist the
applicant in his or her search for housing. The allowed maximum
for any applicant will be the categorical housing maximum
representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to
adequately shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting
assistance for housing that contains more bedrooms than are
necessary for the number of household members will be provided
assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
(a) Rental payments to relatives. The municipality may elect to not
issue any rental payment to an applicant's relatives unless the
rental relationship has existed for at least three months and
the applicant's relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a "relative" is
defined as the applicant's parents, grandparents, children,
grandchildren, siblings, parent's siblings, or any of those
relative's children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319, Subsection 2).
(b) Rental payments to nonrelatives.
[1] When applicants are living in private homes with the
owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not
pooling income or who are not legally liable relatives, the
amount allowed as the applicant's shelter expense will be
the applicant's pro rata share of the actual, total shelter
cost, up to the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301,
Subsection 6).
[2] Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a
circumstance will be issued, whenever reasonably
possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property, i.e., to a landlord before a
tenant, or to a mortgagee before a mortgagor.
[3] When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600
in rental payments to any landlord in any calendar year, a
1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments
issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation.
(See Section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue Code.)
[4] Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments
from the municipality on behalf of applicants renting
rooms from the landlord's own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging
license from the Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to
10-144A Code of Maine Regulations Chapter 201, as a
condition of that landlord receiving future general
assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
§ 200-34 CURFEW § 200-34
173:163
(c) Mortgage payments.
[1] In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make
an individual factual determination of whether the
applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making
this determination, the administrator will consider the
extent and liquidity of the applicant's proprietary interest
in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
[a] The marketability of the shelter's equity;
[b] The amount of equity;
[c] The availability of the equity interest in the shelter to
provide the applicant an opportunity to secure a shortterm
loan in order to meet immediate needs;
[d] The extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant's
financial rehabilitation;
[e] A comparison between the amount of mortgage
obligations and the anticipated rental charges the
applicant would be responsible for if he/she were to be
dislocated to rental housing;
[f] The imminence of the applicant's dislocation from
owned housing because of his or her inability to meet
the mortgage payments;
[g] The likelihood that the provision of housing assistance
will prevent such dislocation; and
[h] The applicant's age, health, and social situation.
[2] These factors shall be considered when determining
whether the equity in the shelter is an available asset
which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
[3] The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in
response to the applicant's request for mortgage
assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible
for general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria
the administrator determines that:
[a] The monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance
with the maximum levels of assistance available for
housing appropriate to the applicant's household size;
[b] There is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the
property, when considered in the context of the
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-34
173:164
applicant's borrowing capacity with the mortgagee or
the general lending community, to suspend the
mortgage obligation temporarily or reamortize the
mortgage in such a way as to suspend or reduce the
mortgage obligation; and
[c] The failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely
manner could jeopardize the applicant's continued
right of possession of the property.
[4] If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will
pay the actual amount due, up to the amount allowed
according to the maximum levels listed below. After an
initial application, assistance with such payments will be
given only after the applicant has made all reasonable
efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her home. If
there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to
secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments are
not realistically in line with the rental rates for similar
housing in the area that could meet the applicant's needs,
the administrator will inform the applicant that he/she is
responsible for finding alternative housing within his or
her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all
reasonable efforts to secure such housing.
(d) Liens.
[1] The municipality may place a lien on the property in order
to recover its costs of granting assistance with mortgage
payments. In addition, a municipality may claim a lien
against the owner of real estate for the amount of money
spent by it to make capital improvements to the real estate
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be enforced against a
recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of
the property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a
person who is currently receiving any form of public
assistance, or who would again become eligible for general
assistance if the lien were enforced.
[2] If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to
place a lien on a person's property to recover its costs of
providing general assistance for a mortgage payment or
capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with
the county registry of deeds where the property is located
within 30 days of making the mortgage payment. That
filing shall secure the municipality's or the state's interest
in an amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital
improvement payment and all subsequent mortgage or
capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
§ 200-34 CURFEW § 200-34
173:165
[3] Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry,
the municipal officers must send notice to the owner of the
real estate, the general assistance recipient, and any
record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that a lien on the property is going to be
filed with the registry. This notice must clearly inform the
recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the
name, title, address and telephone number of the person
who granted the assistance. The municipal officers must
also give written notice to the recipient each time the
amount secured by the lien is increased because of an
additional mortgage payment. This notice must include the
same information that appeared on the original intent-tofile
notice sent to the recipient.
[4] The municipality may charge interest on the amount of
money secured by the lien. The municipal officers will
establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged
against delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the
date the lien is filed.
(e) Property taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance
with his or her property taxes, the administrator will inform
the applicant that there are two procedures on the local level
to request that relief: the poverty abatement process (36
M.R.S.A. § 841, Subsection 2) and general assistance. If the
applicant chooses to seek property tax assistance through
general assistance, or if the applicant is denied a poverty tax
abatement, the administrator may consider using general
assistance to meet this need only if:
[1] The property tax in question is for the applicant's place of
residence;
[2] There is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature
within 60 days of the date of application;
[3] As a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis
of information obtained from the applicant's mortgagee, if
any, it is reasonably certain that a tax lien foreclosure will
result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
[4] The applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property
tax relief through the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, when available.
(f) Housing maximums.
[1] The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in
this chapter have been derived either from a locally
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-34
173:166
accomplished fair market rental survey or the fair market
rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the
maximum levels of housing are derived from the HUD
values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted
to disregard the current and averaged utility allowances
as developed by the Maine State Housing Authority, those
levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See Appendix
C20 of this chapter for the current year's housing
maximums.
[2] If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in
this chapter are derived from a locally developed fair
market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the
maximum levels of housing assistance will be incorporated
into this chapter pursuant to the ordinance adoption and
amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
(4) Utilities.
(a) General.
[1] Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be
budgeted separately if they are not included in the rent.
Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with
the utility company regarding service, including entering
into a special payment arrangement if necessary.
[2] Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the
basis of their most recent bill. The municipality is not
obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant
to § 200-15.
[3] Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an
emergency in all cases. The administrator will make an
individual, factual analysis to determine if the termination
of utility service constitutes an emergency. The
administrator will consider the household composition, the
time of year, the age and health of the household members,
and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or
other resources to pay their utility bill when it was
received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to
receive general assistance to replace those funds.
[4] Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their
income and use of income for the applicable time period
20.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 CURFEW § 200-34
173:167
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4308, Subsection 2). (See §§ 200-15 and
200-29.) The administrator will notify applicants in writing
that they must give the administrator prompt notice if
their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant's responsibility to attempt
to make arrangements with the utility company to
maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service
being terminated.
(b) Electricity maximums for households without electric hot
water. See Appendix D21 of this chapter for the current year's
electricity maximums.
(c) Electricity maximums for households that use electrically
heated hot water. See Appendix D22 of this chapter for the
current year's electricity maximums.
(d) Non-electric utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer
utility service will be budgeted at a thirty-day reasonable
usage rate.
(5) Fuel.
(a) Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the
actual need for fuel during the heating season (September
through May), provided such expenses are reasonable, and at
other times during the year when the administrator determines
the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
(b) Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of
their most recent bill. The municipality is not responsible for
back bills except in an emergency as provided in § 200-15.
Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply.
When applicants who have been informed of this responsibility
run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for
failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for
fuel, the administrator shall find that the emergency was not
beyond the applicants' control, and process the emergency
request accordingly, pursuant to § 200-15 of this chapter.
(c) See Appendix E23 of this chapter for the current year's fuel
maximums.
(6) Personal care and household supplies. Expenses for ordinary
personal and household supplies will be budgeted and allowed
according to the applicant's actual need for these items. Personal
21.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
22.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
23.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-34
173:168
and household supplies include: hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo,
shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and
costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as
toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags, light bulbs
and supplies for children under five years of age. See Appendix F24
of this chapter for the current year's personal care and household
supplies maximums.
(7) Other basic necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be
granted when they are deemed essential to an applicant's or
recipient's health and safety by the general assistance
administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a physician.
Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
(a) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the
purchase of adequate clothing. Before assistance will be
granted for clothing, the general assistance administrator
must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available
resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some
circumstances, clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions
to this would be, for example, if fire, flood or unusually cold
weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity, special
clothing is necessary for the applicant's employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
(b) Medical.
[1] The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses,
other than hospital bills (See below.), provided that the
municipality is notified and approves the expenses and
services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or
services that are determined to be "medically necessary"
by a licensed physician. The municipality will grant
assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the
applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical
care without the municipality's assistance. The applicant is
required to utilize any resource, including any federal or
state program, that will diminish his or her need to seek
general assistance for medical expenses. The municipality
will grant assistance for nonemergency medical services
only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the
administrator may require a second medical opinion from
a physician designated by the municipality to verify the
necessity of the services.
24.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 CURFEW § 200-34
173:169
[2] Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at
the established Medicaid rates for all medical services,
prescriptions, or other medical commodities. Before
authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical
service provider of the municipality's intention to pay for
the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and ask to be
billed accordingly.
[3] Ordinary medical supplies/nonprescription drugs will be
budgeted at the actual amount when the applicant can
demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies
include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic
brand, nonprescription medicines. In addition, the basic
monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when
a telephone is essential to the health and safety of the
household. In order for telephone service to be considered
an allowable expense, the applicant must provide a written
statement from a physician certifying that the telephone is
essential.
(c) Hospital bills.
[1] In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within five business
days of the admission. Notification must be by telephone,
confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a
hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
[2] Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must
apply to the hospital for consideration under the hospital's
free care program as provided in 22 M.R.S.A. § 1716.
Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital's free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants
must apply for assistance within 30 days of being
discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from the
hospital certifying that they are not eligible for the
hospital's free care program.
[3] Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a
hospital bill as a necessary expense, the applicant must
enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the
hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon the
Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant's eligibility, the
municipality will budget the monthly payment to the
hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The applicant's
need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered
each time he/she applies by including the amount of the
bill in the applicant's monthly budget, but the recipient
will be responsible for making any necessary payments to
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-34
173:170
the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements
found at § 200-32 of this chapter.
(d) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary
dental services only. As is the case with medical services
generally, the municipality will issue general assistance for
dental services at the established Medicaid rates for those
services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit
for dental services, the administrator will inform the dentist or
dental surgeon of the municipality's intention to pay at the
Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the
municipality will pay for dentures, provided the applicant has
no other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will
be referred to a dental clinic in the area whenever possible.
The administrator will expect the applicant to bear a
reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant's
ability to pay.
(e) Eye care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance
for eyeglasses, an applicant must have his or her medical need
certified by a person licensed to practice optometry. The
general assistance administrator will provide assistance for
eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at
the Medicaid rate.
(f) Telephone charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be
allowed if a telephone is necessary for medical reasons as
verified by a physician. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job
search or job-related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons
the administrator deems necessary.
(g) Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and
actual work-related expenses will be deducted from earned
income. These expenses include child-care costs, work clothes,
supplies and transportation at the actual costs not to exceed
the ordinance maximum. (See Appendix G25 for this year's
maximum mileage allotment.) The applicant is required to
provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the
expenses were necessary.
(h) Travel expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which
is not work related will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy
the administrator that the prospective need for travel is
necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation
to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
25.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 CURFEW § 200-34
173:171
§ 200-35. Burials; cremations.
necessary travel. See Appendix G26 for the current rate at
which such necessary travel will be budgeted. This rate shall
be construed to subsidize all costs associated with automobile
ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires, maintenance,
insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
(i) Burials, cremations. Under the circumstances and in
accordance with the procedures and limitations described
below (See § 200-35.), the municipality recognizes its
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H27 for the current maximums.
(j) Capital improvements.
[1] The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally
not be budgeted as a basic necessity. Exceptions can be
made only when the capital improvement/repair has been
preapproved by the administrator as a necessary expense
and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair
has been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for
example, by means of the applicant entering into an
installment payment arrangement with the contractor. The
administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
[a] The failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in
emergency circumstances;
[b] There are no other resources available to effect the
capital repair; and
[c] There is no more cost-effective alternative available to
the applicant or municipality to alleviate an
emergency situation.
[2] In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital
improvement can be mitigated by the applicant entering
into an installment payment arrangement with a
contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a
lien on any property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when
general assistance has been used to effect a capital
improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in
the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described
in Subsection B(3)(d), Liens, above.
26.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
27.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-34 MADISON CODE § 200-35
173:172
A. Funeral director must give timely notice. In order for the municipality
to be liable for a burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must
notify the administrator prior to the burial or cremation or by the end of
three business days following the funeral director's receipt of the body,
whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. § 4313, Subsection 2). This contact by
the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application
for burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the
funeral director's responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine
if the family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of the
burial expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay the
expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or
part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to
the municipal administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer
legally liable relatives to the administrator so that a timely
determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
B. Application for assistance shall be calculated on behalf of the deceased.
For the purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and
issuing general assistance for burial or cremation purposes, an
application for assistance shall be completed by the administrator on
behalf of the deceased.
(1) With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for
burial expenses shall be the municipality in which the eligible
deceased person was a resident at the time of death as residency is
determined under § 200-16 of this chapter.
(2) Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses, that information will not be construed as an application
for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible
for burial assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally
liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the burial
or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only
exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible
for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal
obligation to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives. For
these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial or cremation
purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the
deceased.
C. The financial responsibility of certain family members. Grandparents,
parents, children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine
or own property in Maine, are financially responsible for the burial or
cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives, individually or
as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation
either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator,
all legally liable relatives must provide the municipal administrator with
§ 200-35 CURFEW § 200-35
173:173
any reasonably requested information regarding their income, assets,
and basic living expenses.
D. Consideration of the financial responsibility of family members.
Generally, when the administrator can make a finding that one or more
of the deceased's legally liable relatives have an obvious and
demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by
lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation
assistance. When the administrator is unable to make such a finding,
the following proration of familial responsibility will be implemented.
E. Proration of familial responsibility. A proration of familial financial
responsibility will be used when no legally liable relative possesses an
obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay for the burial or cremation,
but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have a
financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the
administrator is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or
more of said relatives. Under these circumstances, each legally liable
relative is considered to be responsible for his or her pro rata share of
the total municipal contribution that would exist if no legally liable
relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as
long as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality
will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro
rata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses to
cooperate with the administrator by providing information or
documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative's
financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable to a
legally liable relative who can financially contribute or partially
contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent of that relative's
share.
F. Eight days to determine eligibility. The administrator may take up to
eight days from the date of contact by the funeral director to issue a
written decision regarding the amount of the municipal contribution
toward the burial or cremation. The eight-day eligibility determination
period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of
legally liable family members and determine their respective financial
capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact the personal
representative of the deceased's estate, if any, and other related
administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this eight-day
period allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality's
decision.
G. The municipal obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or others
can contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum
benefits provided by the municipality when no contributions toward the
burial or cremation are available from any other source. To the extent
any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
§ 200-35 MADISON CODE § 200-35
173:174
§ 200-36. Notice of decision.
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In
addition, any other benefits or resources that are available, such as
social security burial benefits, veterans' burial benefits, or
contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the maximum
amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from
the municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided
for the purpose of publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate
contribution limit for this purpose of $75 when a paid receipt
demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to the
administrator.
H. Burial expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family
members with regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of
burial or cremated. See Appendix H28 for the maximum levels of
assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
I. Cremation expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family
members of the deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the
funeral director can locate any family members, the administrator may
issue general assistance for cremation services. See Appendix H29 for
the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of
cremations.
A. Written decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each
applicant after making a determination of eligibility each time a person
applies. The decision will be given to the applicant within 24 hours of
receiving a completed and signed application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305,
Subsection 3). (See Article IV, § 200-12.)
(1) When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application,
due to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
administrator, the GA administrator may decide to render a notice
of "ineligibility" and provide the applicant with another application
to submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
(2) In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the
responsibility of the general assistance administrator to explain the
applicant's right to a fair hearing in the written notice of decision.
B. Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be
given written notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for
assistance. In addition to the contents of a written decision listed in
§ 200-12 of this chapter, the notice will state that applicants:
(1) Have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may
obtain a fair hearing; and
28.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
29.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Town offices.
§ 200-35 CURFEW § 200-36
173:175
(2) Have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality
has violated the law. The decision will state the method for
notifying the Department.
C. Disbursement of general assistance. Except when determined
impractical by the administrator, all general assistance will be provided
in the form of a voucher or purchase order payable to a vendor or
through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or services.
General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment to
an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash
payment, in which case the administrator shall document the
circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form of cash (22
M.R.S.A. § 4305, Subsection 6).
§ 200-36 MADISON CODE § 200-36
173:176
ARTICLE VII
Fair Hearing
§ 200-37. Right to fair hearing.
Within five working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction
or termination of assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act
or failure to act, the applicant or his or her authorized representative has
the right to request a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review
a decision of the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the
applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review
of the decision.
§ 200-38. Method of obtaining fair hearing.
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance
administrator, all claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a
fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear requests for a fair hearing
will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the general
assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or
explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and file
any correspondence involved.
A. Written request.
(1) To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within five working
days of receiving the administrator's decision to grant, deny,
reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10 working days after any
other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available a
printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the
claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the
claimant will give the following information:
(a) The decision on which review is sought;
(b) The reason(s) for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why the
claimant believes he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
(c) The relief sought by the claimant.
(2) The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing
unless it has been withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
B. Scheduling the fair hearing.
(1) Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair hearing
authority must meet and hold the hearing within five working days.
The administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and
where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to
the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing
§ 200-37 CURFEW § 200-38
173:177
§ 200-39. Fair hearing authority.
§ 200-40. Fair hearing procedure.
sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant's
rights to:
(a) Be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be
represented by legal counsel or other spokesperson at the
hearing, at the claimant's own expense;
(b) Confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the
hearing against the claimant; and
(c) Present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
(2) Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take
into consideration the convenience of the claimant and hearing
authority. The claimant will be given timely notice to allow for
preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary
information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective
preparation of his or her case.
A. The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that
will determine, based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing,
whether the claimant(s) were eligible to receive assistance at the time
they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with the responsibility of
ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with the
state law and local ordinance.
B. The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or
more persons appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA, or,
if designated, the Board of Appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the organization of the fair
hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria.
The person(s) serving as FHA must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the
appeal;
(2) Be impartial;
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to
obtain evidence and the facts necessary to make a fair
determination; and
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically,
explaining to the claimant the laws and regulations under which
the administrator operated, and interpreting to the administrator
any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices
or actions.
§ 200-38 MADISON CODE § 200-40
173:178
A. When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time,
and place of the hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate
preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow for
effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant shall be permitted
to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the claimant
will be told the following information, which will govern all fair
hearings. All fair hearings will:
(1) Be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant,
witnesses, legal counsel, or others whom the claimant wants
present, and the general assistance administrator, his or her
agents, counsel and witnesses;
(2) Be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing
authority;
(3) Be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but
subject to the requirements of due process;
(4) Allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present
their positions for themselves or with the aid of others, including
legal counsel;
(5) Give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written
testimony or documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question
witnesses presented at the hearing; and examine all evidence
presented at the hearing;
(6) Result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony
presented at the hearing; and
(7) Be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to
the claimant and filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The
fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to establish all
pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any arguments
without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair
hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material
reviewed by the fair hearing authority must be made available to
the claimant or his or her representative. The claimant will be
responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
B. The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322).
C. Claimant's failure to appear.
(1) In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will send a
written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator's decision
was not altered due to the claimant's failure to appear.
§ 200-40 CURFEW § 200-40
173:179
§ 200-41. Fair hearing decision.
Furthermore, the notice shall indicate that the claimant has five
working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating "just cause," for failing to
appear. For the purposes of a claimant's failure to appear at a fair
hearing, examples of "just cause" include:
(a) A death or serious illness in the family;
(b) A personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
(c) An emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents
the party from attending the hearing;
(d) An obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in
the conduct of his or her affairs could reasonably conclude
takes precedence over the attendance at the hearing; or
(e) Lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect,
excusable inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
(2) If the claimant (or his/her attorney) establishes just cause, the
request for the hearing will be reinstated and a hearing
rescheduled.
(3) In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to
appear at a fair hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of
the claimant on matters of "fact" but may cross-examine witnesses
and make "legal" arguments on behalf of the claimant.
A. The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general
assistance administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the
claimant within five working days after completion of the hearing.
Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
(1) A statement of the issue;
(2) Relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
(3) Pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance
related to the decision; and
(4) The decision and the reasons for it.
B. A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The
hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the general
assistance administrator.
C. The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is
dissatisfied with the fair hearing decision, he/she has a further legal
right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must
§ 200-40 MADISON CODE § 200-41
173:180
file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of
receipt of the fair hearing decision.
D. When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes
assistance to the claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24
hours.
§ 200-41 CURFEW § 200-41
173:181

ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
§ 200-42. Recipients.
§ 200-43. Recipients anticipating workers' compensation benefits.
§ 200-44. Recipients of supplemental security income.
All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
supplemental security income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and
which therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date,
will be required to sign a statement on an interim assistance agreement
form distributed by the DHHS that authorizes the Social Security
Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment to the
A. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the
recipient, or his or her executors or administrators in a civil action.
However, prior to recovering assistance granted, the municipality shall
"offset" the value of any workfare performed by a GA recipient, at a rate
not less than minimum wage.
B. Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance,
the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by
notifying him/her in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The
municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs if, as a result of the
repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
A. The municipality shall claim a lien for the value of all general assistance
payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment made to that
recipient under the Workers' Compensation Act or similar law of any
other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is
receiving workers' compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of
the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the Office
of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code Division.
B. The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed
by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or is
receiving workers' compensation. Any general assistance applicant who
has applied for or who is receiving workers' compensation benefits and
who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be found
ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the
required signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that
filing to the recipient's workers' compensation attorney, if known, the
applicant's employer or the employer's insurance company, and, at the
administrator's discretion, to the Workers' Compensation Board. The
lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum workers' compensation
benefit is issued.
§ 200-42 CURFEW § 200-44
173:183
municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may
be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to
22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and who refuses to sign the interim agreement SSI
authorization form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance
until he or she provides the required signature (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
§ 200-45. Relatives of applicant.
The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In
addition, grandchildren, children, parents and grandparents are liable for
the burial costs of each other. The municipality considers these relatives
to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in
proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may complain to any
court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf
of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4319).
§ 200-44 MADISON CODE § 200-45
173:184
ARTICLE IX
Severability
§ 200-46. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this chapter.
§ 200-46 CURFEW § 200-46
173:185
Chapter 245
LOCAL FOOD AND COMMUNITY SELF-GOVERNANCE
§ 245-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Food and
Community Self-Governance Ordinance."
§ 245-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY SOCIAL EVENT — An event where people gather as part
of a community for the benefit of those gathering, or for the community,
including but not limited to a church or religious social, school event,
potluck, neighborhood gathering, library meeting, traveling food sale,
fundraiser, craft fair, farmers market and other public events.
HOME CONSUMPTION — Consumed within a private home.
LOCAL FOODS — Any food or food product that is grown, produced, or
processed by individuals who sell directly to their patrons through farmbased
sales or buying clubs, at farmers markets, roadside stands,
fundraisers or at community social events.
PATRON — An individual who is the last person to purchase any product or
preparation directly from a processor or producer and who does not resell
the product or preparation.
PROCESSOR — Any individual who processes or prepares products of the
soil or animals for food or drink.
PRODUCER — Any farmer or gardener who grows any plant or animal for
food or drink.
§ 245-3. Preamble and purpose.
A. Preamble.
(1) We the people of the Town of Madison, Somerset County, Maine,
have the right to produce, process, sell, purchase and consume
local foods thus promoting self-reliance, the preservation of family
farms, and local food traditions. We recognize that family farms,
sustainable agricultural practices, and food processing by
individuals, families and noncorporate entities offers stability to
our rural way of life by enhancing the economic, environmental and
social wealth of our community. As such, our right to a local food
system requires us to assert our inherent right to self-government.
We recognize the authority to protect that right as belonging to the
Town of Madison.
§ 200-46 MADISON CODE § 245-3
173:186
§ 245-4. Authority.
This chapter is adopted and enacted pursuant to the inherent, inalienable,
and fundamental right of the citizens of the Town of Madison to selfgovernment,
and under the authority recognized as belonging to the people
of the Town by all relevant state and federal laws including, but not limited
to the following:
(2) We have faith in our citizens' ability to educate themselves and
make informed decisions. We hold that federal and state
regulations impede local food production and constitute an
usurpation of our citizens' right to foods of their choice. We support
food that fundamentally respects human dignity and health,
nourishes individuals and the community, and sustains producers,
processors and the environment. We are therefore duty bound
under the Constitution of the State of Maine to protect and promote
unimpeded access to local foods.
B. The purpose of the local food and community self-governance chapter is
to:
(1) Provide citizens with unimpeded access to local food;
(2) Enhance the local economy by promoting the production and
purchase of local agricultural products;
(3) Protect access to farmers' markets, roadside stands, farm-based
sales and direct producer to patron sales;
(4) Support the economic viability of local food producers and
processors;
(5) Preserve community social events where local foods are served or
sold;
(6) Preserve local knowledge and traditional foodways.
A. The Declaration of Independence of the United States of America,
which declares that governments are instituted to secure peoples'
rights, and that government derives its just powers from the consent of
the governed.
B. Article I, § 2 of the Maine Constitution, which declares: "all power is
inherent in the people; all free governments are founded in their
authority and instituted for their benefit, [and that] they have therefore
an unalienable and indefeasible right to institute government and to
alter, reform, or totally change the same when their safety and
happiness require it."
C. Section 3001 of Title 30-A of the Maine Revised Statutes, which grants
municipalities all powers necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Madison.
§ 245-3 CURFEW § 245-4
173:187
§ 245-5. Statements of law.
D. Section 1-A of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes which states: "The
survival of the family farm is of special concern to the people of the
State, and the ability of the family farm to prosper, while producing an
abundance of high quality food and fiber, deserves a place of high
priority in the determination of public policy."
E. Section 1-B of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes which states: "The
survival of the family farm is of special concern to the people of the
State, and the ability of the family farm to prosper, while producing an
abundance of high quality food and fiber, deserves a place of high
priority in the determination of public policy."
F. Section 1-B of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes which states:
"...The preservation of rural life and values in the State {is} the joint
responsibility of all public agencies, local, state and federal, whose
policies and programs substantially impact the economy and general
welfare of people who reside in rural Maine, such as the development
and implementation of programs that assist in the maintenance of
family farms { ...}, and improve health and nutrition. The state agencies
in addition to the department include, but are not limited to, the
Department of Education, Department of Health and Human Services,
Department of Labor and the Department of Agriculture, Conservation
and Forestry."
G. Section 201-A of Title 7-A of the Maine Revised Statutes which states:
"It is the policy of the State to encourage food self-sufficiency for its
citizens. The department (Department of Agriculture, Conservation and
Forestry) shall support policies that:
1. Local control. Through local control preserve the abilities of
communities to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume
locally produced foods.30
3. Improved health and well-being. Improve the health and well-being
of citizens of this State by reducing hunger and increasing food
security through improved access to wholesome, nutritious foods
by supporting family farms and encouraging sustainable farming
and fishing;
4. Self-reliance and personal responsibility. Promote self-reliance and
personal responsibility by ensuring the ability of individuals,
families and other entities to prepare, process, advertise and sell
foods directly to customers intended solely for consumption by the
customers or their families."
A. Licensure/inspection exemption.
30.Editor’s Note: The Statute includes Subsection 2, Small-scale farming and food
production, which the Town chose not to include.
§ 245-4 MADISON CODE § 245-5
173:188
§ 245-6. Statement of Law: implementation.
The following restrictions and provisions serve to implement the preceding
statements of law.
§ 245-7. Civil enforcement.
The Town of Madison may enforce the provisions of this chapter through
seeking equitable relief from a court of competent jurisdiction. Any
individual citizen of the Town of Madison shall have standing to vindicate
any rights secured by this chapter which have been violated or which are
threatened with violation, and may seek relief both in the form of injunctive
and compensatory relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1) Producers or processors of local foods in the Town of Madison are
exempt from licensure and inspection, provided that the
transaction is only between the producer or processor and a patron
when the food is sold for home consumption. This includes any
producer or processor who sells his or her products at farmers'
markets or roadside stands; sells his or her products through farmbased
sales directly to a patron; or delivers his or her products
directly to patrons.
(2) Producers or processors of local foods in the Town of Madison are
exempt from licensure and inspection, provided that their products
are prepared for, consumed, or sold at a community social event.
B. Right to access and produce food. Madison citizens possess the right to
save and exchange seed; produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume
local foods of their choosing.
C. Right to self-governance. All citizens of Madison possess the right to a
form of governance which recognizes that all power is inherent in the
people, that all free governments are founded on the people's authority
and consent.
D. Right to enforce. Madison citizens possess the right to adopt measures
which prevent the violation of the rights enumerated in this chapter.
A. State and federal law. It shall be unlawful for any law or regulation
adopted by the state or federal government to interfere with the rights
recognized by this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any corporation to
interfere with the rights recognized by this chapter. The term
"corporation" shall mean any business entity organized under the laws
of any state or country.
B. Patron liability protection. Patrons purchasing food for home
consumption may enter into private agreements with those producers
or processors of local foods to waive any liability for the consumption of
that food. Producers or processors of local foods shall be exempt from
licensure and inspection requirements for that food as long as those
agreements are in effect.
§ 245-5 CURFEW § 245-8
173:189
§ 245-8. Town action against preemption.
The foundation for making and adoption of this law is the peoples'
fundamental and inalienable right to govern themselves, and thereby secure
their rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Any attempt to
use other units and levels of government to preempt, amend, alter or
overturn this chapter or parts of this chapter shall require the Town to hold
public meetings that explore the adoption of other measures that expand
local control and the ability of citizens to protect their fundamental and
inalienable right to self-government.
§ 245-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective immediately upon its enactment.
§ 245-10. Severability.
To the extent any provision of this chapter is deemed invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such provision will be removed from this chapter,
and the balance of this chapter shall remain valid.
§ 245-11. Repealer.
All inconsistent provisions of prior ordinances adopted by the Town of
Madison are hereby repealed, but only to the extent necessary to remedy
the inconsistency.
§ 245-12. Human rights and Constitutionality.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any activities
or actions that violate human rights protected by the United States
Constitution or the Constitution of the State of Maine.
Chapter 256
MASS GATHERINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Chs. 285
and 667.
§ 245-8 MADISON CODE § 245-12
173:190
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Purpose
§ 256-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Mass Gatherings
Ordinance of the Town of Madison."
§ 256-2. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Authority granted to the
Town of Madison in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001
and 22 M.R.S.A. § 1602, Subsection 5.
§ 256-3. Findings; purpose.
The Town of Madison finds that unregulated mass gatherings pose a threat
to the health, safety, and welfare of the community. Large numbers of
patrons overtax the roads leading to the place where the gathering is
being held, preventing the passage of emergency vehicles, delaying persons
using these roads for other purposes, posing a threat to pedestrians, and
obstructing entrances to homes and places of business so that residents
and business guests are denied access. mass gatherings also exceed the
capacity of the community to provide lodging, parking, food, water, medical
services and sanitary facilities, resulting in trespasses upon and damage to
private property, the use of private property as public toilets, and creation
of hazards to the health of both patrons and residents. A lack of sufficient
security forces to cope with large crowds results in open violations of laws
intended to prevent breaches of the peace, and illegal consumption of drugs
and alcohol. Unregulated mass gatherings also interfere with the peaceful
enjoyment of home and property by residents of the Town through the
creation of noise, congestion, and unauthorized use of private property.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a balance between the right of
assembly and the legitimate rights of privacy of residents of the Town.
§ 256-1 CURFEW § 256-3
173:191

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 256-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
DHS — The State of Maine Department of Human Services.
MASS GATHERING — A mass gathering shall be deemed to mean any
meeting, festival, social gathering, political rally, or other event held
with the continued attendance of 750 or more persons for six or more
hours.
MASS GATHERING AREA — Any place, public or private, maintained,
operated, leased, controlled or used for a group gathering or
assemblage. mass gathering area also includes all camping areas used
primarily or exclusively with connection with the mass gathering and
those camping areas need not be contiguous.
M.R.S.A. — The Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
NUISANCE — The following shall be defined as nuisances:
OPERATOR — The person responsible for the managing of the mass
gathering area. In the event that no operator exists, the owner, the
lessee, or the person in possession of the property encompassing the
mass gathering area shall be deemed the operator under this chapter.
REFUSE — All solid or liquid wastes.
SANITARY FACILITIES — Toilets, privies, lavatories, urinals, drinking
fountains, and service buildings or rooms provided for installation and
use of these units.
SELECTMEN — The duly elected members of the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Madison.
TICKET — Any receipt, stamp, or token of eligibility to attend the mass
gathering whether or not a piece of paper or other physical evidence of
payment is issued to the patron.
TOWN — The Town of Madison, Maine.
WATER DISTRICT — The Madison Water District.
Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence;
(1)
Any attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence;
(2)
Any condition which violates federal, state or local health or
environmental laws or regulations.
(3)
B. Any term not defined shall have its common, ordinary meaning.
§ 256-4 CURFEW § 256-4
173:193

ARTICLE III
Permits Required
§ 256-5. Local and state permits required.
No person, corporation, partnership, association, or group of any kind shall
sponsor, promote, or conduct a mass gathering until a permit from the
Town of Madison pursuant to this chapter has been obtained, and all other
necessary municipal and state permits are obtained. These permits may
include:
A. A permit from the Maine State Department of Human Services,
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. Chapter 265, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
B. A "B.Y.O.B." or other appropriate permit from the Maine State Bureau
of Liquor Enforcement, pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. § 163 is required if
the mass gathering allows the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
the premises.
C. A permit for a campground from the Maine Department of Human
Services, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 2491 to 2501, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 256-5 CURFEW § 256-5
173:195

ARTICLE IV
Town of Madison Permit Process
§ 256-6. Application; fees.
An application for a permit to hold a mass gathering shall be filed with
the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen not less than 60 days before the
date of the mass gathering. The application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable check or money order made payable to the Town of Madison,
according to the following schedule:
Expected Attendees Application Fee
750 to 5,000 $250.00
More than 5,000 $500.00
§ 256-7. Public hearing.
Within 14 days of the filing of a complete application the Board of Selectmen
shall hold a public hearing to consider the issuance of the permit. Upon
receipt of the application, the Board of Selectmen shall send a copy of
the application to the Department of Human Services, and request their
presence at the public hearing. All property owners within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of the proposed mass gathering area shall be notified in writing
of the public hearing by the Board of Selectmen. Notice of the hearing shall
be given by posting the same in at least two public places in the Town, and
publishing the same at least once in a newspaper having general circulation
in the Town, at least five days before the date of the public hearing. This
notice of the public hearing shall contain the date, location, number of
expected attendees, and a general description of the event, as well as the
date and location of the public hearing. A copy of the notice shall also be
mailed to or served upon the operator. The date of the public hearing may
be, but need not be, the same date as the meeting of the Board of Selectmen
to consider the issuance of the permit.
§ 256-8. Issuance of permit.
The Board of Selectmen shall issue a permit for a mass gathering when
satisfied that all requirements and conditions of this chapter have been
met. Upon issuance of the permit, all assurances made and obligations
assumed by the operator in the completed application (Article V) shall be
deemed to be conditions of said permit. In issuing the permit, the Board
of Selectmen may impose such additional conditions as may be reasonably
required to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The Board
of Selectmen shall issue or deny the permit not more than 35 days after the
application is filed. If the permit is denied, the Board of Selectmen shall,
within seven days, give the operator written reasons for the denial.
§ 256-9. Plans and reports required; cooperation among agencies.
§ 256-6 CURFEW § 256-9
173:197
§ 256-10. Appeals.
An applicant who has been aggrieved by the Town's decision to deny a
permit under this chapter may appeal to Superior Court under Rule 80B of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
A. In its review of applications for permits for the holding or promoting of
mass gatherings, the Board of Selectmen may require such plans,
specifications and reports as it shall deem necessary for a proper
review. In its review of such applications (Article V), as well in carrying
out its other duties and functions in connection with such a gathering,
the Board of Selectmen may request, and shall receive from all public
officers, departments and agencies of the Town such cooperation and
assistance as may be necessary and proper.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall work with the Department of Human
Services, the Maine State Police, the Somerset County Sheriff's Office,
the Bureau of Liquor Enforcement, the Fire Warden, the Department of
Transportation, and local officials to insure that Town concerns
regarding fire protection, police protection, traffic control, and any
other matters as may effect the security of the public health and safety
are adequately addressed.
§ 256-9 MADISON CODE § 256-10
173:198
ARTICLE V
Permit Application
§ 256-11. Performance standards.
A. Contents of application. The permit application submitted pursuant to
§ 256-5 shall be on the application form prescribed by the Board of
Selectmen31 and shall include the following information:
B. Description.
(1) The application must include a description of the proposed event. A
statement of the number of persons expected to attend the event
together with the maximum number of tickets which will be made
available, if tickets are issued. Persons not holding valid tickets for
an event for which tickets have been issued shall not be permitted
to attend.
(2) The application must also provide a site map of the area, at a scale
of no more than 100 feet to the inch, showing the following:
(a) The location and number of all proposed toilets.
(b) The location and number of all lavatory and bathing facilities.
(c) The location and number of water supply sources.
(d) The location and size of the assemblage area(s).
(e) The location of the food service areas.
(f) The location and size of the camping areas, and number of
camp sites.
(g) The on-site ingress and egress of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. (See Subsection C.)
(h) The off-site ingress and egress roads.
(i) The location of refuse disposal facilities and collection
facilities.
(j) The location and size of the parking areas, including the
number of parking spaces.
(k) The location of all traffic control personnel.
(l) The location of the first aid facilities.
(3) All facilities required by this chapter shall comply with the
regulations promulgated by the DHS pertaining to mass
gatherings. When off-site facilities are to be utilized in order to
meet the requirements of this chapter, they shall be described and
31.Editor's Note: Said application form is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 256-11 CURFEW § 256-11
173:199
written consents from the property owners providing the facilities
shall be submitted with the application indicating that they have
read the application and understand the scope and nature of the
mass gathering.
C. Access.
(1) Evidence shall be provided to show that provisions for access for
the ingress and egress of pedestrians and vehicular traffic shall be
maintained, and that all public roadways in the proximity of the
mass gathering will be adequately staffed with trained traffic
control personnel to insure safety to all the public for the duration
of the mass gathering.
(2) Evidence shall be provided that sufficient safeguards have been
incorporated into mass gathering plans in order to insure that
Town maintained streets and roads will remain accessible to public
safety vehicles (police, fire and rescue) during the proposed mass
gathering.
(3) A detailed plan for controlling traffic must be submitted, which
shall include:
(a) A description of the routes which persons attending the event
are likely to take.
(b) The number, and assigned location of persons who will be
present to direct traffic at the site both before and after the
event. Under no circumstances shall individuals without
proper training be assigned the duty of directing traffic on
public roads.
(c) A description of what means will be available to remove
disabled vehicles from locations where their presence will
obstruct the free flow of traffic, Including a written statement
by any private towing agencies that their towing services will
be available.
(d) A description of parking shall be provided, specifying the
location of all roads and parking lots.
[1] Width of service roads shall be at least 12 feet for one
traffic lane, 24 feet for two traffic lanes, and seven feet for
parallel parking lanes.
[2] There shall be at least one parking space for every four
persons and the density shall not exceed 100 passenger
cars or 30 buses per usable acre.
D. Medical. The applicant must demonstrate how emergency medical
services will be provided, and further demonstrate coordination with
the manager of the ambulance facility serving the Town of Madison. All
necessary personnel must be licensed by the State of Maine, as either
§ 256-11 MADISON CODE § 256-11
173:200
Physician Assistant, Registered Nurse, or Emergency Medical
Technician. A first aid building, tent, or ambulance duly licensed by
the State of Maine shall be available on the site during the entire
time of the mass gathering. Telephone and radio communications shall
be provided and kept available for emergency purposes. The operator
of the mass gathering shall contact area hospitals, advise them that
a mass gathering will be held, and inform them of the expected
attendance of the event.
E. Law enforcement.
(1) Evidence must be provided in writing that a sufficient number of
certified law enforcement personnel licensed pursuant to 32
M.R.S.A. §§ 9401 to 9417, will be on duty near and within the
assembly site area and that the Town authorized officials have
approved the same. A minimum of at least one such certified
security person (not including persons concerned solely with traffic
control) shall be available for each 1,000 persons in attendance.
(2) If they deem it necessary in the interest of public safety, the Board
of Selectmen shall have the authority to require that all security
personnel be certified graduates of the Maine Criminal Justice
Academy.
F. Fire protection. Evidence must be provided in writing that the Madison
Fire Chief has accepted mass gathering plans as meeting fire protection
concerns. If, in his judgment, the conditions which exists at the mass
gathering area constitute an unsafe environment, the Fire Chief shall
recommend the Board of Selectmen deny the issuance of a mass
gathering permit. In addition, evidence must be provided that the
Regional Forest Ranger has inspected the site and assessed the forest
fire hazard. If, in his opinion, conditions warrant, the Forest Ranger
shall have the authority to impose a ban on any and all fires during the
mass gathering.
G. Water supply.
(1) Evidence must be provided in writing from the operator concerning
the source(s) of potable water. Where water is distributed under
pressure and flush toilets are used, the water system shall deliver
water at normal operating pressure (20 per square foot per square
inch minimum to all fixtures at the rate of at least 30 gallons per
person per day).
(2) Where water under pressure is not available, and nonwater toilets
are used, at least three gallons of water per person per day shall be
provided for drinking and lavatory purposes.
(3) If the Madison Water District is to be utilized as a source of potable
water, a written statement from the directors of said Water District
must be submitted to affirm that the district has the capacity to
§ 256-11 CURFEW § 256-11
173:201
provide the necessary quantity of water without adversely affecting
the supply to their normal customers.
(4) Transported water shall be obtained from an approved source, and
stored and dispensed in an approved manner. "Approval" as used in
this subsection means in compliance with standards adopted by the
DHS Division of Health Engineering.
H. Sanitary facilities.
(1) Toilets shall be provided at a rate of one for each 150 persons
attending the mass gathering event.
(2) Sanitary facilities shall be conveniently accessible and well
identified.
(3) Water points or drinking fountains shall be conveniently accessible
and well identified.
I. Refuse disposal. A description of the number, type, and location of
refuse facilities including a statement as to when and how the
accumulated refuse will be picked up, by whom, and to what facility it
will be taken. The operator will provide proof that refuse containers will
be readily accessible throughout the mass gathering area, and that at
least one fifty-gallon refuse container or equivalent will be provided for
each 100 persons expected to attend the mass gathering. The operator
shall be responsible for all fees associated with the cleanup and
disposal of refuse resulting from the mass gathering.
J. Containment. The operator of the mass gathering must have the means
to discourage the presence of persons not holding tickets from
trespassing on private property in the vicinity of the event. In
conformance with the State DHS requirements, the operator must
provide provisions for preventing people in excess of the maximum
permitted number from gaining access to the mass gathering area.
These provisions shall include the following:
(1) A statement that persons not holding valid tickets will not be
permitted to remain on property under the operator's control in the
vicinity of the event.
(2) Written authorization to police to arrest persons not holding valid
tickets who are trespassing on property owned or under the control
of the operator in the vicinity of the event. By filing the application,
the operator authorizes police officers to enter upon any property
under his control in order to enforce compliance.
(3) A description of the means which will be used to publicize the fact
that the event has been sold out or canceled, if this occurs, and that
persons not holding tickets who are trespassing on private property
near the scene of the event will be subject to arrest.
§ 256-11 MADISON CODE § 256-11
173:202
§ 256-12. Review standards.
K. Promotion. A detailed description shall be provided of the methods
being used to publicize the event.
L. Compliance check. The operator of any mass gathering with an
expected attendance of more than 3,000 persons shall have all facilities
in place and subject to inspection by the Board of Selectmen or their
appointed agent a minimum of 24 hours prior to the scheduled
commencement of the event.
M. Noise.
(1) The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular or frequent, or intermittent source of sound produced by
any activity shall be as follows:
(a) 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.: 70 dB(a).
(b) 10:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.: 45 dB(a).
(2) Sound pressure level limits using the sound equivalent level of one
minute (leq) [measured in dB(a) scale]. Noise shall be measured by
a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, fast response. The
meter shall meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
SI 4-1964) American Standards Specification for General Purpose
Sound Level Meters.
A. Board's determination. In determining whether to grant or deny the
permit, the Board of Selectmen shall consider the availability of the
following:
(1) An adequate and satisfactory water supply and facilities.
(2) Adequate refuse storage and disposal facilities.
(3) Adequate sleeping areas and facilities.
(4) Adequate medical supplies and care.
(5) Adequate fire protection.
(6) Adequate police protection.
(7) Adequate traffic control.
(8) Adequate liability insurance.
(9) Adequate protection for public water supply, if deemed necessary
by the Board of Trustees of the Madison Water District.
(10) Any additional matters as may affect the security of the public
health or safety.
§ 256-11 CURFEW § 256-12
173:203
B. Medical. The numbers and schedules of emergency medical technician
personnel and ambulances needed will be determined by the manager
of the ambulance facility serving the Town of Madison.
C. State and local requirements. The operator of the mass gathering must
comply with all laws and regulations of the State of Maine and the Town
of Madison, which pertain to the event in question as stipulated in
§ 256-5. Copies of all such licenses and permits shall be filed with the
Board of Selectmen when received by the operator. The Board of
Selectmen shall have the authority to issue requirements more
stringent than the requirements of 22 M.R.S.A. Chapter 265.
§ 256-12 MADISON CODE § 256-12
173:204
ARTICLE VI
Liability Insurance and Public Costs
§ 256-13. Liability insurance.
Prior to receiving a permit and, in any event, no later than 60 days prior
to the scheduled date of the mass gathering, the operator shall furnish to
the Board of Selectmen a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance
company licensed in the State of Maine providing liability coverage in the
amount of at least $200,000 with respect to the injury or death of one
or more persons in connection with the mass gathering. Such insurance
policy shall also provide coverage for property damage in the amount of
at least $50,000. The insurance policy in question shall contain a provision
requiring that at least 10 days' notice be given to the Board of Selectmen
prior to cancellation.
§ 256-14. Deposit for Town costs.
The operator of the mass gathering shall provide a cash deposit to the
Town, which amount shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen, and
will be deposited in an interest-bearing account. The purpose of the account
shall be to allow the Town to pay costs related to protecting the public
health and safety. Any interest earned and any remaining balance in this
account shall be returned to the applicant following completion of the mass
gathering, and cleanup by the applicant of the area used for this mass
gathering, compliance by the applicant with any applicable state or local
law or regulation, and payment by the applicant of all proper claims against
the applicant for damage to real or personal property in the municipality
for which the permit is issued and arising out of facts done or omitted to be
done by the applicant, his agents or employees. A permit shall not be issued
until receipt of said deposit.
§ 256-15. Liability for Town costs.
A. Town costs shall be those incurred by the Town in connection with the
mass gathering, which relate to any adverse consequences due to the
mass gathering, and which would not have been incurred by the Town if
such mass gathering were not held. Such costs shall include but not be
restricted to damage to road signs, Town roads or ditches, or any other
adverse consequences to any public facilities or works, such as the
municipal water supply. Town costs shall also include the cost of hiring
a constable or constables to oversee the Town's interests in ensuring
the public safety and enforcing the conditions of this chapter.
B. Within 30 days after the mass gathering, the Town costs shall be
calculated, and the deposit shall be refunded to the operator to the
extent it exceeds the actual Town costs. If the actual Town costs exceed
the amount deposited, the operator shall pay the excess to the Town
within 10 days after being so notified.
§ 256-13 CURFEW § 256-15
173:205

ARTICLE VII
Inspection
§ 256-16. Right of entry.
The Board of Selectmen or their appointed agent shall have the right to
enter upon the mass gathering Area, by appointment, prior to the scheduled
event for the purpose of ascertaining that all facilities (water, toilet, parking
spots, signs, etc.) are in place and that all conditions of the mass gathering
permit have been met.
§ 256-17. Determination by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen shall convene a meeting upon completion of the
inspection for the purpose of determining if the mass gathering is in
compliance with all conditions of the Mass Gatherings Ordinance.
§ 256-16 CURFEW § 256-17
173:207

ARTICLE VIII
Revocation of Permit
§ 256-18. Conditions; notice.
The Board of Selectmen may revoke the permit at any time prior to the date
of the scheduled event if the operator has failed to comply with any of the
commitments made in the application, or the requirements of this chapter,
or if the operator has failed to secure any other license or permit required
by the Town of Madison or any other government agency in order to hold
the mass gathering on the proposed site. Except in cases of emergency,
the Board of Selectmen shall revoke a permit only after giving notice to
the operator of the reasons for the proposed revocation and providing
an opportunity to be heard with respect thereto. Written notice of the
reasons for the revocation shall be delivered to the operator or their agent,
personally or by expedited mail service.
§ 256-18 CURFEW § 256-18
173:209

ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 256-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any term of a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty
payable to the Town of Madison in an amount not to exceed $50,000. In
addition, the Town may seek an injunction where necessary to prevent the
applicant from publicizing, promoting or conducting the mass gathering. If
found liable, the violator shall also be held responsible for court costs and
reasonable attorneys fees incurred by the Town. The Selectmen or their
designated agents may enforce this chapter.
§ 256-19 CURFEW § 256-19
173:211

ARTICLE X
Severability and When Effective
§ 256-20. Severability.
Each part of this chapter is severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence
or provision is declared to be contrary to law, the validity of the remainder
shall not be affected thereby unless the application of any remaining portion
of this chapter would result in action being taken which is inconsistent with
the objectives of this chapter.
§ 256-21. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption of the same by the
Town of Madison.
§ 256-20 CURFEW § 256-21
173:213
Chapter 271
OBSCENITY
§ 271-1. Purpose.
The two purposes of this chapter are:
§ 271-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
MATERIAL — Anything tangible that is capable of being used or adapted
to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading, observation,
sound, or in any other manner, but does not include an actual threedimensional
obscene device.
OBSCENE — Material or a performance that:
A. To prohibit certain acts of commercial exploitation of human sexuality
in commercial or business establishments within the Town of Madison
in order to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation,
sexually transmitted diseases and disturbances of the peace and good
order of the community which may occur when such commercial
exploitation is permitted in such places, and
B. To protect the health, safety, welfare and morals of the community by
using the government's recognized and traditional police power to
protect societal order, morality and physical and emotional health
without infringing on protected First Amendment rights.
The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
would find that taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex;
A.
Depicts or describes:
Patently offensive representations or descriptions of ultimate
sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
sexual intercourse, sodomy, and sexual bestiality; or
(1)
Patently offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation,
excretory functions, sadism, masochism, lewd exhibition of the
genitals, the male or female genitals in a state of sexual stimulation
or arousal, covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a
device designated and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation
of the human genital organs; and
(2)
B.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
C.
§ 256-21 MADISON CODE § 271-2
271:214
OBSCENE DEVICE — A device, including a dildo or artificial vagina,
designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human
genital organs.
PATENTLY OFFENSIVE — So offensive on its face as to be intolerable to the
average person, applying contemporary community standards.
PERFORMANCE — To manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate,
present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
PRURIENT INTEREST IN SEX — A shameful or morbid interest in sex.
WHOLESALE PROMOTE — To manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to
offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale.
§ 271-3. Promotion of obscene material or devices prohibited.
§ 271-4. Violations and penalties.
A. A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he
wholesale promotes or possesses with intent to wholesale promote any
obscene material or obscene device.
B. A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he:
(1) Promotes or possesses with intent to promote any obscene material
or obscene device; or
(2) Produces, presents, or directs an obscene performance or
participates in a portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes
to its obscenity.
C. A person who promotes or wholesale promotes obscene material or an
obscene device or possesses the same with intent to promote or
wholesale promote it in the course of his business is presumed to do so
with the knowledge of its content and character.
D. A person who possesses six or more obscene devices or six or more
obscene articles, whether such devices or articles are similar or
identical, is presumed to possess them with intent to promote the same.
E. This section does not apply to a person who possesses or distributes
obscene material or obscene devices or participates in conduct
otherwise prescribed by this section when the possession, participation,
or conduct occurs in the course of law enforcement activities.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. Each
act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such penalty, the Town
may enjoin or abate any violation of this chapter by appropriate action,
including but not limited to, revocation of any Town license for a
§ 271-2 OBSCENITY § 271-4
271:215
§ 271-5. Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Chapter 285
PARKS, CEMETERIES AND WATER-ACCESS AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemeteries — See Chs. 26 and 532.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 667.
Use of Town property — See Ch. 738.
§ 285-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the hours for Town parks,
cemeteries and water-access areas.
§ 285-2. Designation of areas. [Amended 6-11-2018]
Those areas listed in the Selectmen's "Policy to protect children using
Madison's athletic fields and parks" dated June 12, 2018.32
§ 285-3. Use of parks.
The Town Manager shall issue permits to persons or organizations to
conduct such activities in any of the Town parks upon the applicant's
meeting the following requirements:
premises or commercial or business establishment in which the
violation occurs.
B. If the Town is the prevailing party in any action brought to enforce this
chapter, the Town must be awarded reasonable attorneys' fees, expert
witness fees, and costs, unless the court finds that special
circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust.
A. The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold the Town harmless
from any and all claims or damages arising out of applicant's proposed
activity.
B. The applicant shall agree to turn the subject park over to the Town
following the proposed activity in the same condition it is on the date
said permit was issued.
32.Note: See Ch. 667, Parks and Recreation Areas, Art. III, Safe Zones.
§ 271-4 MADISON CODE § 285-3
271:216
§ 285-4. Use of vehicles in parks.
Except for the designated vehicle roadways, launching ramps and parking
areas, Town parks shall be closed to all motor vehicles except emergency,
maintenance and law enforcement vehicles, except during events for which
a permit has been granted, as stated in § 285-3, at which time vehicles used
in connection with operating an event may also enter the parks.
§ 285-5. Cemeteries.
All Town maintained cemeteries shall be closed to all persons and all
vehicles except law enforcement officers and maintenance and emergency
personnel and vehicles, between 1/2 hour after sunset and sunrise.
§ 285-6. Hours of permitted use.
All of the above listed areas shall be closed to all persons except law
enforcement officers and maintenance and emergency personnel between
1/2 hour after sunset and sunrise.
§ 285-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$100, or imprisonment of up to 10 days.
§ 285-8. Waivers.
If a resident wishes to use any of the above-listed areas during the hours
when such areas are closed by this chapter, a permit may be secured at the
Town Manager's Office. Permits will be issued for a set period of time, and
for purposes deemed reasonable by the Town Manager.
Chapter 288
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 165.
C. The applicant shall agree to such reasonable controls or limitations on
hours of operation, noise, and types of activities, as the Town Manager
may impose upon such permit.
D. The applicant shall provide such bonds with such sureties as the Town
Manager may reasonably demand of applicant to assure applicant's
compliance with the conditions and/or limitations of such permit.
§ 285-3 OBSCENITY § 285-8
271:217

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Enabling Legislation
§ 288-1. Purpose.
By and through this chapter, the Town of Madison, Maine declares as
its public purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable
its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed Clean Energy ("PACE")
program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for
energy saving improvements to their properties located in the Town. The
Town declares its purpose and the provisions of this chapter to be in
conformity with federal and state laws.
§ 288-2. Enabling legislation
The Town enacts this chapter pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591
of the 124th Maine State Legislature, "An Act To Increase the Affordability
of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses," also known as the
"Property Assessed Clean Energy Act" or the "PACE Act" (codified at 35-A
M.R.S.A. § 10151 et seq.).
§ 288-1 OBSCENITY § 288-2
271:219

ARTICLE II
Title and Definitions
§ 288-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Madison
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance" (the "Ordinance").
§ 288-4. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have their customary meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
ENERGY SAVING IMPROVEMENT — An improvement to qualifying
property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and
that:
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Madison.
PACE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage
on qualifying property and that is approved, in writing, by all owners of
the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage
holders.
PACE ASSESSMENT — An assessment made against qualifying property to
repay a PACE loan.
PACE DISTRICT — The area within which the Municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality's
boundaries.
PACE LOAN — A loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
PACE MORTGAGE — A mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE
program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced
energy use and:
Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy
ENERGY STAR® program or similar energy efficiency standards
established or approved by the Trust; or
(1)
Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property in a
manner approved by the Trust; or
(2)
A.
Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage
system that meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the
Trust.
B.
§ 288-3 OBSCENITY § 288-4
271:221
PACE PROGRAM — A program established under state statute by the Trust
or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy saving
improvements on qualifying property.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the PACE district of
the Municipality.
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION — A fixture, product, system, device
or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying
property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited
to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill
gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet
systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal Qualified
Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean Renewable Energy Bonds.
TRUST — The Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10103
and/or its agent(s), if any.
§ 288-4 MADISON CODE § 288-4
271:222
ARTICLE III
PACE Program
§ 288-5. Establishment; funding.
The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program allowing owners of
qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to access
financing for energy saving improvements to their property through PACE
loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available
from the Trust in municipalities that:
§ 288-6. Amendment to program.
In addition, the Municipality may from time to time amend this chapter to
use any other funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it
for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality shall
be responsible for administration of loans made from those other funding
sources.
A. Adopt a PACE Ordinance;
B. Adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan;
C. Enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to establish
the terms and conditions of the Trust's administration of the
municipality's PACE program; and
D. Agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration of the
municipality's PACE program.
§ 288-5 OBSCENITY § 288-6
271:223

ARTICLE IV
Conformity with Requirements of Trust
§ 288-7. Standards, rules and model documents.
If the Trust adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model
documents subsequent to the Municipality's adoption of this chapter and
those standards, rules or model documents substantially conflict with this
chapter, the Municipality shall take necessary steps to conform this chapter
and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model documents.
§ 288-7 OBSCENITY § 288-7
271:225

ARTICLE V
Program Administration; Municipal Liability
§ 288-8. Program administration.
§ 288-9. Liability of municipal officials and Municipality.
A. PACE administration contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the Municipality will enter into a PACE
administration contract with the Trust to administer the functions of
the PACE program for the Municipality. The PACE administration
contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE
program, including, without limitation, that:
(1) The Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the Municipality's PACE district;
(2) The Trust, or its agent, will create and record a notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a
PACE mortgage;
(3) The Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
(4) The Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
(5) The Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
(6) The Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
(7) The Trust, or its agent, on behalf of the Municipality, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the
PACE loan.
B. Adoption of education and outreach program. In conjunction with
adopting this chapter, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an
education and outreach program so that citizens of the Municipality are
made aware of home energy saving opportunities, including the
opportunity to finance energy saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the Municipality's PACE program.
D. Assessments not a tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined
by the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax
assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to
§ 288-8 OBSCENITY § 288-9
271:227
any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or
related to a PACE program, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under § 288-8A
above, a municipality has no liability to a property owner for or related
to energy saving improvements financed under a PACE program.
§ 288-9 MADISON CODE § 288-9
271:228
Chapter 290
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile graveyards and junkyards — See
Ch. 154.
Building construction — See Ch. 165.
§ 290-1. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 290-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Property Maintenance
Ordinance" of the Town of Madison.
§ 290-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set a minimum standard for the
maintenance of the grounds of property in order to protect public health,
public safety, property values, and to prevent nuisance conditions.
§ 290-4. Required maintenance. [Amended 6-13-2016]
All grounds or parts thereof shall be maintained to prevent unsafe,
unsanitary and/or nuisance conditions (according to the nuisance definition
found in 17 M.R.S.A. § 2802 and as shown in the Appendix33) and to avoid
any adverse effect on the value of adjoining properties. Grounds include
accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds and fences.
§ 290-5. Grounds maintenance standards.
The grounds of any property shall be kept in good repair and free of unsafe
or unsanitary conditions. Such conditions may include containing: refuse,
household trash, junk, discarded plumbing, heating supplies, old or scrap
copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber, waste and all
scrap iron, steel, other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, debris, scrap
lumber, inoperable machinery or part thereof, glass, unused and inoperable
appliances, worn and unused furniture, and one or more junked and/or
unserviceable vehicle(s), other than those licensed for storage according
to the Town of Madison Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance.34
Materials intended for the private use of the property owner may be stored
on the property as long as such material is screened from the public way
33.Editor’s Note: The Appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 154, Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards.
§ 288-9 OBSCENITY § 290-5
271:229
and from abutting properties and is not in violation with state laws. Private
use does not include resale.
§ 290-6. Maintenance after casualty damage.
Within a period of 60 days after casualty (See Appendix.35) damage to
property grounds or structures, the owner shall cause or contract (See
Appendix.) for the repair or restoration of damaged areas and the
demolition of any areas not to be repaired and the removal of all debris
connected therewith. The CEO may grant an extension under certain
hardship conditions. (See § 290-8).
§ 290-7. Liability for violations and corrective actions.
Owners, operators, and occupants of properties in violation of this chapter
shall be jointly and severally liable for violations and for corrective actions
required.
§ 290-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties; extensions.
A. The CEO, or his or her designee, shall notify the violator, serving a
written notice by certified mail or by hand delivery. Said notice shall
explain the nature of the violation and require corrective action within
30 calendar days from the date of the receipt of the notice to correct the
violation, seven days (maximum) for a health and/or safety violation as
determined by the CEO. The violator may appeal the CEO's decision to
the Board of Selectpersons. Appeals must be made within three
working days of notification by the CEO of a violation. The number of
days given for compliance shall start after the Board of Selectpersons
has heard the appeal. [Amended 6-13-2016]
B. If a violation is not corrected within the time allowed, the Town shall
pursue all remedies, including pursuit of a judge's order to abate the
property and remove the material in violation at the property owner's
expense provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3758-A(4)(C). In addition the Town
shall pursue relief available by law and/or in equity for land use
ordinances, including, without limitation, the remedies and relief
provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, currently including, without
limitation, a penalty of $100 to $2,500 per day for a specific violation,
injunctive relief and reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and
costs. The Town shall retain all penalties set forth in this chapter. The
CEO may represent the Town in District Court, pursuant to Rule 80-K.
However, should the services of the Town Attorney be required, in
litigation in a higher court of law, for example, the CEO shall first
review the case with the Town Manager and Board of Selectpersons.
[Amended 6-13-2016]
C. The CEO may offer one special extension per person/per incident of up
to 180 days to violators of this chapter under certain hardship or
35.Editor's Note: The Appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 290-5 MADISON CODE § 290-8
271:230
§ 290-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, paragraph, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be deemed to be a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 290-10. Conflict with other laws.
Whenever a provision of this chapter conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or
statute, the provision imposing the greater restriction shall control. The
newest version of this chapter shall be the one that is enforced.
§ 290-11. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective when approved by the voters of the Town of
Madison.
Chapter 294
RADIOACTIVE WASTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 327.
§ 294-1. Purpose.
The regulations set forth in this chapter are adopted to:
§ 294-2. Legislative authority.
extenuating circumstances. If a violation is discovered during winter
months (November 1 to April 1) and if winter weather prevents the
correction of a violation, an extension may be given. Cases of disability
or financial hardship shall also be grounds for the consideration of an
extension. Violators requesting an extension for financial hardship shall
be required to prove hardship through financial documentation. These
extensions for seasonal, disability, or financial hardship shall be at the
discretion of the CEO.
A. Provide for the protection of groundwater and surface water quality
through the control of radioactive waste handling, storage or disposal;
and
B. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Madison.
§ 290-8 RADIOACTIVE WASTES § 294-2
294:231
§ 294-3. Requirements.
§ 294-4. Appeals.
An aggrieved party or landowner may appeal a decision to Superior Court
within 30 days from the final decision in accordance with Rule 80B of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 294-5. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by a majority vote of the voters of the
Town. Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of Town voters or
on petition of 10% of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in
the Town. The Selectmen shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed
amendment.
§ 294-6. Site characterization.
Any testing or drilling pertaining to the siting of a high/low level nuclear
waste repository within the Town limits of Madison will be prohibited. Any
request for exception to this section shall be handled under § 294-3B of this
chapter.
§ 294-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Authority. this chapter is adopted pursuant to Home Rule powers as
provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, of the Maine Constitution and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3001.
B. Administration. The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Madison shall
administer this chapter.
A. Waste defined as radioactive waste materials by 38 M.R.S.A. § 1451,
Subsections 6 and 11, within the boundaries of the Town limits are
prohibited.
B. Any request for an exception to the prohibition shall be submitted in
writing to the Board of Selectmen and brought to the whole Town of
Madison, acting as a body politic, to be voted on by all registered
voters. Any person intending to construct or operate any temporary or
permanent radioactive waste repository shall, at least one year prior to
commencing any construction or operation, notify the Town officials in
writing of said intent and of the nature and location of the facility,
together with any other information the Board of Selectmen may
require.
A. Nuisance. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance.
B. Code Enforcement Officer. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement
Officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the Code
Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this chapter is being
violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
§ 294-2 MADISON CODE § 294-7
294:232
Chapter 303
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sludge and septage — See Ch. 321.
§ 303-1. Purpose.
"An ordinance to provide for safety, health and public welfare and the
protection of water resources through the regulation of sewage disposal
methods, providing for permits and prescribing penalties for violation."
§ 303-2. Scope.
The provisions of this code shall pertain to new building construction,
relocation, replacement, or substantial enlargement that may result in
increased amounts of sewage to be disposed of and to any private sewage
disposal system to be installed, relocated, replaced or enlarged.
§ 303-3. Administration and enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer who
shall be appointed by the municipal officers. The municipal officers may
appoint Assistant Code Enforcement Officers as may, in their judgment, be
necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 303-4. Right of entry.
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. A copy of such notice shall be submitted
to the Board of Selectmen.
C. Legal actions. When the above action does not result in the correction
or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Board of
Selectmen, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or
equitable, including seeking injunctions of violators and imposition of
fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of
this chapter in the name of the Town. The Board of Selectmen, or its
authorized agent, is hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
chapter and recovering fines without court action.
D. Fines. Any person who orders or conducts any activity in violation of
this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452.
§ 294-7 RADIOACTIVE WASTES § 303-4
294:233
§ 303-5. Permit required; fees.
Before the construction, relocation, replacement or substantial
enlargement of any building has commenced, or before any private sewage
disposal system is installed, relocated, replaced, or enlarged, the owner or
lessee, or the architect, engineers, contractor, or builder employed by such
owner or lessee shall obtain from the Code Enforcement Officer a permit
covering such proposed work.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, in performance of his
duties, shall have the right to enter any premises and any building
thereon for the purpose of making the inspection required by this
chapter. [Amended 6-10-2019]
B. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to gain entrance,
he may petition the District Court which, upon such notice it may deem
appropriate and after hearing, may issue an order authorizing entry for
the purpose of making such inspection and may assess costs against the
owner or occupant.
A. Building permit fee. A permit fee shall be paid to the Town, with a copy
of the receipt to accompany the application. A copy of the Town of
Madison Fee Schedule is kept at the Town office. Please refer to the Fee
Schedule for all permit fees. [Amended 6-10-2019]
B. Plumbing permit fee.
(1) This section applies to fees charged by the Town of Madison for
plumbing and subsurface wastewater disposal system permits
issued by the Town of Madison pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4201 et
seq. and pursuant to rules promulgated to by the Department of
Human Services (DHS) under the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4201
et seq. ("State Plumbing Code"). For purposes of this section, the
terms contained in this section shall have the meanings given to
them in the State Plumbing Code.
(2) At the time of issuance by the Town of a planning permit pursuant
to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4201 et seq. and the State Plumbing Code, the
plumbing permit applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the
following schedule and at the rate provided for each classification
shown herein.
(a) Any person who shall begin any work for which a permit is
required by the State Plumbing Code without first having
obtained a permit therefor, shall, if subsequently eligible to
obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section
for such work. However, this provision shall not apply to
emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of
the Local Plumbing Inspector that such work was urgently
necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit
before commencement of the work. In all such emergency
§ 303-4 MADISON CODE § 303-5
294:234
§ 303-6. Application.
The application for a building permit shall include:
§ 303-7. Issuance of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit upon finding that the
provisions of this code have been complied with, or shall notify the applicant
in writing that the permit is denied, stating the reasons therefor.
§ 303-8. Display of permit.
The sanitary permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises, clearly visible from the principal traveled street, and shall not be
removed until all work covered by he permit has been approved.
§ 303-9. Certificate of occupancy.
No building shall be occupied after construction, relocation, replacement,
or substantial enlargement of a private sewage disposal system or water
supply system until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, provided that an existing dwelling may continue to be
occupied during improvements to an existing sewerage system, so long as
no sewage is disposed of therefrom in violation of this chapter.
§ 303-10. Duration of permit.
In any case where the work authorized under a permit has not been
commenced within two years from the date of issuance of the permit, no
cases, a permit must be obtained within four working days
or else double permit fee as hereinavbove provided shall be
charged.
(b) For the purpose of this section, a sanitary plumbing outlet on
or to which a plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or
attached shall be construed to be a fixture. Fees for
reconnection and retest of existing plumbing systems in
relocated buildings shall be based on the number of plumbing
fixtures, water heaters, etc., involved.
(c) Please refer to the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules for all applicable fees. A copy of the rules is available at
the Town office. [Amended 6-10-2019]
(d) Late permit fee. A person who starts construction without first
obtaining a subsurface wastewater disposal permit shall pay
double the applicable permit fee indicated in the Town of
Madison Fee Schedule. [Added 6-10-2019]
A. Subsurface wastewater disposal system shall be installed in accordance
with the State Plumbing Code, as amended.
§ 303-5 RADIOACTIVE WASTES § 303-10
294:235
further work shall be done until the permit has been renewed by a new
application, and payment of a new application fee.
§ 303-11. Severability.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 303-12. Violations and penalties.
Any building constructed or work performed in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, or any permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, or any
occupancy of any building constructed as a dwelling without the required
certificate of occupancy, shall be considered a nuisance. Any person who
continues to violate any provisions of this chapter after receiving notice of
such violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to
$100 for each violation. Each day such a violation is continued is a separate
offense.
§ 303-13. Existing systems.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct an investigation of the sewage
disposal system of all existing buildings and private sewage disposal
systems on land that has been identified on maps prepared by the Soil
Conservation Service, US Department of Agriculture, as "poor" and "very
poor" for septic sewage disposal. He shall make a report identifying the
method of sewage disposal being employed for each building, problems that
may be resulting, and any recommendations he may have for eliminating
these problems. Similarly, he shall make an investigation and report for
all existing buildings and private sewage disposal systems located within
500 feet of a lake, pond, river, stream, or watercourse that leads to a
lake or pond. His investigation shall, when appropriate, make use of a dye
test. He shall submit his report to the municipal officers who shall make a
determination of any action to be taken by individual property owners or
by the Town to improve conditions in the areas under investigation. The
municipal officers may require the property owner to make improvements
to his water supply and sewage disposal system at his own expense. If,
within 60 days after being notified in writing, the property owner has
not made the required improvements, with certification by the Code
Enforcement Officer, the building shall be declared to be nuisance.
§ 303-10 MADISON CODE § 303-13
294:236
Chapter 308
SEX OFFENDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Safe zones in parks and recreation
areas — See Ch. 667, Art. III.
§ 308-1. Purpose.
The Town of Madison recognizes that sex offenders who prey upon children
have a high rate of recidivism. The Town of Madison has an obligation to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of its children by prohibiting access
by convicted sex offenders to areas where a concentration of children under
the age of 16 years exists.
§ 308-2. Definitions.
The following definitions have the literal meaning as they pertain to this
chapter only.
PREMISES — The building structure, and any accessory buildings attached
to or detached from the primary structure, playground area, playing field,
or courts.
PUBLIC AREA — Those areas listed in the Selectmen's "Policy to protect
children using Madison's athletic fields and parks" dated June 12,
2018.36[Amended 6-11-2018]
RADIUS — Distance shall be measured from the property line of the school,
home school or day-care center, as defined above, closest to a registered sex
offender's residence.
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER — An individual convicted of a crime against
a person under the age of 16 years and, as a result, is required to register
for life pursuant to Title 34-A M.R.S.A. Chapter 15.
SCHOOL/HOME SCHOOL/DAY CARE — Any public or private educational
facility including home schools that provides services to students under the
age of 16 years or any licensed day-care facility that is clearly marked with
at least one sign.
§ 308-3. Restrictions.
A. Any person, who is a registered sex offender, as defined above, shall not
reside within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius of the property line of a
school, home school, day-care center, or public area as defined above.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 667, Parks and Recreation Areas, Art. III, Safe Zones.
§ 303-13 RADIOACTIVE WASTES § 308-3
294:237
§ 308-4. Exceptions.
A registered sex offender residing within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius
of a school, home school, day care, or public area as defined above, is not in
violation if the residency was established prior to the date of adoption of this
chapter and the registered sex offender's residency has been continuously
maintained. A registered sex offender is not in violation of this chapter if a
school, home school, day care, or public area as defined above, is located
or expanded to within a seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius of his/her residence
after the adoption of this chapter, and the registered sex offender's
residency has been continuously maintained.
§ 308-5. Violations and penalties; injunctive relief.
§ 308-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon adoption at a Town Meeting of the Town
of Madison.
B. Any person who is a registered sex offender, as defined above, is
prohibited from entering upon the premises of a school, home school,
day-care center, or public area as defined above, unless specifically
authorized by the School Superintendent, day-care center owner or
Town Manager and/or Recreation Director.
A. Any person who, 30 days after written notice from the Town of Madison,
is in violation of § 308-3A of this chapter shall be subject to an action
brought by the Town of Madison in the District Court or the Superior
Court to enforce the requirements of this chapter. Any person who,
after verbal notice from a police officer employed by the Town of
Madison is in violation of § 308-3B of this chapter shall be subject to an
action brought by the Town of Madison in the District Court or Superior
Court to enforce the requirements of this chapter. The Town of Madison
may seek injunctive relief to require compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The Town of Madison may also seek a penalty in the minimum amount
of $500 per day, for each day that a violation of § 308-3A of this chapter
continues, and a minimum amount of $100 per day, for each day that a
violation of § 308-3B of this chapter continues after notice of violation
from the Town of Madison. In the event that the Town of Madison is the
prevailing party in any action under this chapter, it shall be entitled to
an award of its reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and the costs of
any expert witness fees incurred by the Town of Madison.
§ 308-3 MADISON CODE § 308-6
294:238
Chapter 316
SKATEBOARDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Chs. 285
and 667.
Skate park — See Ch. 667, Art. II.
§ 316-1. Title and authority.
This chapter shall be known as the "Madison Skateboarding Ordinance,"
pursuant to the Home Rule power granted in the Maine Constitution, and
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq.
§ 316-2. Purpose.
Skateboarding is a dangerous activity when conducted on public ways
and places. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health
and welfare by prohibiting skateboarding in public areas within the
municipality.
§ 316-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED SKATEBOARDING FACILITY — Any public area which is
designed and operated for skateboarding, approved and designated as such
by the Recreation Committee.
PUBLIC AREAS — Restricted area shall include Main Street, Old Point
Avenue, Wesson Avenue, Park Street, South Maple Street, and the parking
lots therein unless written permission is obtained.
SKATEBOARD — Single platform mounted on wheels, having no mechanism
device with which to power, steer, or control direction of movement while
being used, operated or ridden.
§ 316-4. Use in public areas prohibited.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated, a skateboard on a public
area except:
§ 316-5. Enforcement.
A. In a designated skateboarding facility;
B. In a privately owned public parking lot, if owner has given express
written permission.
§ 308-6 SKATEBOARDING § 316-5
316:239
§ 316-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 316-7. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines that any
provision of this chapter is invalid, the remaining provisions shall continue
in full force and effect.
§ 316-8. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective when adopted by the legislative body of
the municipality.
Chapter 321
SLUDGE AND SEPTAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 303.
A. This chapter may be enforced by any authorized constable or law
enforcement officer.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt written rules and regulations
governing use of skateboards and operation of a skateboarding facility
or area.37
A. Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the penalties shall be as
follows:
(1) First offense: one written warning.
(2) Second offense: $10 fine.
(3) Third offense: $25 fine.
(4) Fourth offense: $50 fine.
(5) Fifth offense: $100 fine.
B. All fines collected under this chapter shall accrue to the General Fund
of the Town of Madison. In the case of any violator 16 years or younger,
parents will be subject to a court summons if fine is not paid. If not paid
within 30 days, the offender is subject to court summons, with a fine up
to $150.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 667, Parks and Recreation Areas, Art. II, Madison Community Skate
and Basketball Park.
§ 316-5 MADISON CODE § 316-8
316:240
ARTICLE I
Storage and Land Application
[Adopted 4-15-1996; printed as amended 6-16-1999]
§ 321-1. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Maine Constitution Article VIII, Part 2;
and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 321-2. Findings and purpose.
§ 321-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Refers to the owner and/or operator of the wastewater
treatment plant or generator of the sludge or septage.
AQUIFER — See "significant groundwater aquifer."
BOARD — Refers to the Madison Planning Board.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION — More commonly
referred to as "DEP," refers to the State of Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, including the Board of Environmental Protection
and the Commissioner, and/or its successor agencies.
EP TOXICITY TEST — Refers to the extraction procedure toxicity test as
described in Section 1.2.4. of the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) document entitled "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, SW 846
(November 1986)."
A. The Town finds that sludge and septage may contain concentrations of
heavy metals, polychlorinated biphenyls and substances which can be
harmful to humans, animals, aquatic life, plant life and the natural
environment. The Town further finds that its topography, which
includes wetlands, numerous brooks and tributaries, and significant
groundwater aquifers, makes it uniquely susceptible to environmental
damage and, more particularly, that runoff from areas where sludge and
septage have been spread would pose a special danger to those water
bodies and would threaten the ecological and economic well-being of
the Town.
B. The purpose of this article is to provide an opportunity for effective
notice and meaningful public input during the local review process, to
provide opportunity for local review, monitoring and enforcement of
sludge and septage storage and application activities, including any
long-term effects, to ensure adequate remedy for any damage that may
occur, to protect the health and safety of the residents of Madison, to
enhance and maintain the quality of the environment, and to conserve
natural resources through regulation of storage and land application of
industrial wastewater treatment plant sludge and septage.
§ 321-1 SKATEBOARDING § 321-3
316:241
OPERATOR — Refers to any person who has care, change or control of a
landscaping site or storage facility subject to this article. This person may
be the owner, an agent, a lessee of the owner, or an independent contractor.
OWNER — Refers to any person who, alone or in conjunction with, owns the
real property upon which is located a landspreading site or storage facility
subject to this article.
PRIMARY SAND AND GRAVEL RECHARGE AREAS — Refers to the surface
directly overlying sand and gravel formations that provide direct
replenishment of the groundwater in sand and gravel and fractured bedrock
aquifers. The term does not include areas overlying formations that have
been identified as unsaturated and are not contiguous with saturated
formations.
SELECTMEN — Refers to the Madison Town Selectmen.
SEPTAGE — Refers to waste, refuse, effluent, sludge, and materials from
septic tanks, cesspools, or similar facilities.
SIGNIFICANT GROUNDWATER AQUIFER — Refers to any formation of
soil or fractured bedrock that contains significant recoverable quantities of
water (greater than 10 gallons per minute from a properly constructed sixinch
well). NOTE: Reference may be made to the "Hydrogeologic Date for
Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers" Map prepare by the Maine Geologic
Survey. In the event that on-site testing required pursuant to this article
identifies additional aquifers or identifies boundaries of aquifers that are
different from those mapped, the results of the on-site testing shall control.
SLUDGE — Refers to the solid, semisolid or liquid septage generated by a
municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant.
TEMPORARY FIELD STACKING — Refers to only short-term stacking of
materials for not longer than a period of 72 hours before spreading is to
occur.
§ 321-4. Application procedure; fees and deposits.
A. Procedure.
(1) An applicant wishing to deliver, store or spread sludge, septage, or
any material containing the aforementioned in Madison shall file an
application form with the Board. The application shall be submitted
at least 135 days before the date of first delivery, storage or
spreading, so as to ensure adequate time for review under this
article.
(2) The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the application at least 30
days prior to the Board meeting at which the applicant wishes to be
heard.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
$1,500 established in a Town Fee Schedule revised from time to
time by the Madison Town Selectmen and payable to the Town of
§ 321-3 MADISON CODE § 321-4
316:242
Madison, Maine, with a note indicating the specific purpose of the
fee.
(4) The Board shall require the applicant to deposit an amount not to
exceed $25,000 in an interest-bearing account in the name of the
Town. The purpose of this account shall be to allow the Town to hire
a professional consultant to review the application for compliance
with this article as well as conduct such additional studies as may
be required to assure that the public health, safety, and natural
environment will not be adversely impacted by the proposed sludge
spreading or storage. Funds shall be withdrawn from this account
only the Treasurer of the Town at the Selectmen's request. Any
interest earned and any remaining balance in this account shall be
returned to the applicant following approval or denial of the
application.
(5) At the meeting at which it is first considered by the Board, the
Board shall review the application to determine whether it is
complete or whether additional submissions are required. If the
application is found to be incomplete, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing within 10 days of the meeting as to what
additional submissions are necessary to begin the review process.
(6) The applicant must provide any additional information within 30
days of the date on which the Board gives notice that additional
information is required.
(7) The application shall be considered "complete" and "filed" as of the
date when all required information is furnished to the Board by the
applicant.
(8) A public hearing shall be held within 35 days after the Board
determines that the application is complete. The Board shall cause
notice of the time, place and date of such hearing to be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, not less than 10 days
before the hearing to the applicant, to abutters of the properties
involved, and to owners of any property within 1,000 feet of the
properties involved. Owners of abutting properties and of
properties within 1,000 feet shall be those listed in the most recent
tax records of the Town of Madison. Notice shall also be published
at least seven days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town of Madison. Notice shall also be
posted in three public places designated by the Board. Failure to
receive notice shall not invalidate a public hearing held if the
requirements of this subsection have been met.
(9) The Board shall recommend to the Selectmen whether the
application should be approved, approved with conditions, or
denied. The Selectmen shall take final action within 35 days of the
issuance of a license from the DEP, or within 70 days of the Town's
§ 321-4 SKATEBOARDING § 321-4
316:243
public hearing, whichever date is later. Final action by the
Selectmen may be approval, approval with condition(s), or denial.
(10) If the applicant/operator is denied a license by the DEP, no action
shall be required by the Board. The applicant shall send the DEP
approval or denial to the Board within three days of receiving it.
(11)Within seven days of its final action, the Selectmen shall notify the
applicant of its action and the reason(s) for such action. Approval of
the application, together with the conditions of approval, if any,
shall constitute a permit.
B. Submissions. An application to spread sludge or septage in the Town of
Madison shall include the following:
(1) A completed "Application for Sludge Utilization" prepared for the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) A fee as required by § 321-4A(3) of this article and a deposit into an
interest-bearing account as provided in § 321-4A(4).
(3) A map of the proposed site that clearly indicates property lines,
abutters, owners of property within 1,000 feet, existing water well
locations within 1,000 feet, areas not suitable for spreading and the
reason(s) therefor, required setbacks and the reason(s) therefor,
storage areas, and proximity to any primary sand and gravel
recharge area and/or significant groundwater aquifer.
(4) A baseline soils analysis for each site. This analysis shall be
conducted in the manner recommended by the Soil Conservation
Service for soils testing generally and shall include testing as
required be Appendix A of this article.38
(5) A hydrogeologic analysis conducted by a certified geologist or
registered professional engineer qualified by education and
experience to conduct a hydrogeologic analysis. This analysis shall
be sufficient to determine that the application of sludge or septage
to the proposed site will meet the performance standards set forth
in § 321-5B of this article and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(a) A site-specific geologic literature search.
(b) Aerial photo interpretation, including a photolineament
analysis, to identify potential high-yield aquifers.
(c) Documentation of type, depth, yield, static water level, and
length of casing of any water wells within 1,000 feet of a
proposed spreading site.
38.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 321-4 MADISON CODE § 321-4
316:244
(d) Reconnaissance field mapping by a certified geologist of the
surficial and bedrock geologic of the proposed site and all
areas within 1,000 feet, which field mapping shall relate any
observed bedrock outcrop fracture orientation and spacing
data to the photolineament analysis.
(e) Documentation of the hydrogeologic setting of the project site,
including but limited to a general description of the depth and
expected seasonal variations in the depth to the first
groundwater table encountered below ground surface, a
description of the general direction of groundwater flow up to
the point where discharge to surface water occurs, a
description of the relationship of the site to any significant
aquifers (those producing over 10 gallons per minute to a
properly constructed six-inch water well) including bedrock
aquifers or inferred bedrock aquifers.
(f) A description of the background groundwater quality at the
upgradient and downgradient edges of the proposed site. This
description shall include background levels for any constituent
regulated by this article as per Appendix A.39
(g) A proposed groundwater monitoring plan to be used just prior
to and for two years following the application of the sludge
and/or ash, including the proposed horizontal and vertical
placement of monitoring wells and all domestic wells within
1,000 feet monitored, frequency of monitoring, and precision
of measurement for each parameter to be measured.
(6) A plan for the independent weekly analysis [per the schedule
required in § 321-5B(2)(a)] of the sludge or septage (required by
Appendix A of this article40). Sampling and analysis shall be
performed by a state-certified laboratory chosen by the Board in
accordance with the DEP document entitled "Methodology for
Sampling and Analysis of PCDFs in Sludge and Residual," and shall
be performed on all sludge or septage without regard to the source.
(7) A plan for the submission of the results of the tests required in
§ 321-5B(2)(b) and (c) of this article.
(8) A plan for the submission of the results of soils tests to be
performed just prior to and twice yearly following the application of
the sludge and/or septage for the duration of the permit sought,
including the proposed sampling schedule, sampling locations, and
parameters to be measured.
(9) The Board may require such information as it deems necessary.
39.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 321-4 SKATEBOARDING § 321-5
316:245
§ 321-5. Performance standards.
A. General standards.
(1) Storage and land application of sludge and septage is prohibited in
Madison unless approval has first been obtained from the Board,
the Selectmen and from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
(2) No sludge or septage may be stored on site in Madison except in a
permanent storage facility as provided in the Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations Chapter 567 B-4.c. There
shall be no winter field stacking of sludge or septage in Madison.
Stacking per site shall be limited to the amount approved for use on
each site.
(3) If temporary field stacking is to occur, there must be reasonable
precautions taken to prevent leaching and/or dispersal into the air.
(4) Spreading shall be allowed only from May 15 to November 15 in
any year. Spreading shall not be allowed in any event if it is raining,
or if the ground is saturated, frozen or snow-covered.
B. Testing requirements. Providing that approval of the application is
conditioned on approval by the Department of Environmental
Protection, the Board shall recommend for approval or conditional
approval an application for land spreading (or storage for the purpose
of land spreading) if the applicant agrees to comply with any additional
testing required by the Board or the Selectmen, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) Site testing and monitoring.
(a) Soils analysis. The applicant shall furnish a baseline soils
analysis as required in § 321-4B(4) and soils testing program in
accordance with § 321-4B(8) of this article with the initial
application to the Board.
(b) Water analysis. The applicant shall install at least two
monitoring wells on each site, the number and location of said
wells to be determined by a Board-appointed certified
geologist or registered professional engineer qualified by
education and experience to make that determination. The
water in these wells shall be tested quarterly for parameters to
be approved by the Board based on the actual constituents of
the sludge or septage. At the discretion of the Planning Board
or at the request of the owner of an existing well located within
1,000 feet of any site proposed for storage or spreading of any
sludge or septage, the Board may require baseline and annual
water analysis of any well as required by Appendix A of this
article.41
§ 321-5 MADISON CODE § 321-5
316:246
(2) Characteristics of sludge or septage.
(a) The Board shall provide for the supervision of an independent
random weekly sample of sludge or septage taken at the point
of generation after the product has gone through all
processing steps necessary prior to delivery. All testing shall be
in accordance with the 16th edition of Standard Methods for
Examination of Water and Wastewater (1985), published by the
American Public Health Association, and the results shall be
furnished to the Madison Code Enforcement Officer and/or
Board on a schedule approved by the Board.
(b) Sludge and septage. Sludge and septage shall be tested for
pollutants as required by the Department of Environmental
Protection regulations and as required by this article. In
addition to the above requirements, the Board or its agent shall
take a representative composite sample of the actual product
delivered to Madison and test by the "EP Toxicity Test" and as
required by Appendix A of this article.42
(c) No sludge or septage may be delivered to, stored or spread in
Madison if testing required by this article indicates that
concentrations of heavy metals, organic compounds or
pollutants exceed the maximum permissible concentrations
and/or loading limits appearing in the Department of
Environmental Protection Regulations at Chapter 567 B-1.b.
(3) Hydrogeologic criteria:
(a) No sludge or septage may be delivered to, stored, or spread on
land with a slope of greater than 15%.
(b) Where the proposed application site has a slope of 15% or less,
no sludge or septage may be delivered to, stored, or spread
within the following setback areas:
[1] Residences; classified bodies of water including lakes,
ponds, and streams; water supply wells: 300 feet.
[2] Intermittent streams: 50 feet.
[3] Public roadways; drainage gullies; property boundaries:
25 feet.
[4] Additional setback requirements established by the
Department of Environmental Protection Regulations at
Chapter 567 B-2.b. and B-4.a. must also be met.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(3)(b) of this
section with respect to water supply wells, no sludge or
41.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
42.Editor's Note: Said appendix is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 321-5 SKATEBOARDING § 321-5
316:247
septage containing human pathogens may be delivered to,
stored, or spread on a site closer than a two-hundred-day
hydraulic groundwater travel time from the nearest existing
water well used for drinking water purposes.
(d) No sludge or septage may be delivered to, stored, or spread
over a significant groundwater aquifer, over a primary sand
and gravel recharge area, or within the recharge area of a
public water supply well.
(e) The sludge or septage shall not cause the State of Maine
Primary Drinking Water Standards or the National Primary
Drinking Water Regulations, which are incorporated herein by
reference, to be exceeded in the groundwater at a distance
greater than 100 feet from the edge of the sludge or septage
spreading boundary, or at the property line, if it is within 100
feet of the sludge or septage spreading boundary, taking into
account existing background groundwater quality under the
site. The burden shall be on the applicant to show that the
sludge or septage spreading will not cause these standards to
be exceeded.
(4) Aquatic impact criteria. The sludge or septage spreading shall not
cause the National Water Quality Criteria (freshwater chronic
criteria), established by the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to protect aquatic organisms, to be exceeded in classified
water bodies that will receive runoff from the sludge or septage
spreading site, taking into account the existing quality of those
classified water bodies. The freshwater chronic criteria appear in
full in the "Guidelines for Deriving Numerical Nation Water Quality
Criteria for the Protection of Aquatic Organisms and Their Uses,"
published in the EPA document Quality Criteria for Water 1989,
EPA 440/5-86-001. The burden shall be on the applicant to establish
that the sludge and septage spreading will not cause these criteria
to be exceeded.
C. Additional requirements.
(1) The Board shall not recommend approval of an application for land
spreading (or storage for the purpose of land spreading) unless the
applicant agrees in writing to furnish the Madison Code
Enforcement Officer with copies of all conditions and limitations
imposed by the Department of Environmental Protection as well as
prompt notice of any changes in the composition of the material,
and further testing required by the DEP and the results of those
tests, and any annual variations in site spreading or storage plans.
(2) The Board shall not recommend approval of an application unless
the applicant agrees in writing to notify the Madison Code
Enforcement Officer of delivery of any sludge or septage to
Madison, to advise the Code Enforcement Officer of the proposed
§ 321-5 MADISON CODE § 321-5
316:248
§ 321-6. Duration of permit; review process; renewal fee.
spreading timetable, and of who is to do the actual spreading.
The person spreading sludge or septage shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer as soon as possible prior to spreading, and in
any event not later than three days prior to spreading.
(3) The Board shall not recommend approval of an application unless
the applicant has provided the landowner and the Town with a
written statement indicating that the applicant has agreed or will
agree to indemnify the owner for any damages which may result
from the spreading of sludge or septage.
(4) The Board shall not recommend approval of an application unless
the applicant has entered into a written conditional buy/sell
agreement with the owner establishing a fair market price for the
land involved in the sludge spreading or storage and agreeing to
purchase the land at that price should damage to the land occur.
(5) The Board shall not recommend approval of an application unless
the applicant agrees in writing to be financially responsible should
the storage or spreading of its sludge prove hazardous to the health
and safety of the residents, wildlife, soil, water, and/or air quality of
the Town of Madison.
(6) The Board shall require that an applicant provide a fence or barrier
suitable to prevent access to the sludge spreading site by
unauthorized individuals or animals.
A. A permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period of five years
from the date of issuance and shall be subject to annual review by the
Board and Town Selectmen.
B. At least 14 days prior to annual review, but not more than 30 days prior
thereto, the Board shall notify the applicant of the review.
C. As part of the annual review, the applicant shall submit the following
information to the Board in writing:
(1) The names of the applicant and the landowner and the date of the
original permit.
(2) A narrative describing the following:
(a) The quantity of sludge and/or septage waste supplied the
previous year and the number of acres utilized;
(b) Any problems incurred the previous year;
(c) Any proposed changes in the upcoming year (NOTE: new
acreage requires a new application);
§ 321-5 SKATEBOARDING § 321-6
316:249
§ 321-7. Modification of conditions and revocation of permit.
If at any time, as a result of any testing required by the Department
of Environmental Protection, this article, or the Board, elements or
compounds are found in quantities which may threaten environmental
safety or human or animal health, the Board may require additional testing
at the applicant's expense and may modify the conditions applicable to any
permit. If the Board as a result of any required testing or risk assessment
determines that continued storage or spreading of sludge or septage
unreasonably threatens environmental safety or human or animal health,
then it may recommend to the Selectmen such appropriate action as it
deems necessary, including limitation, modification, suspension or
revocation of any permit.
§ 321-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(d) Any physical or chemical changes in the sludge or septage
waste;
(e) A sludge or septage waste analysis as required in the initial
application;
(f) A soil pH for each land acre to which the sludge or septage
waste was applied;
(g) The results of the quarterly water analysis required under
§ 321-5B(1)(b) of this article;
(h) Such analysis as the Department of Environmental Protection
or Town Selectmen required in the initial approval.
D. The applicant shall submit a nonrefundable annual renewal fee of
$1,000.
E. If the Board determines that the conditions of the permit were met for
the previous year, the Board shall recommend that the permit continue
in effect until the next annual review. The Selectmen may, in its
discretion, modify or revoke the permit if actions by the applicant or the
operator were in violation of this article or if the Board finds that
continuation of the permit unreasonably threatens human or animal
health and safety.
A. The Madison Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to enter all
land application and storage sites at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting the site for compliance with this article.
B. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations of any permit
conditions or of any obligations imposed by this article or Chapter 567
of the Department of Environmental Protection Regulations, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice to the landowner, the
Board, the applicant, the operator (if different from the landowner) and
notify the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 321-6 MADISON CODE § 321-8
316:250
§ 321-9. Appeals.
An aggrieved party may appeal any final action taken by the Selectmen
to the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80D of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
§ 321-10. Severability; conflict with other provisions.
§ 321-11. Amendment procedures.
This article may be amended by a majority vote of the Madison Town
Selectmen. Amendments may be initiated by a request of the Planning
Board, the Town Selectmen, or by petitions bearing the signatures of
registered Madison voters equal to, or in excess of, 10% of the votes cast
in the last gubernatorial election in the Town. The Town Selectmen shall
conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment.
C. The Board, upon finding the provisions of this article or conditions of
approval are being or have been violated, may recommend that the
Selectmen temporarily suspend the permit and the Selectmen may
revoke the permit after notice and hearing. The Selectmen may take
any action it deems necessary, including prosecution of the code
violation pursuant to Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
D. The applicant and/or operator who violates this article or the conditions
of approval, as well as the owner who knowingly permits such violations
to occur, shall be guilty of a civil violation and shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 for each offense.
Each day such a violation is permitted to exist after notification shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts
to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section of this
article.
B. Whenever the requirements of this article are inconsistent with the
requirements of any other ordinance, code, or statute, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply.
§ 321-8 SKATEBOARDING § 321-11
316:251
Chapter 327
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auto graveyards and junkyards — See Ch. . Sewage disposal — See Ch. 303.
§ 327-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto, unless the context indicates a different meaning:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Ordinary household, municipal, institutional,
commercial and industrial solid waste including, but not limited to, the
following:
Garbage, trash, rubbish, paper and cardboard, plastics, refuse, beds,
mattresses, sofas, brown goods, white goods, bicycles, baby carriages
and automobile or small vehicle tires, to the extent that the facility
determines that the air emission criteria and standards to and at the
facility are not violated;
A.
B. Processible portions of commercial and industrial solid waste; and
Wood and lumber, tree limbs, branches, ties, logs and trees, leaves,
twigs, grass and plant cuttings, provided that the Town shall not be
obligated to deliver or cause to be delivered any of the items listed
in this Subsection C to the facility, and further provided that such
items may be delivered to the facility by or on behalf of the Town on
an irregular basis only and shall represent an insignificant portion of
the total waste delivered to the facility by or on behalf of the Town
within any calendar year; and notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary, unacceptable waste, including hazardous waste, shall not be
"acceptable waste" and is explicitly excluded therefrom. Furthermore,
any substances which are included as "acceptable waste," but which
are later determined to be harmful, toxic, dangerous or hazardous by
any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction, shall
not be "acceptable waste" under the terms of this chapter. However,
any substances which are not included within the definition of
"acceptable waste" because they are considered harmful, toxic,
dangerous or hazardous, and which are later determined not to be
harmful, toxic, dangerous or hazardous by any governmental agency
or unit having appropriate jurisdiction, shall be considered "acceptable
waste" unless a contrary determination has been or is made by any
other governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction or
unless such substances are otherwise considered "unacceptable waste"
or "hazardous waste."
C.
§ 321-11 MADISON CODE § 327-1
327:252
AUTHORIZED COMMERCIAL HAULER — A commercial hauler who has
a contract with the Town to collect and transport solid waste and/or
recyclable materials.
COMMERCIAL HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership, association,
municipality, corporation, or other legal entity licensed by the Town to
collect, transport and dispose of solid waste for a fee as herein prescribed.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — Solid waste and recyclable materials generated by a
commercial or industrial use or activity.
FACILITY — The Town of Madison, Maine, Solid Waste Disposal Facility.
The facility may consist of more than one site and more than one system of
disposal.
NUMBER and GENDER — In this chapter, the singular shall include the
plural, and masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter, except
where the context indicates differently.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Newsprint, glass, metal cans, mixed paper,
plastic, pressboard and cardboard, which is acceptable waste and from
which resources other than energy may be recovered by the Town.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY (DISPOSAL FACILITY) — Any land area
or structure or combination of land area and structures, including dumps,
used for storing, salvaging, recycling, processing, reducing, incinerating or
disposing of solid wastes.
§ 327-2. Curbside collection.
§ 327-3. Regulation of haulers.
A. The Town may collect acceptable waste and recyclable materials in the
Town as provided in this chapter.
B. The Town may enter into a contract or contracts with one or more
commercial haulers, which shall be known as "authorized commercial
haulers," for the collection and transport of acceptable waste and
recyclable materials from residences in the Town as provided for in this
chapter. Any such contract shall specify the frequency of curbside
collection of acceptable waste and recyclable materials. Any such
contract also shall require the authorized commercial hauler(s) to
transport acceptable waste directly to the facility or to such other solid
waste disposal facility as designated by the Town and shall require the
authorized commercial hauler to transport recyclable materials directly
to the party or parties as designated by the Town.
A. Application. Any person, except commercial haulers, who desires to
obtain a residential haulers license shall sign a form stating that a) the
solid waste was owned by the person signing the form, b) the person
signing the form is a year-round or seasonal resident of the Town, the
owner of property located within the Town, or the owner or operator of
§ 327-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 327-3
327:253
a commercial or industrial activity located in Town, c) the materials are
uncontaminated, and d) person's address and telephone number. The
Town shall retain this form.
B. Regulation of commercial haulers.
(1) Commercial or industrial solid wastes and recyclable materials and
commercial hauler's license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
haul, transport, collect, remove and dispose of garbage, refuse,
recyclable materials, rubbish, white goods or other solid waste
generated within the Town over the streets of the Town for a fee
without first securing a commercial hauler's license. The Town,
upon application and after investigation of information required by
the Department of Environmental Protection for a nonhazardous
waste transporter's license, may issue a commercial hauler's
license for a period of one year, or to the end of the calendar year.
(2) Application. An application for an annual or a limited commercial
hauler's license shall contain the following information: a copy of
all documents submitted to DEP as required for a nonhazardous
waste transporter's license, CMR, Chapter 411.
(3) Place of deposit of solid waste and recyclable materials. The
commercial hauler shall deposit acceptable solid waste and
recyclable materials at the facility or at any other solid waste
disposal facility or facilities as may be designated by the Town
Selectmen and shall deposit recyclable materials at a location
designated by the Town Selectmen. The dates of unloading, type
and quantity of waste, and name and location of the waste facility
to which the waste is being transported shall be submitted to Town
quarterly.
(4) Residential disposal license. All residents who wish to deliver waste
to the place of deposit of solid waste and recyclable materials must
display a residential disposal license issued by the Town on their
vehicle.
(5) License denial and revocation. Licenses and renewals of licenses
shall be denied and any license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be revoked by the Town Selectmen upon failure
of the licensee to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter,
or with any of the regulations of the State of Maine, Department of
Environmental Protection, relating to the collection and disposal or
garbage, refuse, recyclable materials, rubbish, white goods, and
any other solid waste materials.
(6) Term of license. A license shall be good for the calendar year only.
§ 327-3 MADISON CODE § 327-4
327:254
§ 327-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. In addition to any other violations, he shall submit
a declaration to the person. A valid declaration shall consist of:
§ 327-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $1,000, costs of prosecution, and costs
of removal of any waste deposited. Each day's continuance of a violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 327-6. Severability.
If any sentence, clause or section, or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, or sections or parts of this chapter. It is
hereby declared as the intent of the Town that this chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof, not been included herein.
§ 327-7. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective January 1, 1992.
§ 327-8. Fees.
A. The name of the property owner and address or legal description of the
property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
B. A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a
cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
C. A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
D. Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation; and
E. A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to
this chapter.
A. The Selectmen of the Town shall develop a structure of maximum fees,
based upon the Town's experience with solid waste management under
this chapter.
B. The processing fees shall provide incentives for recycling and offset
increased handling costs resulting from disposal of nonrecyclable
acceptable solid wastes. Fees shall be recommended to the Town
§ 327-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 327-8
327:255
§ 327-9. Solid Waste and Recycling Advisory Committee.
Chapter 339
Meeting based upon such considerations as volume, type of material
and frequency of delivery.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Solid Waste and Recycling Advisory
Committee (hereafter referred to as "Committee") which shall be
appointed by the Madison Board of Selectmen.
B. Purpose. The Committee is responsible for reporting to the Board of
Selectmen issues of concern pertaining to the current municipal solid
waste and recycling operations.
C. Membership, appointment and procedures.
(1) Members appointed by Board of Selectmen:
(a) The Committee shall consist of seven Madison residents who
shall be responsible to advise the Board of Selectmen for the
legal and proper management of the solid waste and recycling
program.
(b) The initial appointments shall be of two members to serve until
the first regular meeting of the Board of Selectmen in July
1993; of two members to serve until the first regular meeting
of the Board of Selectmen in July 1994; and of three members
to serve until the first regular meeting of the Board of
Selectmen in July 1995.
(c) All subsequent appointments, other than those required to fill
unexpired terms of office, shall be for a term of office
approximately three years, terms actually expiring at the first
regular meeting of the Board of Selectmen in July of the year of
expiration.
D. Ex officio members. Each commercial hauler and authorized
commercial hauler may designate one ex officio member to serve on the
Committee.
E. Public involvement. The Committee is authorized and responsible for
the establishment, modification, supervision, and disestablishment of
such subordinate committees, groups, and teams as that committee
may deem necessary; and to appoint and remove volunteers to and from
such committees, groups and teams.
F. Responsibilities of Chairman. The Chairman of the Committee, who
shall be elected by that Committee, will, in addition to functioning as
Chairman of that Committee, keep the Board of Selectmen advised of
any pending activities which may or will have an impact upon the
sphere of responsibility of such officials.
§ 327-8 MADISON CODE § 327-9
339:256
STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 189.
Street naming — See Ch. 343.
Maintenance of public ways — See Ch. 679.
Seasonal closing of roads — See Ch. 694, Art.
I.
Streetlighting guidelines — See Ch. 713.
Requests for warning signs — See Ch. 767.
§ 339-1. Minimum standards.
The following minimum design and construction standards shall be followed
for construction of streets and roads for public ways. Design of streets shall
provide for proper continuation of streets from adjacent subdivision and
built-up areas and proper projection of streets into adjacent unsubdivided
and open land.
A. Minor streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic.
B. Width of rights-of-way shall be a minimum of 50 feet and a maximum of
66 feet.
C. The width of traveled ways shall be a minimum of two ten-foot traffic
lanes and three-foot shoulders. The Road Commissioner or Selectmen
may require that additional width be required for streets which will
receive heavy usage.
D. The radius of center-line curves shall be 100 feet at the minimum, up to
500 feet for streets, which will receive heavy usage.
E. The angle of street intersections shall be as close to 90° as possible, but
in no case less than 60°.
F. Street grades shall be a minimum of 15% and a maximum of 10%, which
may be varied by the Road Commissioner in certain cases. Grade at
intersections shall be a maximum of 3% within 50 feet of the
intersection.
G. Cul-de-sac and dead-end streets shall have a maximum length of 800
feet with a minimum property line radius of 100 feet and a minimum
turning radius of 35 feet at the closed end. Use of a T-shaped
turnaround will be permitted as an alternative. In the latter case, the
turnaround shall be at least 25 feet wide, 40 feet long, and shall be
located between 50 and 100 feet from the end of the street (all
dimensions cited for the T-shaped turnaround are for the traveled way).
H. All construction plans and progress of work shall be approved by the
Road Commissioner in writing and shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
§ 327-9 STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION § 339-1
339:257
§ 339-2. Acceptance by Town.
Upon completion of a street or road to these standards, the street or road
may be accepted as a public way, by approval of the Selectmen and the Road
Commissioner.
§ 339-3. Surface treatment.
Surface treatment shall be by the Town after acceptance. No damage for
right-of-way shall be awarded in lieu of Town surfacing accepted public way.
§ 339-4. Variances.
Where Selectmen find that extraordinary and unnecessary hardships may
result from the strict compliance with these standards or where there are
special circumstances of a particulate plan, they may vary these standards
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secure;
provided that such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of these standards.
Chapter 343
STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street design and construction
standards — See Ch. 339.
(1) Remove loam. In clay soil conditions, removal of three feet may be
required.
(2) A minimum of 18 inches of base gravel shall be required in firm dry
areas and 24 inches in unstable or wet areas. Gravel shall not
exceed three-inch-diameter stones except as needed in exceptional
circumstances.
(3) In clay soil conditions, the base shall be 18 inches of sand, 12
inches of base gravel.
(4) Six inches of surface shall be on top of base material and shall be
crushed stone or screened gravel to 1 1/2 inches size.
(5) All street construction shall conform to good engineering practices
and be suitable for the intended usage.
(6) Construction progress shall be checked by the Road Commissioner
and a written record filed.
(7) Utilities to be installed underground shall be installed before base
material is placed.
§ 339-1 MADISON CODE § 339-4
343:258
§ 343-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an official street naming and
house numbering method for the Town of Madison that will provide an
actual physical location, in conformity of address, between local property
tax maps, mailing and other delivery services, enhanced 911 telephone
system, and to assist in providing emergency services. This chapter is
adopted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 for the purpose of protecting
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 343-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to any street, building or vacant lot in the Town of
Madison. It shall apply to any street, building or vacant lot as shown on map
titled "Town of Madison; Existing Land Use; Revised November 7, 1995,"
or as subsequently amended by the Board of Selectmen as provided in this
chapter.
§ 343-3. Authority for street numbering.
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the sole authorization
to assign street numbers to any building or vacant lot within the boundary
lines of the Town of Madison. That number shall be the official address used
for property identification on Town records.
§ 343-4. Method of street numbering.
A. All properties located on the north side of a street/road, etc., will be
assigned an even number.
B. All properties located on the south side of a street/road, etc., will be
assigned an odd number.
C. All corner lots will be reserved a number for each street/road, etc., it
borders on, which will allow for a building or vacant lot to be numbered
according to the front property line.
D. Lowest numbers will start at the bridge at the Kennebec River and
proceed sequentially toward the farthest most points.
NOTE: An exception to the above numbering system will be in
circumstances to conform with existing numbering systems in the
contiguous towns.
E. In the event where more than one residence or commercial building is
on a lot, the rear dwelling or structure shall be lettered with an A or B.
For example, two homes at 452 Main Street, the structure closest to
Main Street would be 452, and the rear 452 A. See § 343-7 for
additional information regarding more than two structures on a lot.
§ 339-4 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 343-5
343:259
§ 343-5. Numbers affixed to buildings.
Upon written notification to do so from the Board of Selectmen or its
designee, the owner or occupant of any dwelling or business shall, within
30 days, cause to be affixed to such dwelling or business the designated
number. The number shall be of reflective material, not less than three
inches in height, and placed on the building in such a manner as to be
plainly visible and legible from the street or to a person approaching
from the street. Where the building is placed at such a distance from the
street or road that a number placed on it is not visible, the number shall
be placed on a post or other suitable object in such a manner as to be
visible from the street. During the initial phase of numbering, the Town
will provide appropriate numbers to all owners or occupants of record,
and thereafter as the supply lasts. Subsequent numbers, whether for new
structures or replacements, shall be purchased by the owner or occupant
but must conform in size and reflectivity. Any person who neglects or
refuses to number such structure or erects a number other than that
assigned shall cause the proper number to be affixed at the expense of the
owner or occupant.
§ 343-6. Names of new streets.
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the sole authorization to
provide the name of a new street that is to be maintained by the Town of
Madison. However, a subdivision street will also be subject to approval by
the Planning Board.
§ 343-7. Privately owned ways.
All private roads or ways, serving two or more numbered structures or
providing access to other privately owned ways, shall be named, approved
by the Selectmen or designee, and a sign that conforms with municipal sign
erected bearing that name. The expense of the sign shall be borne by the
owner of the property underlying the private road or way. Failure to erect
such sign shall cause the proper sign to be erected at the expense of the
owner.
§ 343-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Madison shall have the
responsibility of enforcing this chapter. The Town does not wish, however, to
impose fines for violations of this chapter. The numbering system will assist
the Town in providing services, and failure to comply may make it more
difficult to do so. The Town could impose a $10 fine for each day that the
resident does not comply with this chapter.
§ 343-9. Appeals.
Any persons aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer in
the administration or enforcement of this chapter may appeal that decision
to the Town of Madison Board of Appeals at any time within 30 days of
§ 343-5 MADISON CODE § 343-9
343:260
notification of violation, by informing the Town Clerk, in writing, of said
appeal.
§ 343-10. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this chapter.
§ 343-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon adoption by vote of
the municipal legislative body.
Chapter 399
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks and cemeteries — See Ch.
285.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 405.
Town-owned ATVs — See Ch. 508.
§ 399-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Ordinance for the Regulation of
Vehicles, as Amended."
§ 399-2. Purpose.
To regulate the operation of all vehicles in the public ways and on publicly
owned property within the Town of Madison.
§ 399-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CROSSWALK —
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured for the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the
edge of traversable roadways; or
A.
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
B.
§ 343-9 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-3
343:261
CURB — The outer edge of a defined sidewalk or either edge of the wrought
or usually traveled part of a way.
DRIVEWAY — That portion of the roadway used by an individual or business
for purposes of barrier-free access onto their property. Barriers shall
include but are not limited to curbing, severe slope, walls and/or fencing.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curblines of the roadways of two highways which
join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within
which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle
may come in conflict.
PARKING — The stopping or standing of motor vehicles on a roadway
whether occupied or unoccupied, attended or unattended, otherwise than
for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers and/or merchandise or
in obedience to police officers or traffic regulations, signs or signals, or
while making emergency repairs if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.[Amended 6-10-2019]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, fiduciary, trust, estate or any other legal or commercial entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes parking lots, cemeteries, parks, sidewalks
and land leased by the Town.
SNOW EMERGENCIES — A time designated by the Road Commissioner
during which special parking restrictions are put into effect for the purpose
of plowing and removing snow.
STOP or STOPPING — When prohibited, means halting, even momentarily,
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
VEHICLE — Includes all kinds of conveyances on ways for persons and for
property, except those propelled or drawn by human power.
WAY — Includes all lands of public ways including Town ways, state aid
roads, and state highways.
§ 399-4. Parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park the same
on the following designated ways or areas:
Beach Road
There will be no parking on the northerly side of Beach Road,
beginning at the intersection of Route 201; thence commencing in an
easterly direction to the shore of Wesserunsett Lake.
Grange Road
§ 399-3 MADISON CODE § 399-4
343:262
There will be no parking on the northwest side of the Grange Road,
beginning at the intersection of the East Madison Road; thence
commencing in a southwesterly direction to the shore of Wesserunsett
Lake.
There will be no parking on the southeast side of the Grange Road,
beginning at the shore of Wesserunsett Lake; thence commencing in a
northeasterly direction for a distance of approximately 220 feet.43
Kennebec Street
There will be no parking on either side of Kennebec Street from the
west side of the intersection with Old Point Avenue, to the west side of
the intersection with Pine Street.
Madison Avenue
On the east side of the road, beginning at the southerly corner of the
intersection of Main Street and Madison Avenue; thence commencing
northerly to the southerly side of the driveway of One Madison Avenue.
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the west side of Madison Avenue;
beginning at the northerly corner of the intersection of Main Street
and Madison Avenue; thence commencing in a northerly direction a
distance of 90 feet.
Main Street
On the north side of the road from the easterly side of the driveway
of the Maplecrest Nursing Home; thence commencing easterly to the
west side of the easterly most driveway of Skowhegan Savings Bank.44
On the north side of the road from the westerly side of the driveway of
Dunkin Donuts; thence commencing westerly 50 feet. [Added
6-10-2019]
On the north side of the road from the easterly side of the driveway of
Dunkin Donuts; thence commencing easterly 50 feet. [Added
6-10-2019]
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the north side of the road, beginning at
the westerly corner of the intersection of Main Street and North Street;
thence commencing westerly to a point 20 feet therefrom.
From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the north side of the road, beginning at
the easterly corner of the intersection of Main Street and North Street;
thence commencing easterly to the westerly side of the driveway of No.
220 Main Street.
43.Editor’s Note: The entry that prohibited parking on a portion of John Street, which
immediately followed, was repealed 6-10-2019.
44.Editor’s Note: The entries that prohibited parking on portions of Main Street east and
west of the driveway of the residence of No. 152 Main Street, which immediately preceded
this entry, and the entry that prohibited parking on a portion of Main Street starting at a
point west of MEW Pole No. 7.1, which immediately followed this entry, were repealed
6-10-2019.
§ 399-4 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-4
343:263
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to stop or
park said motor vehicle from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the north side
of Main Street, beginning at the westerly side of the intersection of
the driveway for the Skowhegan Savings Bank; thence commencing
easterly a distance of approximately 200 feet to the easterly side of the
driveway at 200 Main Street. [Amended 6-10-2019]
On the north side of the road beginning at the westerly corner of the
intersection of Main Street and what was once known as Water Street
and then commencing westerly to the Anson/Madison Town line.
On the south side of the road from the Anson/Madison Town line
easterly a distance of approximately 285 feet. [Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to stop or
park said motor vehicle from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the south side of
Main Street, beginning at the easterly corner of Nichols Street; thence
commencing in an easterly direction a distance of approximately 75
feet. [Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to stop or
park said motor vehicle from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the south side of
Main Street, beginning at the westerly corner of Nichols Street; thence
commencing in a westerly direction a distance of approximately 75
feet. [Amended 6-10-2019]
Maple Street
On the east side of Maple Street from the north side of the intersection
of Maple Street and Main Street; thence commencing in a northerly
direction to the northern most property line of The Bangor Savings
Bank.
On the west side of Maple Street from the south side of the intersection
of Maple Street and Main Street; thence commencing in a southerly
direction to the southeastern most corner of Camden National Bank.
[Amended 6-10-201945]
Nichols Street. [Amended 6-10-2019]
On the east side of the street from the intersection of Nichols Street
and Main Street southerly to a point 325 feet therefrom.
On the west side of the street from the intersection of Nichols Street
and Main Street southerly to a point 110 feet therefrom.
North Street
On the west side of the road from the west corner of the intersection
of North Street and Main Street; thence commencing northerly to the
southwest corner of the intersection of North Street and Heald Street.
Old Point Avenue
45.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed the entries that immediately followed and
prohibited parking at the Municipal Building.
§ 399-4 MADISON CODE § 399-4
343:264
On the east side of the road from the north corner of Pleasant Street;
thence commencing northerly to the southernmost corner of the
intersection of Main Street. [Amended 6-10-2019]46
On the east side of the road from the north corner of Towne Road;
thence commencing northerly to the southern property line of the
Madison Public Library.
On the west side of the road from a point 260 feet south of the
intersection of Main Street; thence commencing southerly to the
northerly corner of Bartly Street.
Pine Street
On the east side of the road from the intersection of Pine Street and
Main Street; thence commencing southerly to a point 50 feet south of
the intersection of Pine Street and Main Street.
On the east side of the road from MEW utility pole No. 11 located
near the south corner of the Hatfield Auto Repair building; thence
commencing southerly to the Jones Brook Bridge.
Preble Avenue
On the north side of the road from the easterly side of the driveway
of the VFW Post No. 7865; thence commencing easterly to the
easternmost side of the second entrance to the Recreation Ball Fields.
[Amended 6-10-2019]
Route No. 148 (adjacent to Madison Area Memorial High School)
On the north side of Route No. 148 starting at the westernmost point
of the driveway at 450 Main Street to the easternmost point of the
driveway at 504 Main Street, a total of approximately 1,320 feet.
[Amended 6-10-2019]
On the south side of Rt. No. 148 starting at the westernmost point of
the driveway at 450 Main Street to the easternmost point of the
driveway at 504 Main Street, a total of approximately 1,320 feet.
[Amended 6-10-201947]
Weston Avenue [Amended 6-10-2019]
On both sides of the road from MEW Pole No. 29; thence commencing
northerly to MEW Pole No. 40 (Outer Weston Avenue).
On the west side of the road from the northwesternmost corner of the
intersection of Weston Avenue and Main Street; thence commencing
northerly to a point one-foot north of the southernmost point of Clark
Court (the drive which runs around the Post Office property).
§ 399-5. through § 399-6. (Reserved)48
46.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed the entry that immediately preceded this entry
and prohibited parking on a portion of Old Point Avenue in front of the SAD No. 59 Old
Point School.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the entries that immediately followed and
prohibited parking on a portion of Thomas Street.
§ 399-4 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-7
343:265
§ 399-7. Two-hour parking.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park the same
for more than two hours on the following ways:
§ 399-8. Special overnight parking.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same on any
way within the Town for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. from the first day of November
in any year to the first day of April in the following year.
§ 399-9. Stopping prohibited at all times.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to park in such
a manner as to block the flow of other vehicles in a line of traffic except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic signs.
A. Weston Avenue.
(1) During the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the east side of the
road from a point 135 feet from the northeast corner of the
intersection of Weston Avenue and Main Street; thence
commencing northerly to the south corner of the intersection of
Weston Avenue and Heald Street. This section of this chapter shall
not apply during snow emergencies.
B. Main Street.
(1) During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday, on both sides of the road from its intersection of Old Point
Avenue and Weston Avenue; thence commencing westerly to the
Anson/Madison Town line, excepting all areas described in this
chapter under § 399-4. [Amended 6-10-2019]
C. Municipal Parking Lot, South Maple Street.
(1) During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., parking spaces
numbered 1 through 55, as shown on the plan for Municipal
Parking Lot, South Maple Street, dated August 1990. [Amended
6-10-2019]
D. Parking Lot Municipal Building, Weston Avenue. [Added 6-10-2019]
E. Parking area between John Street and Thomas Street (ice rink). [Added
6-10-2019]
48.Editor’s Note: Former §§ 399-5, Thirty-minute parking, and 399-6, One-hour parking, were
repealed 6-10-2019.
§ 399-7 MADISON CODE § 399-10
343:266
§ 399-10. U-turns prohibited. [Amended 6-10-2019]
With the exception of emergency vehicles, it shall be unlawful for an
operator of a motor vehicle to change lanes for the purpose of changing the
direction of said vehicle from whence it is headed to the opposite direction.
The above restriction applies to the following areas:
§ 399-11. (Reserved)49
§ 399-12. Curbside parking.
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals, the operator of a motor vehicle shall not park said motor vehicle
along Main Street other than parallel with the curb or edge of the roadway,
headed in the direction of traffic, with the motor vehicle within six inches
of the curb or edge of such roadway and with a clear space of three feet
left ahead and behind the same except where diagonal parking is provided.
Where diagonal parking is permitted, motor vehicles shall park so as to be
entirely within the marked-off or painted area.
§ 399-13. Handicap parking. [Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to park in a handicap
parking space, which vehicle does not bear a special registration place or
placard issued under 29-A M.R.S.A. § 521, or similar plate issued by another
state.
§ 399-14. Double parking.
Double parking on any way is prohibited at all times except in cases of
vehicle loading and unloading when the vehicle is unable to park next to the
curb due to the presence of a second vehicles.
A. Main Street.
(1) Beginning at Garden Street and thence commencing in a westerly
direction to the Madison-Anson Town line.
B. Weston Avenue.
(1) Beginning at the intersection of Weston Avenue and Main Street
and thence commencing in a northerly direction to the intersection
of Weston Avenue and Park Street.
C. Old Point Avenue.
(1) Beginning at the intersection of Old Point Avenue and Main Street
and thence commencing in a southerly direction to the intersection
of Old Point Avenue and Kennebec Street.
49.Editor’s Note: Former § 399-11, Left turns prohibited, was repealed 6-10-2019.
§ 399-10 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-15
343:267
§ 399-15. Repairing of vehicles in public way.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation engaged in the garage,
repair or automobile service business to park any motor vehicle in a street
or highway for the purposes of assembling, dismantling or repairing any
vehicle.
§ 399-16. Loading zone.
§ 399-17. (Reserved)51
§ 399-18. Distance from hydrants, driveways and corners.
[Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to park within a
distance of 15 feet from any corner of an intersection in Town. It shall be
unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to park said vehicle within a
distance of 15 feet from a hydrant. It shall be unlawful for an operator of
a motor vehicle to park in front of all driveway entrances, and 10 feet to
either side.
§ 399-19. Parking on sidewalks, crosswalks and intersections.
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to park the same or a
portion of the same on a sidewalk, crosswalk or within an intersection.
§ 399-20. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 6-10-2019]
Local law enforcement may cause any motor vehicle parked in violation of
this chapter to be removed at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. This
section may be enforced in addition to other penalty provisions provided
hereinafter.
A. It shall be unlawful for an operator of a noncommercial motor vehicle to
park within the following designated areas:
(1) Madison Avenue.
(a) From 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the west side of Madison
Avenue; beginning at the northerly corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Madison Avenue; thence commencing in a
northerly direction a distance of 90 feet.50
B. Commercial operators may use these areas for loading and unloading of
merchandise only. No commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park
more than two hours or overnight in said areas.
50.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(2), Main Street, was repealed 6-10-2019.
51.Editor’s Note: Former § 399-17, Taxi stands; permit; fee, was repealed 6-10-2019.
§ 399-15 MADISON CODE § 399-21
343:268
§ 399-21. Emergencies and special circumstances. [Amended
6-10-2019]
In an emergency, law enforcement, the Fire Chief and/or the Road
Commissioner may impose a parking ban on designated streets or may
waive the prohibition of parking on designated streets on a temporary basis.
The Selectmen may prohibit parking on a designated street or may waive
the prohibition of parking on designated streets for a period not to exceed
three months. For details on road postings and seasonal closings see the
Roads and Highways Ordinance (Chapter 694).
§ 399-22. Yield signs. [Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to enter the limits
of an intersection designated as a "yield intersection" without first yielding
the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians approaching from either
direction.
§ 399-23. Traffic signal.
The operator of a motor vehicle facing a traffic control signal exhibiting the
word "Stop" or the color "red" shall bring his vehicle to a complete stop, and
shall not proceed until said traffic control signal exhibits the word "Go" or
the color "green" except when directed otherwise by state law or by a police
officer. The following intersections shall have traffic signals:
Traffic Signal on Location
Main Street At the intersection of Old Point Avenue and
Weston Avenue for traffic in all directions
§ 399-24. Stop signs.
A. It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to enter the limits
of an intersection designated as a stop intersection without first
bringing the vehicle to a full stop and yielding the right-of-way to all
vehicles or pedestrians approaching from either direction, except when
the operator is otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Designated stop intersections are as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Abanaki Road East East Madison Road
Adams Road East Route 201
Ash Street North Preble Avenue
Ash Street South Myrtle Street
Bagley Road North Route 43
Bagley Road South East Madison Road
§ 399-21 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-24
343:269
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Beach Road West Rt. 201
Bean Street East Madison Avenue
Bean Street East Weston Avenue
Bean Street West Madison Avenue
Bean Street West Maple Street
Birch Street East Old Point Avenue
Birch Street West Pine Street
Blackwell Hill Road North Golf Course Road
Blackwell Hill Road South Rt. 148
Boardman Road South Route 43
Brown Street North Glendale Street
Brown Street South Ingalls Street
Cedar Street North Preble Avenue
Cedar Street [Repealed
6-10-2019]
Clifton Street West Hardy Street
Colby Bryant Road North Preble Avenue
Davis Road East Grange Road
Dinsmore Street
[Repealed 6-10-2019]
Edwards Street East Old Point Avenue
Edwards Street West Pine Street
Fall Street South Preble Avenue
Fir Street North Preble Avenue
Fir Street South Myrtle Street
Folsom Street
[Repealed 6-10-2019]
Foss Road East Route 201
Garden Street North Main Street
Garfield Street East Weston Avenue
Garfield Street West Madison Avenue
Glendale Street West Weston Avenue
Golf Course Road East Rt. 201
Golf Course Road West Route 43
Grange Road East East Madison Road
Gray Street East Weston Avenue
§ 399-24 MADISON CODE § 399-24
343:270
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Gray Street West Madison Avenue
Hardy Street North Park Street
Hardy Street South Main Street
Hardy Street South Park Street
Hartford Street
[Amended 6-10-2019]
North Maxim Street
Hayden Street West Route 201
Hazel Street North Glendale Street
Hazel Street North Lowe Street
Hazel Street South Ingalls Street
Heald Street East Hardy Street
Heald Street West Weston Avenue
Houghton Street East Weston Avenue
Houghton Street West Madison Avenue
Houghton Street West Weston Avenue
Ingalls Street West Weston Avenue
John Street East Hardy Street
John Street West Weston Avenue
Jones Street West Old Point Avenue
Kennebec Street East Old Point Avenue
Kennebec Street West Maine Central Railroad
Kincaid Road East Route 201
Kincaid Road West Blackwell Hill Road
Locust Street North Preble Avenue
Locust Street South Myrtle Street
Longley Road East Russell Road
Lowe Street West Weston Avenue
Lower Mills Road West East Madison Road
Madison Avenue South Main Street
Maple Street East Madison Avenue
Maple Street North Main Street
Maple Street South Main Street
Maple Street South Pine Street
Maxim Street North Main Street
Merriman Street East Withee Street
§ 399-24 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-24
343:271
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Merriman Street West Hardy Street
Middle Street East Weston Avenue
Middle Street West Madison Avenue
Myrtle Street [Repealed
6-10-2019]
Myrtle Street [Repealed
6-10-2019]
Myrtle Street West Old Point Avenue
Naomi Avenue North Hayden Street
Naomi Avenue South Hayden Street
Nichols Street East Old Point Avenue
Nichols Street [Added
6-10-2019]
South Main Street
Nichols Street West Old Point Avenue
Nichols Street (Lower)
[Amended 6-10-2019]
West Pine Street
North Street North East Houghton Street
North Street North Heald Street
North Street North John Street
North Street North Park Street
North Street North Thomas Street
North Street South Heald Street
North Street South John Street
North Street South Main Street
North Street South Park Street
North Street South Thomas Street
Old County Road North Route 43
Old County Road South Route 148
Old Point Avenue North Route 201 A
Orchard Road East Route 43
Park Street West Weston Avenue
Pearl Street North Garfield Street
Perkins Street East Old Point Avenue
Perkins Street South Pine Street
Pine Street North Main Street
Pine Street South Kennebec Street
§ 399-24 MADISON CODE § 399-24
343:272
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Pleasant Street West Old Point Avenue
Reed Road East Route 201
River Road South Route 43
Route 43 North Route 201
Route 43 West Route 201
Rowell Street East Madison Avenue
Rowell Street East Weston Avenue
Rowell Street West Madison Avenue
Russell Road North Route 148
Shusta Road North Route 148
Shusta Road South Preble Avenue
South Solon Meeting
House Road
South Route 43
Spring Street North Towne Road
Spring Street South Preble Avenue
Spruce Street North Preble Avenue
Spruce Street
[Repealed 6-10-2019]
Spruce Street South Myrtle Street
Summer Street North Towne Road
Summer Street South Preble Avenue
Thomas Street West Weston Avenue
Towne Road West Old Point Avenue
Trolley Line Drive
[Added 6-10-2019]
West Route 43
Tupper Road East Bagley Road
Vaughn Street East Weston Avenue
Vaughn Street West Madison Avenue
Ward Hill Road North Route 148
Water Street South Main Street
Wedge Street West Weston Avenue
Wesserunsett Road East East Madison Road
White School House
Road
East East Madison Road
White School House
Road (Route 148)
East Route 201
§ 399-24 STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING § 399-24
343:273
§ 399-25. One-way traffic. [Amended 6-10-2019]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to drive in a northerly
direction on the alleyway from the Municipal Parking Lot behind R.H. Renys
at the rear of buildings towards Main Street.
§ 399-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-10-2019]
§ 399-27. Prima facie evidence.
If a vehicle is unlawfully parked in violation of the provision of this chapter,
this shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by
the person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
§ 399-28. Arbitration. [Added 6-10-2019]
In the event of a dispute over enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
the Town Manager or their designee shall serve as arbitrator for contested
cases.
Chapter 405
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles in parks, cemeteries and wateraccess
areas — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 399.
Town-owned ATVs — See Ch. 508.
§ 405-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
White School House
Road
West Route 201
Withee Street South Main Street
Young Street South Nichols Street
A. A person who violates any provision of this chapter may be subject to
having the vehicle removed in accordance with § 399-20.
B. Local law enforcement will enforce the terms, conditions and fines
clearly marked on signage at or near a location where parking is
prohibited in part or entirely.
C. Parking fines are set at the discretion of the Madison Select Board.
§ 399-24 MADISON CODE § 405-2
405:274
§ 405-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATV — Any recreational vehicle including motorcycles, motorbikes, trail
bikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts or any similar type of vehicle that is
designed principally for use off-road. This term shall not include any vehicle
that is designed or used principally for agricultural purposes.
§ 405-3. Prohibited conduct.
A person may not operate an ATV upon land of another unless the person
has written permission of the landowner or the landowner's agent or unless
the landowner specifically permits the operation of ATVs on the land
without written permission as recorded with the Madison Police
Department or the landowner has designated specific ATV trails through
placement of signs.
§ 405-4. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be a civil infraction. Penalties for a violation
shall be not less than $100 and not more than $500.
§ 405-5. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any portion of this chapter
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining sections or provisions
of this chapter.
Part III: Land Use Ordinances
Chapter 422
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 7.
Shoreland zoning — See Ch. 478.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 490.
§ 422-1. Purpose and intent.
A. Certain areas of the Town of Madison, Maine, are subject to periodic
flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas.
Relief is available in the form of federally subsidized flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
§ 405-2 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-1
405:275
§ 422-2. Permit system established; areas of special flood hazard.
§ 422-3. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in § 422-14),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas
of special flood hazard established in § 422-2, a flood hazard development
permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit
shall be in addition to any other building permits which may be required
pursuant to the codes and chapters of the Town of Madison, Maine.
§ 422-4. Application for permit.
B. Therefore, the Town of Madison, Maine, has chosen to become a
participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and
agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in the
attached Floodplain Management chapter.
C. It is the intent of the Town of Madison, Maine, to require the
recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions
relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
D. The Town of Madison has the legal authority to adopt land use and
control measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 through 3007, 4352, 4401 through 4407, and 38
M.R.S.A. § 440.
A. The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid
Act, provides that areas of the Town of Madison having a special flood
hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood
hazard areas. This chapter establishes a flood hazard development
permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Madison, Maine.
B. The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE, for the Town of
Madison, Maine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Madison, Maine"
dated July 3, 1995, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map,
dated July 3, 1995, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this chapter.
A. The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
contractor;
(2) An address and a map indicating the location of the construction
site;
§ 422-1 MADISON CODE § 422-4
405:276
(3) A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed structures,
sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut
and filled, and lot dimensions;
(4) A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or
development;
(5) A statement of the cost of the development, including all materials
and labor;
(6) A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
(7) Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development;
(8) The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD), or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
(a) Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially
improved structures, which is determined:
[1] In Zone AE, from data contained in the Flood Insurance
Study — Town of Madison, Maine, as described in § 422-2;
or
[2] In Zone A:
[a] From any base flood elevation data from federal, state,
or other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2
model, FEMA 265), including information obtained
pursuant to § 422-7K and § 422-9D; or
[b] In the absence of all data described in
§ 422-A(8)(a)[2][a], information to demonstrate that
the structure shall meet the elevation requirement in
§ 422-7F(2)(b), 422-7G(2)(a) or (b), or 422-7H(2)(b).
(b) Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of
the proposed building;
(c) Lowest floor, including basement, and whether or not such
structures contain a basement; and
(d) Level, in the case of nonresidential structures only, to which
the structure will be floodproofed;
(9) A description of an elevation reference point established on the site
of all developments for which elevation standards apply as required
in § 422-7;
(10) A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect, that the base flood elevation and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
§ 422-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-4
405:277
§ 422-5. Application fee and expert's fee.
§ 422-6. Review standards for flood hazard development permit
applications.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
(11) The following certifications as required in § 422-7 by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
(a) A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, as amended), to
verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of § 422-7G and
other applicable standards in § 422-7;
(b) A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that engineered
hydraulic openings in foundation walls will meet the standards
of § 422-7L(2)(a);
(c) A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
§ 422-7M;
(d) A certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of § 422-7N.
(12) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of the proposed development; and
(13) A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in § 422-7 will be met.
B. The items in Subsection A(8) through (11) apply only to new
construction and substantial improvements.
A. A nonrefundable application fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk, and a
copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. (Refer
to the Town of Madison's Fee Schedule for application fee.)
B. An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer or
other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the Town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to
pay the bill shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be grounds
for the issuance of a stop-work order. An expert shall not be hired by the
municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity
to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal that decision to
the Board of Appeals.
A. Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to
assure that proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding
§ 422-4 MADISON CODE § 422-6
405:278
and to determine that all pertinent requirements of § 422-7
(Development standards) have been, or will be, met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications:
(1) The base flood data contained in the Flood Insurance Study — Town
of Madison, Maine, as described in § 422-2.
(2) In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are
not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
from federal, state, or other sources, including information
obtained pursuant to § 422-4A(8)(a)[2][a], 422-7K, and 422-4A(4),
in order to administer § 422-7 of this chapter; and
(3) When the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A
by methods outlined in § 422-4A(8)(a)[2][a], the community shall
submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in § 422-2 of this chapter;
D. In the review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Office of Community Development prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this chapter, approve the
issuance of one of the following flood hazard development permits
based on the type of development:
(1) A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated
structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure
to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer with an "under construction" elevation
certificate completed by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit
construction, for verifying compliance with the elevation
requirements of § 422-7, Subsection F, G, or H. Following review of
the elevation certificate data, which shall take place within 72
hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue Part II of the flood hazard development permit. Part II
§ 422-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-6
405:279
§ 422-7. Development standards.
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project;
or
(2) A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of
nonresidential structures that are new construction or
substantially improved nonresidential structures that are not being
elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of
§ 422-7G(1)(a), (b), and (c). The application for this permit shall
include a floodproofing certificate signed by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or
(3) A flood hazard development permit for minor development for all
development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the
structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited to:
accessory structures as provided for in § 422-7J, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of
equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities
that do not involve structures; and nonstructural projects, such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permit applications, corresponding permits issued, and
data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of § 422-10 of this chapter, and
copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, certificates of
compliance, and certifications of design standards required under the
provisions of §§ 422-4, 422-7, and 422-8 of this chapter.
A. All development shall:
(1) Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
(2) Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
(4) Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
§ 422-6 MADISON CODE § 422-7
405:280
B. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
C. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
D. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. All development associated with altered or relocated portions of a
watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that
no reduction occurs in the flood-carrying capacity of any watercourse.
F. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure located within:
(1) Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated:
(a) To at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to § 422-4A(8)(a)[2][a], 422-6B,
or 422-9D; or
(b) In the absence of all data described in § 422-7F(2)(a), to at
least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the
structure.
G. New construction or substantial improvement of any nonresidential
structure located within:
(1) Zones AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by § 422-4A(11) and shall include a record
of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
§ 422-7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-7
405:281
(2) Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated:
(a) To at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing
information obtained pursuant to § 422-4A(8)(a)[2][a], 422-6B,
or 422-9D; or
(b) In the absence of all data described in § 422-7G(2)(a), to at
least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the
structure; or
(c) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, meet the
floodproofing standards of § 422-7G(1)(a), (b), and (c).
H. New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
(1) Zones AE shall:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor
is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
(b) Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured concrete
or masonry slab, foundation walls with hydraulic openings, or
may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which
support the manufactured home so that no weight is supported
by its wheels and axles; and
(c) Anchoring.
[1] Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to:
[a] Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four
corners of the manufactured home, plus two
additional ties per side at intermediate points (homes
less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per
side); or by
[b] Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five
additional ties along each side at intermediate points
(homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
[2] All components of the anchoring system described in
§ 422-7H(1)(c)[1][a] and [b] shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
(2) Zone A shall:
(a) Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in
§ 422-7H(1)(b), such that the lowest floor (including basement)
of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base
§ 422-7 MADISON CODE § 422-7
405:282
flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
§ 422-4A(8)(a)[2][a], 422-6B, or 422-9D; or
(b) In the absence of all data as described in § 422-7H(2)(a), to at
least two feet above the highest adjacent grade to the
structure; and
(c) Meet the anchoring requirements of § 422-7H(1)(c).
I. Recreational vehicles located within:
(1) Zones A and AE shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or
(c) Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in § 422-7H(1).
J. Accessory structures, as defined in § 422-14, located within Zones A
and AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in § 422-7F
and G above, if all other requirements of § 422-7 and all the following
requirements are met. Accessory structures shall:
(1) Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
(2) Have hydraulic openings, as specified in § 422-7L(2), in at least two
different walls of the accessory structure;
(3) Be located outside the floodway;
(4) When possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be
placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and
(5) Have only ground-fault-interrupt electrical outlets. The electric
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the special flood hazard area.
K. Floodways.
(1) In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development,
shall not be permitted in riverine areas for which a regulatory
floodway is designated on the community's Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, unless a technical evaluation certified by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels
§ 422-7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-7
405:283
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge;
(2) In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development, shall not be
permitted in the floodway as determined in § 422-7K(3) unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer
is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
(a) Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
(b) Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in FEMA's
guidelines and standards for flood risk analysis and mapping.
(3) In Zones A and AE riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the
channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as
measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of
the floodplain.
L. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zones
A and AE that meets the development standards of § 422-7, including
the elevation requirements of § 422-7, Subsection F, G, or H, and is
elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, stilts, or crawl spaces less than
three feet in height may be enclosed below the elevation requirements,
provided that all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not basements as defined in § 422-14; and
(2) Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
(a) Be engineered and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
(b) Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and
§ 422-7 MADISON CODE § 422-7
405:284
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic
mechanical means;
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and
(4) The enclosed area may be used for building maintenance, access,
parking vehicles, or storing of articles and equipment used for
maintenance of the building.
M. New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A
and AE shall be designed such that:
(1) When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation; and
(2) A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
(a) The structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of § 422-7K; and
(b) The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all structural components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
N. New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall
located within Zones A and AE shall:
(1) Have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation;
(a) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(2) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for
a flood hazard development permit, as required by § 422-4A(11).
O. New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones A and AE, in and over water and seaward
of mean high tide, if the following requirements are met:
(1) Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations; and
§ 422-7 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-7
405:285
§ 422-8. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
§ 422-9. Review of subdivision and development proposals.
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local
chapters or regulations and all projects on five or more acres, or in the case
of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
(2) For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered
professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction.
A. For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated
structure, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
an elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor,
registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with
§ 422-7, Subsection F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement
Officer that the development is complete and complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
(1) Review the elevation certificate and the applicant's written
notification; and
(2) Upon determination that the development conforms to the
provisions of this chapter, shall issue a certificate of compliance.
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a
riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based
on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan shall include a statement that the
developer will require that structures on lots in the development be
§ 422-7 MADISON CODE § 422-9
405:286
§ 422-10. Appeals and variances.
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Madison, Maine, may, upon written
application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board in the administration or enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the
requirements of this chapter consistent with state law and the following
criteria:
constructed in accordance with § 422-7 of this chapter and that such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, or document
transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real
estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest.
The statement shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce
any violation of the construction requirement, and that fact shall also
be included in the deed or any other document previously described.
The construction requirement shall also be stated on any map, plat, or
plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as
part of the approval process.
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
(2) A determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or chapters; and
(3) A showing that the existence of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or chapters; and
(4) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
undue hardship, which in this subsection means:
(a) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
(b) That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
(c) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
§ 422-9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-10
405:287
(d) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief,
and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as it
deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) Other criteria of this § 422-10 and § 422-7K are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
or restoration of historic structures upon the determination that:
(1) The development meets the criteria of § 422-10, Subsections A
through D above; and
(2) The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of § 422-10, Subsections A
through E, shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the
signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance coverage; and
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and
(3) The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant
may have against the municipality that are related to the use of
land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals.
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party within 30 days after receipt of a
§ 422-10 MADISON CODE § 422-10
405:288
§ 422-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
(2) Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from.
(3) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request.
(4) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(5) The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within 35 days after
the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(6) The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
a report of all variance actions, including justification for the
granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
(7) Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with state laws within 45 days from
the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this chapter.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a
denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
(1) The name of the property owner and address or legal description of
the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2) A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, or chapter;
(3) A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
(4) Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
§ 422-10 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-11
405:289
§ 422-12. Validity and severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this chapter.
§ 422-13. Conflict with other chapters.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, chapter, regulation, bylaw,
permit, or provision of law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 422-14. Definitions.
(5) A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and
to give this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is
permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
100-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A small detached structure that is
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE — The natural elevation of the ground surface prior
to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
having a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as
specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in § 422-2 of
this chapter.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year; commonly called the "100-year
flood."
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 422-11 MADISON CODE § 422-14
405:290
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified under 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4451 (including exceptions in § 4451, Paragraph 1) and
employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive
planning and land use laws and chapters.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 05/
93, as amended) that:
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the special hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A or AE, to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns, post, piers, or shear walls; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to one foot above
the magnitude of the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In the case of Zones A or AE, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters, as required in § 422-7L.
(2)
Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
(1)
(2) Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 422-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-14
405:291
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program
of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning chapters,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose chapters (such as a floodplain chapter, grading chapter, and
erosion control chapter) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see flooding).
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits
of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed,
that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated
for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a) of this definition.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
§ 422-14 MADISON CODE § 422-14
405:292
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM — For purposes of this chapter, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at
the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established
datum and is used in areas where mean sea level data is too far from a
specific site to be practically used.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements described
in § 422-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs,
maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50%
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 422-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-14
405:293
of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited
to accessory structures as provided for in § 422-7J, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of
equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or
private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not
involve structures; and nonstructural projects such as bridges, dams,
towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — The national
vertical datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is used
by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea
Level (MSL)."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) — The national datum
whose standard was established in 1988, which is the new vertical
datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all
new Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum
used by other North American countries such as Canada and Mexico
and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement
of the earths crust, glacial rebound and subsidence, and the increasing
use of satellite technology.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY —
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot; and
(1)
In riverine areas is considered to be the channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas to a distance of 1/2 the
width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high-water
mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
(2)
§ 422-14 MADISON CODE § 422-14
405:294
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground is also a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamage
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the Town of
Madison's Board of Appeals.
(2)
§ 422-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 422-14
405:295
§ 422-15. Repealer.
This chapter repeals and replaces any municipal chapter previously enacted
to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as
amended).
Chapter 478
SHORELAND ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 7.
Floodplain management— See Ch. 422.
Site review — See Ch. 484.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 490.
§ 478-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to
control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve
shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters;
to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond
to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
§ 478-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
38, §§ 435-449, of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
§ 478-3. Applicability.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or development to comply with
a community's floodplain management regulations.
A. This chapter applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river, or
upland edge of a freshwater wetland, and all land areas within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
B. In addition, this chapter applies to the one-hundred-year floodplain of
the Kennebec River as shown on Madison's most recently adopted
Shoreland Zoning Map.52
52.Editor's Note: The Shoreland Zoning Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 422-14 MADISON CODE § 478-3
405:296
§ 478-4. When effective.
§ 478-5. Availability of provisions.
A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and
shall be accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made
available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person
making the request. Notice of availability of this chapter shall be posted.
§ 478-6. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of the chapter.
§ 478-7. Conflicts with other ordinances.
Whenever a provision of this chapter conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this chapter or of any other ordinance, regulation
or statute administered by the municipality, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
C. This chapter also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a
dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending or located below the
normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
D. Activities requiring a permit that take place within 250 feet of wetlands
rated as moderate or high value by the Maine Department of Fisheries
and Wildlife must be approved by Maine's Department of
Environmental Protection as well as Madison's Planning Board.
A. Effective date of chapter and chapter amendments. This chapter, which
was adopted by the municipal legislative body on June 8, 2009, shall not
be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection. A certified copy of the ordinance, or
ordinance amendment, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk,
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the
Commissioner fails to act on this chapter or chapter amendment, within
45 days of his/her receipt of the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, it
shall be automatically approved.
B. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the
forty-five-day period shall be governed by the terms of this chapter, or
chapter amendment, if the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, is
approved by the Commissioner.
C. Pending approval by the Director of the Bureau of Forestry, on January
1, 2013, § 478-150, Timber harvesting, will be administered and
enforced by the Bureau of Forestry. [Added 6-11-2012]
§ 478-3 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-8
405:297
§ 478-8. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body.
Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall
be submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body and shall
not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner
fails to act on any amendment within 45 days of his/her receipt of the
amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application
for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five-day period
shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Commissioner.
§ 478-9. Districts and Zoning Map.
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this chapter is
applicable are hereby divided into the following districts as shown on
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is (are) made a part of this
chapter:53
(1) Resource Protection.
(2) Limited Residential.
(3) Limited Commercial.
(4) General Development I.
(5) General Development II.
(6) Stream Protection.
B. Scale of map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than: one inch equals 2,000 feet. District boundaries
shall be clearly delineated, and a legend indicating the symbols for each
district shall be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland
Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the Municipal
Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office. In the event the
municipality does not have a municipal office, the Municipal Clerk shall
be the custodian of the map.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in
accordance with § 478-8, are made in the district boundaries or other
matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes
shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within 30 days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
53.Editor's Note: The Shoreland Zoning Map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 478-8 MADISON CODE § 478-10
405:298
§ 478-10. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district
boundary lines are property lines, the center lines of streets, roads and
rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein.
Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines,
the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
NOTE: The Maine Supreme Judicial Court has held that the Official
Shoreland Zoning Map is the primary tool to which to refer in determining
district boundaries under ordinances that are not more explicit in their
district descriptions than the language of the Guidelines, and that where
there is inconsistency between the map and these general text descriptions
of the shoreland districts as provided in the minimum guidelines, the map
prevails.
§ 478-11. Land use requirements.
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and
no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is
granted.
§ 478-12. Nonconformance.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to promote land use
conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed before
the effective date of this chapter or amendments thereto shall be
allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in § 478-12.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a nonconforming
condition shall not be permitted to become more nonconforming.
B. General.
(1) Transfer of ownership. Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses
may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the
nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure
or lot, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Repair and maintenance. This chapter allows, without a permit, the
normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and
structures, including repairs or renovations that do not involve
expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other
changes in a nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or
local building and safety codes may require.
NOTE: See § 478-17 for the definitions of "nonconforming
structures," "nonconforming uses" and "nonconforming lots."
C. Nonconforming structures.
§ 478-10 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-12
405:299
(1) Expansions. A nonconforming structure may be added to or
expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting
authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion
does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in
accordance with Subsection C(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less than
the required setback from the normal high-water line of a
water body or tributary stream or the upland edge of a
wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded, as
measured in floor area or volume, by 30% or more, during the
lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms
with the requirements of § 478-12C(3), and is less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream or
wetland, the replacement structure may not be expanded if the
original structure existing on January 1, 1989, had been
expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since that date.
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a nonconforming structure, the structure
and new foundation must be placed such that the setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its
decision on the criteria specified in § 478-12C(2), Relocation,
below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the
exterior dimensions of the structure, except for expansion in
conformity with § 478-12C(1)(a) above, and the foundation
does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three
additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the
structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first
floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the
structure.
(2) Relocation.
(a) A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the
boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located
provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by
the Planning Board or its designee, and provided that the
applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of state law and the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules),
or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the
law and said rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a
manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
(b) In determining whether the building relocation meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board or
its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
§ 478-12 MADISON CODE § 478-12
405:300
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the
location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable
for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to
be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary
to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback
area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall
require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the
destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the
relocated structure was removed must be replanted with
vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
[1] Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be
replanted with at least one native tree, three feet in height,
for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted,
no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the
number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted
no further from the water or wetland than the trees that
were removed.
[2] Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground
cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a
structure must be reestablished. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was
disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished
within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground
cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or
ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
[3] Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel
the original location of the structure shall be replanted
with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or replacement.
(a) Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed,
regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value
of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal,
may be reconstructed or replaced, provided that a permit is
obtained within 18 months of the date of said damage,
destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction
or replacement is in compliance with the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback, requirement to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its
designee in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. In no
case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to
increase its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement
structure is less than the required setback, it shall not be any
larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant
§ 478-12 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-12
405:301
to § 478-12C(1) above, as determined by the nonconforming
floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced
structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area
and volume of the original structure can be relocated or
reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion
of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced
or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a
new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in
order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with § 478-12C(2) above.
(b) Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market
value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market
value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such
damage, destruction, or removal.
(c) In determining whether the building reconstruction or
replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical extent
the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in addition to
the criteria in § 478-12C(2) above, the physical condition and
type of foundation present, if any.
(4) Change of use of a nonconforming structure.
(a) The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to
another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a
written application, determines that the new use will have no
greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources
than the existing use.
(b) In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the
applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and
wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of
public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain
management, archaeological and historic resources, and
functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Expansions. Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited,
except that nonconforming residential uses may, after obtaining a
permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing
residential structures or within expansions of such structures as
allowed in § 478-12C(1)(a) above.
§ 478-12 MADISON CODE § 478-12
405:302
(2) Resumption prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year,
or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be
devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board
may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one-year
extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the
resumption of a use of a residential structure, provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes
during the preceding five-year period.
(3) Change of use. An existing nonconforming use may be changed to
another nonconforming use, provided that the proposed use has no
greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties and
resources than the former use, as determined by the Planning
Board. The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be
made according to criteria listed in § 478-12C(4) above.
E. Nonconforming lots.
(1) Nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto may be built
upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in
separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the
same ownership, and that all provisions of this chapter except lot
area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relating to
setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or
shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous built lots:
(a) If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this chapter, if
all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements
of this chapter, and if a principal use or structure exists on
each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately
or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12
M.R.S.A. §§ 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
(b) If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single
lot of record on the effective date of this chapter, each may be
sold on a separate lot, provided that the above-referenced law
and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided, each
lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this chapter.
(3) Contiguous lots, vacant or partially built:
(a) If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint
ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or
amendment of this chapter, if any of these lots do not
individually meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter
§ 478-12 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-12
405:303
§ 478-13. Establishment of districts.
or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots
are vacant or contain no principal structure, the lots shall be
combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
(b) This provision shall not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at
least one of which is nonconforming, owned by the same
person or persons on July 22, 1992, and recorded in the
registry of deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can
accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules; and
[1] Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at
least 20,000 square feet of lot area; or
[2] Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size
requirements of § 478-12E(3)(b)[1] are reconfigured or
combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of
shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District includes
areas in which development would adversely affect water quality,
productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values.
This district shall include the following areas when they occur within
the limits of the Shoreland Zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection
District, except that areas which are currently developed and areas
which meet the criteria for the Limited Commercial or General
Development I Districts need not be included within the Resource
Protection District.
(1) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands and wetlands associated with great ponds and
rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and
wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that
are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer
maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of December
31, 2008. For the purposes of this subsection "wetlands associated
with great ponds and rivers" shall mean areas characterized by
nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are
contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation
at or below the water level of the great pond or river during the
period of normal high water. "Wetlands associated with great ponds
or rivers" are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
§ 478-12 MADISON CODE § 478-13
405:304
NOTE: The Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.S.R.A.
§§ 480-A through 480-Z, requires the Department of
Environmental Protection to designate areas of "significant
wildlife habitat". Significant wildlife habitat includes: habitat for
species appearing on the official state or federal lists of
endangered or threatened species; high- and moderate-value deerwintering
areas and travel corridors as defined by the Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife; high- and moderate-value
waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including nesting and feeding
areas as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife; critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea-run
salmon as defined by the Atlantic Sea Run Salmon Commission;
and shorebird nesting, feeding and staging areas and seabird
nesting islands as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife.
(2) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed
great ponds along rivers, defined by the one-hundred-year
floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these,
by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
20% or greater.
(4) Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland
vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater
wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected to a
water body during the period of normal high water.
NOTE: These areas usually consist of forested wetlands abutting
water bodies and nonforested wetlands.
(5) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion,
undercutting, or river bed movement.
B. Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District includes
those areas suitable for residential and recreational development. It
includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection District, or
Stream Protection District, and areas which are used less intensively
than those in the Limited Commercial District or the General
Development Districts.
C. Limited Commercial District. The Limited Commercial District includes
areas of mixed, light commercial and residential uses, exclusive of the
Stream Protection District, which should not be developed as
intensively as the General Development Districts. This district includes
areas of two or more contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of
residential and low-intensity business and commercial uses. Industrial
uses are prohibited.
§ 478-13 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-13
405:305
D. General Development I District. The General Development I District
includes the following types of existing, intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial,
industrial or intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such
activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial
activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and
service activities, or other commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and
activities, such as, but not limited to, amusement parks, race
tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive
commercial, industrial or recreational uses.
E. General Development II District. The General Development II District
includes the same types of areas as those listed for the General
Development I District. The General Development II District, however,
shall be applied to newly established General Development Districts
where the pattern of development at the time of adoption is
undeveloped or not as intensively developed as that of the General
Development I District.
(1) Portions of the General Development District I or II may also
include residential development. However, no area shall be
designated as a General Development I or II District based solely
on residential use.
(2) In areas adjacent to great ponds and adjacent to rivers flowing to
great ponds, the designation of an area as a General Development
District shall be based upon uses existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter. There shall be no newly established General
Development Districts or expansions in area of existing General
Development Districts adjacent to great ponds, and adjacent to
rivers that flow to great ponds.
F. Stream Protection District. The Stream Protection District includes all
land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond, or river, or
within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a wetland.
Where a stream and its associated shoreland area are located within
250 feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands,
that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the shoreland
district associated with that water body or wetland.
§ 478-13 MADISON CODE § 478-14
405:306
§ 478-14. Table of Land Uses.
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone,54 shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in
§ 478-15. The district designation for a particular site shall be determined
from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
§ 478-15. Land use standards.
All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone shall conform with the
following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum lot standards.
(1) Area and frontage.
Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Shore
Frontage
(feet)
(a) Residential per dwelling
unit
40,000 200
(b) Governmental,
institutional, commercial
or industrial per principal
structure
60,000 300
(c) Public and private
recreational facilities
40,000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two
lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road
was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after
September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the
shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure or use, or
combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and accessory structures.
54.Editor's Note: Table 1 (with related Key) is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 478-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:307
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least
100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
great ponds and rivers that flow to great ponds, and 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except
that in the General Development I District the setback from the
normal high-water line shall be at least 25 feet, horizontal distance.
In the Resource Protection District, the setback requirement shall
be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads,
parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed in
that district in which case the setback requirements specified
above shall apply. In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision
shall neither apply to structures which require direct access to
the water body or wetland as an operational necessity, such as
piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally
water-dependent uses.
(b) On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential
structure exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory
structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or
wetland setbacks, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities,
for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such
accessory structure shall not exceed 80 square feet in area nor
eight feet in height, and shall be located as far from the
shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all
other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure
be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the
principal structure.
NOTE: A tributary stream may be perennial or intermittent.
Where a tributary stream is present within the Shoreland
Zone, setback standards from that tributary stream are
applicable.
(2) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing
structures which are permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited
Residential, Limited Commercial, and Stream Protection Districts,
shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision shall not apply to
structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and
similar structures having no floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and
structures, including basements, shall be elevated at least one foot
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood, the flood of
record, or, in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types
identified as recent floodplain soils. In those municipalities that
participate in the National Flood Insurance Program and have
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:308
adopted the April 2005 version, or later version, of the Floodplain
Management Ordinance, accessory structures may be placed in
accordance with the standards of that ordinance and need not meet
the elevation requirements of this subsection.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other
nonvegetated surfaces, within the Shoreland Zone shall not exceed
20% of the lot or a portion thereof, located within the Shoreland
Zone, including land area previously developed, except in the
General Development District adjacent to rivers that do not flow to
great ponds classified GPA, where lot coverage shall not exceed
70%.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall
meet the structure setback requirement, except for low retaining
walls and associated fill, provided all of the following conditions are
met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated
buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally
existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally
occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, is no more
than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the one-hundred-year
floodplain on rivers, streams, wetlands, and tributary streams,
as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of
these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof, and no further structural
development will occur within the setback area, including
patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet
the following characteristics:
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:309
[1] The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is
lacking, the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark
mulch;
[2] Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to
retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater runoff;
[3] Only native species may be used to establish the buffer
area;
[4] A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is
required, measured perpendicularly to the normal highwater
line or upland edge of a wetland;
[5] A footpath not to exceed the standards in § 478-15P(2)(a),
may traverse the buffer;
NOTE: If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water body, or
tributary stream, a permit pursuant to the Natural
Resource Protection Act is required from the Department
of Environmental Protection.
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils, provided that the structure is limited to a
maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not extend
below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland (unless permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the
property.
C. Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such
use and constructed so as to control erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural
beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on
fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry
on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:310
and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be
wider than six feet for noncommercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf,
dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water
line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure
requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an
operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is
clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier
or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act.
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf
or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential
dwelling units in any district.
(8) Except in the General Development Districts, structures built on,
over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall not 20 feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or
other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof,
projecting into or over water bodies shall require a permit from
the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C. Permits
may also be required from the Army Corps of Engineers if located
in navigable waters.
D. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum
requirements imposed under state licensing procedures and the
following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land,
not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting
wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or
shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and 75
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual private campsites. Individual private campsites not
associated with campgrounds are allowed, provided the following
conditions are met:
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:311
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this chapter,
or 30,000 square feet of lot area within the Shoreland Zone,
whichever is less, may be permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great
pond or river flowing to a great pond, and 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a
canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle,
tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be
limited to 1,000 square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method
and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite
and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where
disposal is off site, written authorization from the receiving facility
or landowner is required.
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on site
for more than 120 days per year, all requirements for residential
structures shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface
sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public
sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and industrial uses. The following new commercial and
industrial uses are prohibited within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to
great ponds, and rivers and streams which flow to great ponds:
(1) Auto-washing facilities.
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including
body shops.
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers,
other than amounts normally associated with individual households
or farms.
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping.
(6) Dry-cleaning establishments.
(7) Electronic circuit assembly.
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:312
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing.
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage
on same property as use occurs and except for storage and sales
associated with marinas.
(11) Photographic processing.
(12) Printing.
G. Parking areas.
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream
setback requirements for structures for the district in which such
areas are located. The setback requirement for parking areas
serving public boat launching facilities in districts other than the
General Development I District shall be no less than 50 feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the
Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists
further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and
shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing
directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and where
feasible, to retain all runoff on site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities,
the following shall apply:
(a) Typical parking space: approximately 10 feet wide and 20 feet
long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer
shall be 40 feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: approximately 20 feet wide.
H. Roads and driveways. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts
and other related features.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond or a river
that flows to a great pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable
alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no other
reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback
requirement shall be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon
clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be
used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream,
or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to,
the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:313
additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
(a) On slopes of greater than 20%, the road and/or driveway
setback shall be increased by 10 feet, horizontal distance, for
each five-percent increase in slope above 20%.
(b) Section 478-15H(1) does not apply to approaches to water
crossings or to roads or driveways that provide access to
permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the
shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity,
excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and
driveways providing access to permitted structures within the
setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of
§ 478-15H(1) except for that portion of the road or driveway
necessary for direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right
of way regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary
stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection
District except that the Planning Board may grant a permit to
construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses
within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the
Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding
that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside
the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource
Protection District, the road and/or driveway shall be set back as
far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two
horizontal to one vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in
accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in § 478-15Q.
(5) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10% except for
segments of less than 200 feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet
plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface
drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:314
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To
accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road, or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade
(Percent)
Spacing
(feet)
0% to 2% 250
3% to 5% 200 to 135
6% to 10% 100 to 80
11% to 15% 80 to 60
16% to 20% 60 to 45
21%+ 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only
where the grade is 10% or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty-degree angle
downslope from a line perpendicular to the center line of the
road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their
inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads and
driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
I. Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the
Resource Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential and
Limited Commercial Districts:
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be
allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed six square feet in
area and shall not exceed two signs per premises. In the Limited
Commercial District, however, such signs shall not exceed 16
square feet in area. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or
rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:315
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two
signs per premises, and shall not exceed 12 square feet in the
aggregate.
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three square
feet in area relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without
restriction as to number, provided that no such sign shall exceed
two square feet in area.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than 20 feet above the ground.
(7) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, nonflashing lights.
J. Stormwater runoff.
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to
minimize stormwater runoff from the site in excess of the natural
predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff
control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded
areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Stormwater runoff control systems shall be maintained as
necessary to ensure proper functioning.
NOTE: The Stormwater Management Law (38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D)
requires a full permit to be obtained from the DEP prior to
construction of a project consisting of 20,000 square feet or more
of impervious area or five acres or more of a developed area in an
urban impaired stream watershed or most-at-risk lake watershed,
or a project with one acre or more of developed area in any
other stream or wetland watershed. A permit-by-rule is necessary
for a project with one acre or more of disturbed area but less
than one acre impervious area (20,000 square feet for most-atrisk
lakes and urban impaired streams) and less than five acres
of developed area. Furthermore, a Maine Construction General
Permit is required if the construction will result in one acre or
more of disturbed area.
K. Septic waste disposal. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be
installed in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
(1) Clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new
system and any associated fill extensions shall not extend closer
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland; and
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:316
(2) A holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the
Shoreland Zone.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require
new systems, excluding fill extensions, to be constructed no less
than 100 horizontal feet from the normal high-water line of a
perennial water body. The minimum setback distance for a new
subsurface disposal system may not be reduced by variance.
L. Essential services.
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited
to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than roadside
distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection or Stream
Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted use
within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates
that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any
adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including
visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution
lines, towers and related equipment may be replaced or
reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral exploration and extraction. Mineral exploration to determine
the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by
hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral
exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations,
including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas
and to protect the public health and safety. Mineral extraction may be
permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the
Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe
in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements of
§ 478-15M(3) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff
control features, shall be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond or a river
flowing to a great pond, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary
stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations
shall not be permitted within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of any
property line without written permission of the owner of such
adjacent property.
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:317
(3) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete
when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in any
consecutive twelve-month period, ground levels and grades shall
be established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location, or shall be buried on site.
Only materials generated on-site may be buried or covered on
site.
NOTE: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, 38 M.R.S.A.,
§ 1301, and the Solid Waste Management Rules, Chapters
400 to 419 of the Department of Environmental Protection's
regulations may contain other applicable provisions regarding
disposal of such materials.
(b) The final graded slope shall be 2 1/2 to one (2 1/2:1) slope or
flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land
areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation
native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained
from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization
project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board
may impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize the
adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
N. Agriculture.
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with
the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201 to 4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, or
within 75 feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the
Shoreland Zone must be constructed or modified such that the
facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated
stormwater.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000
square feet in surface area, within the Shoreland Zone shall require
a conservation plan to be filed with the Planning Board.
Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this chapter.
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:318
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a conservation plan may be
available through the local Soil and Water Conservation District
office.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within 75
feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within 25
feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands.
Operations in existence on the effective date of this chapter and not
in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted
within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of a great pond; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of other water
bodies; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams
and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm
activities, and which are not in conformance with the above
setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is
conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
O. Timber harvesting.
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, timber
harvesting shall be limited to the following:
(a) Within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance,
inland from the normal high-water line, timber harvesting may
be conducted when the following conditions are met:
[1] The ground is frozen;
[2] There is no resultant soil disturbance;
[3] The removal of trees is accomplished using a cable or
boom and there is no entry of tracked or wheeled vehicles
into the seventy-five-foot strip of land;
[4] There is no cutting of trees less than six inches in
diameter; no more than 30% of the trees six inches or
more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground
level, are cut in any ten-year period; and a well-distributed
stand of trees and other natural vegetation remains; and
[5] A licensed professional forester has marked the trees to be
harvested prior to a permit being issued by the
municipality or the Bureau of Forestry issuing a permit by
rule. [Amended 6-11-2012]
(b) Beyond the seventy-five-foot strip referred to in
§ 478-15O(1)(a) above, timber harvesting is permitted in
accordance with Subsection O(2) below except that in no case
shall the average residual basal area of trees over 4 1/2 inches
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:319
in diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level be reduced to less
than 30 square feet per acre.
(2) Except in areas as described in § 478-15O(1) above, timber
harvesting shall conform with the following provisions:
(a) Selective cutting of no more than 40% of the total volume of
trees four inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet
above ground level on any lot in any ten-year period is
permitted. In addition:
[1] Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a great pond or a river flowing to a great
pond, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be no
clear-cut openings and a well-distributed stand of trees
and other vegetation, including existing ground cover,
shall be maintained.
[2] At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
a great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and greater
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of other water bodies or the upland edge of a wetland,
harvesting operations shall not create single clear-cut
openings greater than 10,000 square feet in the forest
canopy. Where such openings exceed 5,000 square feet,
they shall be at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart.
Such clear-cut openings shall be included in the
calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be
considered to be equivalent to basal area.
(b) Timber harvesting operations exceeding the forty-percent
limitation in § 478-15O(2)(a) above, may be allowed by the
Planning Board or the Bureau of Forestry upon a clear
showing, including a forest management plan signed by a
Maine-licensed professional forester, that such an exception is
necessary for good forest management and will be carried out
in accordance with the purposes of this chapter. The Planning
Board shall notify the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection of each exception allowed, within 14
days of the Planning Board's decision. [Amended 6-11-2012]
(c) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body. In all
other areas, slash shall either be removed or disposed of in
such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof
extends more than four feet above the ground. Any debris that
falls below the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream shall be removed.
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:320
(d) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as
travel routes except when:
[1] Surface waters are frozen; and
[2] The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(e) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert,
except in areas with low banks and channel beds which are
composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which would
not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
(f) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and
designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering
the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber
harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed
and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
(g) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where
the operation of machinery used in timber harvesting results in
the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an
unscarified strip of vegetation of at least 75 feet, horizontal
distance, in width for slopes up to 10% shall be retained
between the exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For each tenpercent
increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be
increased by 20 feet, horizontal distance. The provisions of this
subsection apply only to a face sloping toward the water body
or wetland; provided, however, that no portion of such exposed
mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than 25 feet,
horizontal distance, to the normal high-water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland.
P. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting.
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall
be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75
feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line,
except to remove safety hazards. Elsewhere, in any Resource
Protection District, the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in
that district.
(2) Except in areas as described in Subsection P(1), above, and except
to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of
land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the
normal high-water line of a great pond or a river flowing to a great
pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body,
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of
vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:321
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet
in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a
forested canopy is not present) as measured from the outer
limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to
exceed six feet in width as measured between tree trunks and/
or shrub stems is allowed, provided that a cleared line of sight
to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed,
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation is maintained.
[1] For the purposes of § 478-15P(2)(b), a "well-distributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond or a river or
stream flowing to a great pond, shall be defined as
maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each twentyfive-
foot by fifty-foot rectangular (1,250 square feet) area
as determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2 feet Above
Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 to < 4 1
4 to < 8 2
8 to < 12 4
12 or greater 8
[2] Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and
wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per twenty-fivefoot
by fifty-foot rectangular area.
NOTE: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a
twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot plot contains four trees
between two and four inches in diameter, two trees
between four and eight inches in diameter, three trees
between eight and 12 inches in diameter, and two trees
over 12 inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(4x1)+(2x2) + (3x4) + (2x8) = 36 points
Thus, the twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot plot contains trees
worth 36 points. Trees totaling 12 points (36- 24 =12)
may be removed from the plot, provided that no cleared
openings are created.
[3] The following shall govern in applying this point system:
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:322
[a] The twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular plots
must be established where the landowner or lessee
proposes clearing within the required buffer;
[b] Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not
overlap a previous plot;
[c] Any plot not containing the required points must have
no vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by
this chapter;
[d] Any plot containing the required points may have
vegetation removed down to the minimum points
required or as otherwise allowed by this chapter;
[e] Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the
points on any twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular
area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in
diameter.
[4] For the purposes of § 478-15P(2)(b), "other natural
vegetation" is defined as retaining existing vegetation
under three feet in height and other ground cover and
retaining at least five saplings less than two inches in
diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level for each twentyfive-
foot by fifty-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two inches in diameter can
be removed until five saplings have been recruited into the
plot.
[5] Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40%
of the total volume of trees four inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may
be removed in any ten-year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing
vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover,
including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described in § 478-15P(2) and (2)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new
tree growth is present.
(f) Section 478-15P(2) does not apply to those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:323
long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area
necessary.
(3) At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a
great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and 75 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland,
there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten-year period, selective
cutting of not more than 40% of the volume of trees four inches or
more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. Tree
removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses
shall be included in the forty-percent calculation. For the purposes
of these standards, volume may be considered to be equivalent to
basal area.
(a) In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including,
but not limited to, principal and accessory structures,
driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed, in the
aggregate, 25% of the lot area within the Shoreland Zone or
10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, including land
previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the
General Development Districts.
(4) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
chapter.
(5) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily
shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under
the provisions of § 478-15P.
Q. Erosion and sedimentation control.
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other
similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and
which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the
permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features, such as hay bales, silt
fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures, such as retaining walls or
rip-rap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall
be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of
steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-15
405:324
avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed
as closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all
aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and
shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount of
exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to
reduce the potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively
worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective
measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within
nine months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one
bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch
of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other
suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to
avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the
use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be
protected from erosion from water flowing through them.
Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a twenty-five-year storm or greater, and shall be
stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
R. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the
proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained without
causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass
soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during
or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste
disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar
intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified
persons may include Maine-certified soil scientists, Maine-registered
professional engineers, Maine-State-certified geologists and other
persons who have training and experience in the recognition and
evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the
analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and
water areas, maximum groundwater elevation, presence of ledge,
drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator
deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for
a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
S. Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or in
§ 478-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-15
405:325
§ 478-16. Administration.
combination with other activities or substances, will impair designated
uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or
wetland.
T. Archaeological site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural
development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or
eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as
determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review
and comment, at least 20 days prior to action being taken by the
permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the
application.
NOTE: Municipal officials should contact the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission for the listing and location of historic places
in their community.
A. Administering bodies and agents.
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed or reappointed annually by July 1.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in
accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance
with the provisions of state law.
B. Permits required. After the effective date of this chapter, no person
shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of
land or structure requiring a permit in the district in which such activity
or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or
structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is
issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall have a copy of the permit
on site while the work authorized by the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road
culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the
culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent
sedimentation of the water, and the crossing does not block
fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as
the excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State
§ 478-15 MADISON CODE § 478-16
405:326
Historic Preservation Officer's Level 1 or Level 2 approved list, and
unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means
of adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization
measures.
(3) Any permit required by this chapter shall be in addition to any
other permit required by other law or ordinance.
C. Permit application.
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application,
including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality,
to the appropriate official as indicated in § 478-14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can
show evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an
agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner with
authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and
correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each application
the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including
the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be
submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system.
D. Procedure for administering permits.
(1) Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in
§ 478-14, shall notify the applicant in writing either that the
application is a complete application, or, if the application is
incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to make
the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within 35 days
of receiving a completed application. However, if the Planning
Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the
application shall occur within 35 days after the first available date
on the Planning Board's agenda following receipt of the completed
application, or within 35 days of the public hearing, if the proposed
use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes
and provisions of this chapter.
§ 478-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-16
405:327
(2) The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed
land use activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions
of this chapter.
(3) After the submission of a complete application to the Planning
Board, the Board shall approve an application or approve it with
conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information
presented that the proposed use:
(a) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(b) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
(c) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(d) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
(e) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points
of access to inland waters;
(f) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as
designated in the comprehensive plan;
(g) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use; and
(h) Is in conformance with the provisions of § 478-15, Land use
standards.
(4) If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the
reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval
shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would
violate any other local ordinance, or regulation or statute
administered by the municipality.
E. Special exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in § 478-16D
above, excepting structure setback requirements, the Planning Board
may approve a permit for a single-family residential structure in a
Resource Protection District, provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within
the Resource Protection District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was
established and recorded in the registry of deeds of the county in
which the lot is located before the adoption of the Resource
Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other
improvements are:
§ 478-16 MADISON CODE § 478-16
405:328
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the one-hundred-year
floodplain along rivers and artificially formed great ponds
along rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as
delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least
one foot above the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation; and
the development is otherwise in compliance with any
applicable municipal floodplain ordinance. If the floodway is
not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency
Maps, it is deemed to be 1/2 the width of the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar
overhanging extensions, of all principal and accessory structures is
limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This limitation shall not
be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are
set back from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent,
but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the
greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the
depth of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion,
the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its
proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the use
of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made within
one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one
additional year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall
expire.
G. Installation of public utility service. A public utility, water district,
sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may not install
services to any new structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless
written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local
permits required under this chapter or any previous ordinance has been
issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written
arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and the
utility.
H. Appeals.
(1) Powers and duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals
shall have the following powers:
§ 478-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-16
405:329
(a) Administrative appeals: to hear and decide administrative
appeals, on an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to
act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this chapter;
and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo
basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in
his or her review of and action on a permit application under
this chapter. Any order, requirement, decision or determination
made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this chapter is not
appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance appeals: to authorize variances upon appeal, within
the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(2) Variance appeals. Variances may be granted only under the
following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional
requirements, including, but not limited to, lot width, structure
height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses
otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
(c) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
[1] The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions
of § 478-15 except for the specific provision which has
created the nonconformity and from which relief is sought;
and
[2] The strict application of the terms of this chapter would
result in undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" shall
mean:
[a] That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable
return unless a variance is granted;
[b] That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
[c] That the granting of a variance will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and
[d] That the hardship is not the result of action taken by
the applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding § 478-16H(2)(c)[2] above, the Board of
Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a residential
§ 478-16 MADISON CODE § 478-16
405:330
dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible
to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses
the dwelling. The Board shall restrict any variance granted
under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment
or the construction of structures necessary for access to or
egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability.
The Board may impose conditions on the variance, including
limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the
time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling.
The term "structures necessary for access to or egress from
the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof systems
necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as
strictly as possible in order to ensure conformance with the
purposes and provisions of this chapter to the greatest extent
possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a
variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the
variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and
all supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be
forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior
to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from
the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals
shall be made part of the record and shall be taken into
consideration by the Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative appeals.
(a) When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Board of Appeals shall hold a "de
novo" hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider
new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting
in a "de novo" capacity, the Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent
analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
(b) When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning
Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse the
decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the
decision was contrary to specific provisions of the chapter or
contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The
Board of Appeals may only review the record of the
proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals
shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not
presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may
receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board of
Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board
§ 478-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-16
405:331
proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand
the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal procedure.
(a) Making an appeal.
[1] An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the
Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board,
except for enforcement-related matters as described in
§ 478-16H(1)(a) above. Such an appeal shall be taken
within 30 days of the date of the official, written decision
appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board,
upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty-day
requirement.
[2] Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the
Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal which
includes:
[a] A concise written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why the appeal or variance should be
granted.
[b] A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of
existing buildings and structures and other physical
features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
[3] Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal
or a variance, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
[4] The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an
administrative appeal or a request for a variance within 35
days of its receipt of a complete written application, unless
this time period is extended by the parties.
(b) Decision by the Board of Appeals.
[1] A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
[2] The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
[3] The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and
variance appeals within 35 days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
[4] The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for
its decision, including a statement of the facts found and
§ 478-16 MADISON CODE § 478-16
405:332
conclusions reached by the Board. The Board shall cause
written notice of its decision to be mailed or handdelivered
to the applicant and to the Department of
Environmental Protection within seven days of the Board's
decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of
Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code
Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691, Subsection 3F, any aggrieved party who participated as a
party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take
an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with state laws within
45 days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration.
(a) In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 Subsection 3F, the
Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within 45 days
of its prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a
decision must be filed within 10 days of the decision that is
being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken
on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within 45
days of the date of the vote on the original decision.
Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote of
the majority of the Board members originally voting on the
decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner,
Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and other parties
of interest, including abuttors and those who testified at the
original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional
hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony.
(b) Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be
made within 15 days after the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. If the Code Enforcement Officer
shall find that any provision of this chapter is being violated, he
or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of
illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work being done,
removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of
nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted
to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent
record.
§ 478-16 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-16
405:333
§ 478-17. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site
inspections to insure compliance with all applicable laws and
conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of
alleged violations of this chapter.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of
all essential transactions of the office, including applications
submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals,
court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and
fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this record
shall be submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land and
Water Quality within the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(3) Legal actions. When the above action does not result in the
correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the
Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer,
are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter
in the name of the municipality. The municipal officers, or their
authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this chapter and recovering fines without Court action.
Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to
continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the
illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct
result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official
and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless
the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard
to public health and safety or will result in substantial
environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including, but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner's agent or a contractor, who violates any provision or
requirement of this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with
30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor
more than $2,500 per violation for each day that the violation
continues. However, in a Resource Protection District, the
maximum penalty is increased to $5,000 (30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452).
§ 478-16 MADISON CODE § 478-17
405:334
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or structure which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this chapter; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance
has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease,
of plants and/or animals, including but not limited to forages and sod
crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry
and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
greenhouse products. Agriculture does not include forest management and
timber harvesting activities.
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
BASAL AREA — The area of crosssection of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.
BASEMENT — Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of
six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing
ground level.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more
parties in temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents,
recreational vehicles or other shelters.
CANOPY — The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a
wooded area.
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than
a "home occupation," defined below, the intent and result of which activity
is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
DEVELOPMENT — A change in land use involving alteration of the land,
water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other
construction not naturally occurring.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore
frontage and height.
§ 478-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-17
405:335
DISABILITY — Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement,
congenital defect or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident,
disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap,
by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway less than 500 feet in length serving
two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Gas, electrical or communication facilities;
steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal
sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks.
Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings
which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume
of a structure, including all extensions, such as, but not limited to, attached
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
EXPANSION OF USE — The addition of one or more months to a use's
operating season; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a
particular use.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one-hundredyear
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot in height.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
FORESTED WETLAND — A freshwater wetland dominated by woody
vegetation that is six meters tall (approximately 20 feet) or taller.
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES — Timber cruising and other forest
resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application,
management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities,
§ 478-17 MADISON CODE § 478-17
405:336
exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
FRESHWATER WETLAND —
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, inland waters and that cannot be located
away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to commercial
and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail
and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities,
shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne
transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water
that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses
that primarily provide general public access to inland waters.
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres except
for the purposes of this chapter, where the artificially formed or increased
inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner.
GROUND COVER — Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the
partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE — The vertical distance between the mean
original (prior to construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure
and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples,
antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than
forested wetlands, which are:
Of 10 or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream
or brook, such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is
in excess of 10 acres; and
(1)
Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
(2)
A.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions
of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
B.
§ 478-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-17
405:337
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which is customarily
conducted on or in a residential structure or property and which is:
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE — Any change in a
structure or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional
standard(s) creating the nonconformity, such as, but not limited to,
reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property
changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional
standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of
nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity
with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area
than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally, provided that the expansion extends
no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly
shaped structures.
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITE — An area of land which is not associated
with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only
one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves site
improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking
area, fireplace, or tent platform.
INDUSTRIAL — The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
INSTITUTIONAL — A nonprofit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a
church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or
operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or
created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber
harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.
LICENSED FORESTER — A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter
76.
LOT AREA — The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot,
minus land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
Clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses; and
A.
Which employs no more than two persons other than family members
residing in the home.
B.
§ 478-17 MADISON CODE § 478-17
405:338
MARINA — A business establishment having frontage on navigable water
and, as its principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking
facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services, such as
boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine
fuel service facilities.
MARKET VALUE — The estimated price a property will bring in the open
market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing
seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Any operation within any twelve-month period
which removes more than 100 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and
to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of
a lot. When only two lot lines extend into the Shoreland Zone, both lot lines
shall be considered to be side lot lines.
MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL — A residential structure containing three or
more residential dwelling units.
NATIVE — Indigenous to the local forests.
NONCONFORMING CONDITION — Nonconforming lot, structure or use
which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this
chapter or subsequent amendment took effect.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, does not meet the area,
frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which does not meet any
one or more of the following dimensional requirements; setback, height, or
lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence
at the time this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect.
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or
parts thereof which is not allowed in the district in which it is situated, but
which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the
time this chapter or subsequent amendments took effect.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE — That line which is apparent from visible
markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of
the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous
with rivers and great ponds that support nonforested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water
§ 478-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-17
405:339
level of the river or great pond during the period of normal high water are
considered part of the river or great pond.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND
USES EXTENDING OVER OR BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE
OR WITHIN A WETLAND —
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building or
use on the same premises.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same premises.
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or
otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soil series as described and
identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure-time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat-launching facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pickup camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its
tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor
Vehicles.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — A system intended to replace:
Temporary: structures which remain in or over the water for less than
seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
A.
Permanent: structures which remain in or over the water for seven
months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months.
B.
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
A.
§ 478-17 MADISON CODE § 478-17
405:340
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and
toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time period
rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
RESIDUAL BASAL AREA — The average of the basal area of trees remaining
on a harvested site.
RIPRAP — Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six inches in diameter,
used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground
slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
RIVER — A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of
25 square miles to its mouth.
ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the
repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
SERVICE DROP — Any utility line extension which does not cross or run
beneath any portion of a water body provided that:
SETBACK — The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water
line of a water body or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the
nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or
area.
SHORE FRONTAGE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.
SHORELAND ZONE — The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within
250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream.
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
In the case of electric service:
The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting
service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
(1)
(2) The total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
A.
In the case of telephone service:
The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles; or
(1)
The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
(2)
B.
§ 478-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-17
405:341
SHORELINE — The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a wetland.
SKID ROAD or SKID TRAIL — A route repeatedly used by forwarding
machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to the
yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal excavation.
SLASH — The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after
a timber harvest.
STREAM — A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond
or the confluence of two perennial streams as depicted on the most recent
edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic
map, or, if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point
where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or
wetland within the shoreland area.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, exclusive
of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated
with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes
structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and
satellite dishes.
SUBSTANTIAL START — Completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
dispose of waste or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth;
includes, but is not limited to, septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered
cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. § 414, any surface wastewater
disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or wastewater
treatment system.
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of
trees in the Shoreland Zone on a lot that has less than two acres within
the Shoreland Zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting
or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to § 478-15P, Clearing or
removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting.
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial
vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which
is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. "Tributary stream"
does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
§ 478-17 MADISON CODE § 478-17
405:342
human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined
elsewhere in this chapter, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the Shoreland Zone of the receiving water body or
wetland.
NOTE: Water setback requirements apply to tributary streams within the
Shoreland Zone.
UPLAND EDGE OF A WETLAND — The boundary between upland and
wetland. For purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed
where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support
wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland
vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six
meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, and other plants, including, without
limitation, trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/
2 feet above ground level.
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.
WATER BODY — Any great pond, river or stream.
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under,
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not
be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and
cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber-harvesting equipment and related activities.
WETLAND — A freshwater wetland.
WOODY VEGETATION — Live trees or woody, nonherbaceous shrubs.
Chapter 484
SITE REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 7.
Street design and construction
standards — See Ch. 339.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 490.
§ 478-17 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 478-17
405:343

ARTICLE I
Site Plan Review Requirements and General Provisions
§ 484-1. Applicability.
§ 484-2. Administration and authority.
A. Site plan review does not apply to single- and two-family dwelling units,
home occupations, or to agricultural land management and forest
management practices, as defined.
B. Site plan review does apply to the following development proposals:
(1) New commercial, retail, industrial and institutional structures;
(2) Multiple-family dwellings (as defined) and all accessory structures
to same, whether attached or detached, to the principal structure;
(3) Any expansion of an existing commercial, retail, industrial,
institutional or multifamily structure where the expansion adds 800
square feet or more;
(4) New commercial, retail, industrial and institutional land uses of
two acres or more;
(5) Any expansion, by 0.5 acre or more, of a commercial, retail,
industrial, institutional or multifamily land use located on two acres
or more.
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer
and the Planning Board. All applications for site plan review shall be
made to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Madison Planning Board is responsible for reviewing and
approving applications for site plan review under this chapter. The
Planning Board shall decide if:
(1) A proposed development requires site plan review under § 484-1B
of this chapter.
(2) A site plan application is, in fact, complete, and if not, what
additional items or information must be submitted.
(3) A site plan application shall be approved or denied.
(4) Expansions of or changes to an existing approved site plan must be
reviewed under § 484-7 of this chapter.
(5) The applicant is exempt from review.
C. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Home Rule powers as provided for
in Article VII-A of the Maine Constitution, and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
§ 484-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-3
405:345
§ 484-3. No building permit without site plan approval.
The Code Enforcement Officer may not issue a permit for site preparation,
building demolition, or building construction until a site plan has been
approved by the Planning Board, and a person may not engage in any of
these activities without building or demolition permits.
§ 484-3 MADISON CODE § 484-3
405:346
ARTICLE II
Application Procedure
§ 484-4. Multi-stage process.
Site plan reviews are conducted in two or more stages, in order for the Town
and applicant to comply with the requirements of this chapter in an efficient
manner:
§ 484-5. Pre-application meeting.
§ 484-6. Application process.
A. A pre-application process, as described in § 484-5 of this chapter.
B. A formal application and review process for approving a proposed
development, as described in § 484-6 of this chapter.
C. If a proposed development is unusually complex, or will require
additional levels of approval from state or federal agencies, the
Planning Board may issue a conditional approval, with final review to
follow.
D. A revision to a previously approved plan may be subject to further
review, as described in § 484-7 of this chapter.
A. A prospective applicant shall contact the Code Enforcement Officer to
schedule a pre-application meeting with the Planning Board. The preapplication
meeting is intended to provide an opportunity for the
applicant to present a concept (sketch) plan to the Board, to discuss
specific ordinance requirements, or to identify concerns that should be
addressed in the application.
B. In order to be placed on the agenda for a pre-application meeting, the
prospective applicant must provide the information required by § 484-9
of this chapter to the Town Office no less than seven days prior to the
meeting. [Amended 6-11-2018]
C. The Board's advice at the time of pre-application shall not constitute
review or comment on the merits of the application. The Board may
discuss timing of the application and other state or federal permitting
procedures, identify specific concerns or issues to be addressed in the
application, specify supplemental information to be required, or may
grant waivers for submission requirements. The Board may also
arrange with the prospective applicant to visit the development site for
the purpose of gaining a better perspective on the proposal.
D. At the time of the pre-application meeting, if not before, the prospective
applicant shall receive a copy of this chapter at no cost.
A. All applications shall be made on site plan application forms available
from the Town Office, and contain the elements listed in § 484-10 of this
§ 484-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-6
405:347
chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the Town office, together
with required fees. The Town Office shall issue a dated receipt for the
application and fees.
B. When an application has been submitted, the Town Office will
immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer and place
consideration of the application on the agenda for the next Planning
Board meeting. In order to be placed on the agenda, an application
must be submitted no less than 10 days prior to a scheduled meeting.
C. The Planning Board, at its next scheduled meeting, shall determine
whether the application is complete. If the application is complete, the
Board shall so notify the applicant. If the application is not complete,
the Board shall provide a written listing of the items that are yet to be
submitted for a complete application.
D. Within 20 days after the Planning Board determines that the application
is complete, and before taking final action thereon, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing.
E. Notice of the application and public hearing shall be published in a local
newspaper at least 10 days in advance of the required public hearing.
Notice of the application shall also be posted in an accessible, public
location and mailed to each landowner abutting or adjacent to the
proposed development. Landowners shall be considered to be those
against whom property taxes are assessed. Failure of any person to
receive a notice of application shall not necessitate another notification,
or invalidate any action of the Board. The purpose of the notification
shall be to inform the general public and abutters that a public hearing
is to be held on a pending application.
F. A public hearing shall be held, at which the applicant and members of
the public shall be given the opportunity to present testimony or
evidence in support of or opposed to the application. The hearing shall
be informal, at the discretion of the Chairman of the Board, allowing the
Board and attendees to ask questions of the applicant.
G. Within 14 days of the public hearing, or within such other time limit as
may be mutually agreed to, the Planning Board shall prepare written
findings of fact and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application. The Board shall limit its review to the criteria set forth in
this chapter. The Board may consult with the applicant or any other
party in completing its review. In all instances, the burden of proof shall
be upon the person making the application. The Board shall inform the
applicant of its decision in writing, and in cases of denial or approval
with conditions, reasons for such action shall be stated, as required by 1
M.R.S.A. § 407. A copy of the Board's decision shall be filed with the
CEO.
(1) When an application is found to require additional information or
study or detailed engineering design, or when state or federal
permit(s) have not yet been issued, the Planning Board may make
§ 484-6 MADISON CODE § 484-6
405:348
§ 484-7. Revisions.
§ 484-8. Appeals.
its approval conditional on items yet to come. The conditional
approval shall give the applicant a specified number of days in
which to provide the required information, at which time the Board
may grant final approval. No construction or other development
work may commence prior to final approval.
H. A project must be commenced within 12 months of final approval and
completed within 24 months. After 24 months, the approval shall be
deemed to have expired unless a special schedule has been approved by
the Planning Board or an extension has been granted by it. Any
deviation from the project as approved shall require a revision to the
approval.
A. A minor revision to an approved plan may be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Minor revisions are those that do not involve the
creation of additional impervious surface or building area, or the
relocation of lot boundaries, buildings, drainage structures, or paved
areas.
(1) The applicant shall submit a statement identifying the proposed
change and rationale for it. If the changes require re-drawing of the
plans, the applicant shall provide a copy of the new plans.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny the proposed
changes within five working days. The Code Enforcement Officer
may refer the revision to the Planning Board for a decision if he or
she determines that the change is substantial.
B. A major revision to an approved plan shall be reviewed and may be
approved by the Planning Board.
(1) The applicant shall submit a revised plan to the Board for review,
clearly identifying the changes proposed. Supplemental materials
shall only be required if they have a direct bearing on the proposed
changes.
(2) A public hearing is not mandatory for a revision, but the Board may
decide to hold a public hearing if it determines that the proposed
change may impact public services or abutting properties. Notice
and hearing requirements shall be in accordance with § 484-6E of
this chapter.
A. If the Planning Board disapproves an application or grants approval
with conditions that are objectionable to the applicant, any abutting
landowner, or any aggrieved party, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of this chapter do not apply, or that the true intent and
meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or wrongfully
interpreted, the applicant, an abutting landowner, or aggrieved party
§ 484-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-8
405:349
may appeal the decision of the Planning Board in writing to the Board
of Appeals within 30 days of the Planning Board's decision. The Board
of Appeals' review will be limited to a determination as to whether a
reasonable factual basis exists to support the Planning Board's decision
or the Planning Board's decision was clearly contrary to the provisions
of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may sustain or reverse a Planning
Board decision and remand the application to the Planning Board for
further review. When a Planning Board decision is reversed, the Board
of Appeals will articulate both the factual premises and the reasoning
that support the reversal.
B. The decision of the Board of Appeals may be appealed by any aggrieved
party to Somerset County Superior Court within 30 days of the date of
the Board's decision.
§ 484-8 MADISON CODE § 484-8
405:350
ARTICLE III
Site Plan Requirements
§ 484-9. Pre-application requirements.
The following information is required for pre-application review under
§ 484-5: a sketch of the proposed property (may be hand-drawn but should
be to scale) with the following:
§ 484-10. Site plan submission requirements.
The following information is required for site plan submission:
A. Project name, applicant and designer.
B. Date, North arrow, scale.
C. Perimeter boundaries, area and acreage of proposed development and
preliminary building footprints, any area reserved for future
development.
D. Tentative locations of rights-of-way and future lot lines or easements.
E. A copy of the USDA soil survey map for the area, with the parcel
outlined on the map.
F. Land cover areas, i.e., woods, fields.
G. General natural features of the area to be developed: areas of steep
slopes, bedrock outcrops, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains.
H. Tentative location of proposed structures; locations of existing
structures and neighboring land uses.
A. Application fees: as provided for in § 484-12 of this chapter.
B. Application information. An applicant for site plan review shall submit
the following as part of the application package:
(1) Town of Madison site plan application form.
(2) Project name.
(3) Name, address, phone number of applicant.
(4) Name, address, phone number of owner.
(5) Name, address, phone number of authorized representative.
(6) Name, registration number, address, phone number of engineer,
surveyor, architect, landscape architect or planner.
(7) Ownership interest of applicant in property and abutting property,
supported by a photocopy of a deed, option to purchase, contract to
purchase, or a lease.
§ 484-9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-10
405:351
(8) Tax Map and lot numbers.
(9) Acreage to be developed.
(10) Covenants, deed restrictions, easements, or rights-of-way existing
or planned.
(11) Existing use of the property.
(12) Name, address, map and lot number of abutting landowners.
(13) Variances requested from the appropriate issuing authority.
C. Site plan requirements. The site plan map must consist of three paper
prints plus one Mylar (reproducible) copy, with a maximum size of 30
inches by 48 inches and at a scale of between one inch equals 40 feet
and one inch equals 100 feet. The plan must include the following:
(1) Date, title, scale, North arrow, name of project.
(2) A boundary outline with dimensions and lot area, in relation to
surrounding streets, walls and adjoining land uses.
(3) Names and addresses of present landowners and abutting
landowners.
(4) Locations of existing buildings and other structures, fire hydrants,
streetlights, utility poles, underground water and sewer facilities,
existing trees greater than 10 inches in diameter and other natural
landscape features.
(5) Preliminary design drawings of site plans, floor plans, elevations in
sufficient detail to show access, layout and building construction or
modification.
(6) Location and dimension of all proposed buildings, and private and
public utilities.
(7) Location map.
(8) All existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements, shown on
plan.
(9) Location and accurate dimensions of streets, width of pavement,
parking, loading and associated curbing.
(10) Identification and boundaries of any shoreland zoning districts
affecting the property.
(11) A signature block for approval by the Planning Board.
D. Supporting documents:
§ 484-10 MADISON CODE § 484-10
405:352
(1) A circulation plan noting all pedestrian and vehicle traffic flow, both
within the development and in terms of ingress and egress impact
on surrounding road systems.
(2) The size and proposed location of water supply and sewage
disposal systems on the property and provision for future
expansion or replacement of those systems.
(3) A landscaping plan indicating grade change, vegetation to be
preserved, new plantings used to stabilize areas of cut and fill and
for screening; the size, location, purpose and type of vegetation.
(4) A stormwater management plan, including location, elevation,
layout of catch basins, and other surface and subsurface drainage
features. If the development will create more than 10,000 square
feet of new impervious surface, the stormwater management plan
must be designed by a registered professional engineer.
(5) A topographical plan, at two-foot intervals, showing existing and
proposed contours and finished grade elevations. [Amended
6-11-2018]
(6) An erosion control plan.
(7) Plans, profiles, and cross-sections of roads, driveways, and parking
areas proposed to be added to the site.
(8) Identification of soils with severe or very severe limitations for the
type of development proposed in accordance with the USDA
medium-intensity soil survey for Somerset County. If soils identified
by the survey as having severe or very severe limitations are to be
developed, a high-intensity soil survey may be required.
(9) Locations of any critical areas of natural or cultural resources,
including but not limited to areas of potential archaeological
significance, wetlands, vernal pools, critical wildlife habitat,
floodplains, and the location of any sand and gravel aquifers. If any
of these areas will be affected by the development, a plan to
mitigate or manage impacts to the resource shall be supplied.
(10) Any other exhibits or data deemed necessary by the Planning
Board to evaluate the proposed development for compliance with
the review criteria of this chapter.
(11) Construction schedule, costs and performance guarantee
arrangement, along with appropriate statements of proof of
financial capability and a statement of relationship between
developer, design consultant and project contractor.
(12) Design drawing of any signs or other display features of the
development.
E. Signed statements from the following municipal officials:
§ 484-10 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-10
405:353
§ 484-11. Waiver or modification of application requirements.
The Planning Board, on the written petition of the applicant, may waive,
in its sole discretion, any of the submission requirements of § 484-10 of
this chapter, or otherwise modify the application requirements, including
application fees and documentation, based on the unique circumstances of
the plans or site and provided such waiver does not unduly restrict the
review process. The Board shall make a written record of its decision to
waive requirements.
§ 484-12. Fee schedule.
The Board of Selectmen shall adopt and from time to time amend a fee
schedule for applications submitted under this chapter. The fees to be
assessed shall be at least sufficient to pay for the Town's cost of processing
the application, including public hearing notice expenses. Any fee schedule
so adopted shall become effective 30 days following its adoption.
(1) The Madison Water District as to the conditions under which the
District will supply water and approval of the size and location of
mains, valves, and hydrants proposed.
(2) The Fire Chief approving the features related to fire and
emergency protection.
(3) The Superintendent of the Anson-Madison Sewer District as to the
conditions under which the Sewer District will provide sewage
disposal service, or a statement relative to the capacity of the
sewage disposal system to treat septic tank pumping.
(4) The Road Commissioner regarding the adequacy and design of
drainage and street systems, both proposed and existing.
(5) The Police Chief or county sheriff relative to security and traffic
circulation, if required by the Planning Board.
(6) Where the use may involve the production of a substantial amount
of waste, the applicant shall request review by the Town Manager
of a waste management plan developed in accordance with
§ 484-25.
(7) Any other agency or committee deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
§ 484-10 MADISON CODE § 484-12
405:354
ARTICLE IV
Review Standards
§ 484-13. Criteria to be considered.
The Planning Board shall consider the following criteria before granting
approval and shall determine that for all site review applications:
A. The proposed development will not result in undue water or air
pollution on and off site. In making this determination it shall at least
consider the elevation of land above sea level and its relation to the
floodplains, the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to
adequately support waste disposal; the slope of the land and its effect
on effluents; the availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and the
applicable state and local health and water resources regulations;
B. The proposed development has sufficient water available for the
reasonably foreseeable needs of the proposed development, including,
but not limited to, potable water and fire control water;
C. The proposed development will not cause an unreasonable burden on
an existing water supply, including private groundwater or the Madison
Water District, whichever is to be utilized;
D. The proposed development will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or
reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous
or unhealthy condition may result both on and off site. If the
development proposes to discharge stormwater runoff at an increased
rate compared to preapplication rate into a municipal stormwater
system, then the developer shall improve or pay for the improvement of
such municipal stormwater system so that it will have the capacity to
handle such an increase plus 25% extra capacity;
E. The proposed development will not cause unreasonable highway or
public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the
highways or public roads existing or proposed both on and off site. If
the developer is required to submit a traffic impact analysis for off-site
traffic, and as a result changes and/or improvements are needed on
municipal-owned or -maintained public ways, the developer shall make
or pay for such changes and/or improvements;
F. The proposed development will provide for adequate sewage disposal;
G. The proposed development will not cause an unreasonable burden on
the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid waste and sewage, if
municipal services are to be utilized, and has made adequate provision
for such disposal. If demolition debris, stumps, rock and brush are to be
disposed of at a municipal site, the costs of such disposal shall be paid
for by the developer. If the development will use more than 33 1/3% of
the available excess capacity of any portion of the municipal sewage
collection system, treatment facility and/or its discharge permits, the
§ 484-13 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-13
405:355
developer shall pay for the replacement of the available excess capacity
needed by the development;
H. The proposed development will not have an undue adverse effect on the
scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites or rare
and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or
visual access to the shoreline;
I. The proposed development is in conformance with all Town of Madison
ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, development plans or land use
plans;
J. The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet
the above-stated standards;
K. Whenever situated, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of any pond, lake
or river, the proposed development will not adversely affect the quality
of that body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of that body
of water and complies with Chapter 478, Shoreland Zoning, of the Code
of the Town of Madison;
L. The proposed development will not, alone or in conjunction with
existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of
groundwater both on and off site;
M. The applicant will determine, based on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, whether the project is in a flood-prone area. If
the project, or any part of it, is in such an area, the applicant will
determine the one-hundred-year flood elevation and flood hazard
boundaries within the project. The proposed project plan shall include a
condition of plat approval requiring that principal structures on lots in
the project shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the
basement, at least one foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation;
and
N. The proposed development will meet all of the general performance
standards.
§ 484-13 MADISON CODE § 484-13
405:356
ARTICLE V
General Performance Standards
§ 484-14. Access to lots.
§ 484-15. Air emissions.
No emission of dust, ash, smoke or other particulate matter or gases and
chemicals shall be allowed which can cause damage to human or animal
health, vegetation, or property by reason of concentration or toxicity, which
can cause soiling beyond the property boundaries, orwhich fails to meet or
cannot meet the standards set by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 484-16. Buffers and screening.
A. No building permit shall be issued to erect any structure on a lot
without frontage on a public way unless an access road has been
constructed within a deeded right-of-way a minimum of 50 feet in width.
The access road shall be constructed to the standards of § 484-32 of this
chapter or to the standards of Chapter 339, Street Design and
Construction Standards.
B. No structure shall have a driveway of more than 100 feet unless the
access road meets the construction standards of § 484-32 or of Chapter
339, Street Design and Construction Standards, of the Code of the
Town of Madison.
A. Buffering of adjacent uses. A buffer shall be provided between any
existing residential use or property and any proposed activity that, by
the presence of noise, dust, light, traffic, or industrial activity, would
have a deleterious effect on residential uses. A buffer shall also be
established in cases where the proposed activity would pose a potential
attraction to children.
(1) A visual buffer must be designed to provide a year-round visual
screen of all portions of the development in order to minimize
impacts. It may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms, rocks,
boulders, mounds, or a combination thereof.
(2) The width of the buffer may vary depending on the density of
development. A buffer with dense plantings, fencing, or changes in
grade should be 10 feet to 15 feet in width. A (naturally) vegetated
buffer should be a minimum of 25 feet in width.
(3) Areas adjacent to service, loading, or storage areas should be
screened by dense planting, berms, fencing, or a combination
thereof sufficient to substantially eliminate the visual appearance
of the area.
(4) Sites with outside storage of materials such as stacks of inventory,
junkyards, refuse piles, auto parts, or with machinery not within an
§ 484-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-16
405:357
§ 484-17. Construction standards.
All construction subject to this chapter shall comply with Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code adopted pursuant to 10 M.R.S.A. § 9271 et seq.
§ 484-18. Storage of flammable or explosive materials.
§ 484-19. Glare.
Lighting may be used which serves security, safety and operational needs
but which does not directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects on
abutting properties or which would impair the vision of a vehicle operator
on adjacent roadways. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so
that the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists,
pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings. Direct or indirect illumination shall
not exceed 0.5 footcandle upon abutting residential properties.
§ 484-20. Landscaping.
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical,
by minimizing tree removal and grade changes. Landscaping and vegetative
enclosed structure, shall be screened from view by a stockade
fence or dense evergreen hedge. Further, when site conditions may
present a danger to children, the site shall be secured with fencing
or other means sufficient to deter small children from entering.
B. Screening of parking areas. Outside of the downtown area, where the
area between the street and the front of the building is used for parking
or vehicle movement, separation or buffering must be provided to avoid
distraction to motorists from movement or glare in the parking lot and
to provide distinct points of access into the site. Unless the parking
areas are located more than 40 feet from the road, a buffer providing at
least three feet of height along the front of the parking area shall be
established. The buffer may consist of a vegetative hedge, berms, walls,
fences, or any combination thereof.
A. All flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in a
manner and location which is in compliance with regulations of federal,
state and local authorities with jurisdiction over the particular
materials involved.
B. For aboveground storage of fuel, chemicals, industrial wastes, and
potentially harmful raw materials, an impermeable diked area shall be
provided; the diked area must be sized to contain the total volume of
fuel tanks and piping; roofed to prevent accumulation of rainwater in
the diked area and shall be properly vented. There shall be no drains in
the facility. All concrete shall be designed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maine when required by the Board. Storage
tanks for "home heating oil" and diesel fuel, not exceeding 275 gallons
in size, are exempted from this requirement.
§ 484-16 MADISON CODE § 484-20
405:358
buffers shall be added to soften, screen, or enhance the physical design of
structures and parking areas to avoid the encroachment of the proposed use
on abutting land uses.
§ 484-21. Groundwater impacts.
§ 484-22. Sound.
A. The development will demonstrate that it will not increase the
contaminant concentration in the groundwater to more than the State's
Primary Drinking Water Standard or Secondary Drinking Water
Standard, nor will it decrease the quantity of groundwater available on
nearby properties below that needed to support existing uses, potential
expansions of existing uses or allowable uses.
(1) If groundwater contains preexisting contaminants in excess of the
primary standards, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated.
(2) If groundwater contains preexisting contaminants in excess of the
secondary standards, the development shall not cause the
concentration of the parameters in question to exceed 150% of the
ambient concentration.
B. An assessment of the impacts of the development on groundwater may
be required by the Planning Board if the development will be located
over a mapped sand and gravel aquifer, or if the development involves
extraction of groundwater to be used off-site. The assessment shall be
prepared by a certified geologist or registered professional engineer
and shall include the following:
(1) A map showing the basic soil types.
(2) The depth to the water table at representative points throughout
the development and presumed groundwater flow directions.
(3) Drainage conditions throughout the development.
(4) Data on the existing groundwater quality and availability, either
from test wells in the development or from existing wells on
neighboring properties.
(5) An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the development on
groundwater resources. The evaluation shall, at a minimum,
include a projection of post-development water quality and
quantity, including fluctuations in water table levels and nitrate
concentrations.
(6) A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the development and
within 200 feet of the development boundaries.
A. Sound from routine operation.
§ 484-20 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-22
405:359
§ 484-23. Off-street parking and loading.
(1) The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular or frequent or intermittent source of sound produced by
any activity shall be limited by the time period and land use which
it abuts listed below. Sound levels shall be measured at least four
feet above ground at the property boundary of the abutting
landowner.
(2) Sound levels determined on a one-hour equivalent sound basis from
routine operations of the development [measured in dB(A) scale]
shall satisfy the following levels:
Neighboring Use
7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
7:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Residential 60 dB(A) 50 dB(A)
Commercial 70 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
Industrial 70 dB(A) 60 dB(A)
B. Sound from construction activities. Sound from construction activities
shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Sound from construction activities conducted between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. or during daylight hours, whichever is longer, is
exempt from regulation under this chapter.
(2) Sound from construction activities between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
or nondaylight hours, whichever is shorter, shall be subject to the
following limits:
(a) The sound level limits for nighttime (7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.)
routine operation are set forth in Subsection A above.
(b) If construction activities are conducted concurrently with
routine operation, then the combined total of construction and
routine operation sounds shall be subject to the nighttime
routine operation sound level limits set forth in Subsection A
above.
(c) Higher levels of nighttime construction sound are permitted
when a duly issued permit authorizing nighttime construction
sound in excess of the above nighttime limits has been granted
by the Planning Board. In determining whether to authorize
higher levels of nighttime construction sound, the Planning
Board shall consider the magnitude of the higher levels, as well
as the nature, size, and duration of the construction project.
C. Measurement. For purposes of determining compliance with the above
sound level limits, the measurement procedures and exemptions set
forth in the DEP Site Location Law Noise Regulation, DEP Regs. Ch.
375.10, as amended from time to time, shall be used.
§ 484-22 MADISON CODE § 484-23
405:360
A. General.
(1) A use shall not be extended, and no structure shall be constructed
or enlarged, unless off-street vehicle access and parking is
provided in accordance with the following requirements.
(2) Parking spaces shall be provided as required and made available
for use prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
B. Lot design and circulation.
(1) Access points from a public road to commercial and industrial
operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and
to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily
residential character.
(2) All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a distance
of 25 feet measured along the intersecting driveway and street
lines in order to provide visibility for entering and leaving vehicles.
(3) Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the
building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers, and containers
for loading or storage shall not be located upon any Town way.
(4) Projects that require regular access by delivery trucks must
provide a clear route to and from loading areas, with appropriate
geometric design to allow turning and backing for a minimum
vehicle length of 72 feet. Maneuvering and parking of delivery
trucks at loading bays/docks shall be designed not to impede
normal circulation and parking on the site or on a public street.
(5) At least one off-street loading bay/dock shall be provided for retail,
service, wholesale, warehouse, and industrial operations with a
gross floor area of more than 5,000 square feet.
(6) Vehicular entrance and exit.
(a) Entrances and exits should be clearly identified by the use of
signs, curb cuts, and landscaping.
(b) Entrance/Exit design shall be in conformance with the
standards for street access.
(c) On-site parking will be arranged so that it is not possible for
vehicles to back directly onto a street. The driveway shall be
designed so that vehicles do not have to wait on the street for
drivers to pull into or out of parking spaces. Entrances/Exits
shall be designed to allow adequate stacking of vehicles
without blocking interior vehicle circulation lanes.
(7) Interior vehicular circulation.
§ 484-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-23
405:361
(a) Major interior travel lanes should be designed to allow
continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement.
(b) Enclosures, such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls and
landscaping, should be used to identify circulation patterns of
parking areas and to restrict driving movements diagonally
across parking aisles, but not to reduce visibility of oncoming
pedestrians and vehicles.
(c) A clear route of access must be provided and maintained for
emergency vehicles to and around buildings. Snow shall not be
stored on-site in locations that may impede emergency
vehicles.
(d) Any use that provides drive-through service must be located
and designed to minimize the impact on neighboring
properties and traffic circulation. No drive-through facility
shall be located in the area of the site adjacent to a preexisting
home without adequate screening. Communication systems
must not be audible to adjacent homes. Vehicular access to the
drive-through shall be through a separate lane that prevents
vehicle queuing within normal parking areas. Adequate
queuing space must be provided to prevent any vehicles from
having to wait on a public street, within the entry from the
street, or within designated parking areas.
C. Parking area standards.
(1) Access to parking stalls should not be from major interior travel
lanes, and shall not be immediately accessible from any public way.
(2) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
utilize the parking space provided for it without requiring the
moving of any other motor vehicles.
(3) Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores or
businesses for easy pedestrian access and visibility.
(4) All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five feet from
any side or rear lot line, except for the additional requirements in
buffer yards.
(5) Parking stalls and aisle layout shall be laid out as follows:
(a) Parking spaces shall measure a minimum of 10 feet in width by
20 feet in length for spaces angled at 90° from the travel aisle.
Spaces designated for handicapped parking shall measure 12.5
feet in width by 20 feet in length.
(b) Parking spaces installed at an angle other than 90° from the
travel aisle shall be designed so that a ten-by-eighteen-foot
rectangle can be placed within each one (12.5 by 18 for
§ 484-23 MADISON CODE § 484-23
405:362
handicapped), except that stalls parallel to a travel aisle shall
measure 10 feet in width by 22 feet in length.
(c) Parking aisles shall be 20 feet in width if designated for twoway
traffic, and 16 feet in width if restricted to one-way traffic.
One-way aisles shall be so marked.
(6) In paved parking areas, painted stripes shall be used to delineate
parking stalls. Stripes should be a minimum of four inches in width.
Where double lines are used, they should be separated a minimum
of 12 inches on center.
(7) Bumpers and/or wheel stops shall be provided where overhang of
parked cars might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads,
restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways, or damage
landscape materials.
(8) Parking space requirements.
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided to conform with the
number required in the following schedule:
Activity
Minimum Required
Parking
Residential:
With 2 or more bedrooms 2 spaces per dwelling unit
With 1 bedroom 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling
unit
Elderly housing 1/2 space per dwelling unit
Tourist home, boarding-, lodging
house, motel, hotel, inn, bed/
breakfast
1 space per room/unit
rental and for each
employee on the largest
shift
Place of public assembly 1 space per 4 seats (based
on rated capacity if no fixed
seating)
Schools:
Primary 2 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Secondary 4 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Postsecondary 4 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Child-care facility 5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Theater, auditorium 1 per 4 seats
§ 484-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-23
405:363
Activity
Minimum Required
Parking
Funeral home 3 spaces for every 1,000
square feet (chapels
calculated separately)
Medical care facility 3 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Bank 5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
General office 3 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Medical office 5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Veterinarian clinic 4 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Retail and service business 3.5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Supermarket, box store 3 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Barber/Beauty shop 2 spaces/chair
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats (sit-down)
6 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area (fast-food)
Industrial business 1.5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Warehouse, wholesale 1 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Flea market 3 spaces/table
Automobile repair garage and
gasoline filling station
3 per service bay
Library, museum, art gallery 4 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Marina 1 space for each boat slip
and mooring
Commercial recreation facility 1 per 4 seats (spectator
sport)
1 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area (fitness
club, etc.)
30 per acre (outdoor
amusements)
§ 484-23 MADISON CODE § 484-23
405:364
§ 484-24. Odor control.
Activity
Minimum Required
Parking
Motor vehicle sales 1 space reserved for
customers per 30 vehicles
displayed on the lot
NOTES:
[1] Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking
spaces results in a fractional part of a complete parking
space, the parking spaces required shall be construed to
be the next highest number.
[2] Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number
of required parking stalls, gross floor area shall be used
unless otherwise noted.
[3] Where multiple uses of the lot or building are proposed,
the requirement shall be the sum of the requirements for
the separate uses. Where a building or use consists of
multiple functions, such as a church with school, each
separate function shall be calculated independently,
except that when one of the uses is residential, no
additional spaces shall be required.
(b) Modification of parking requirements.
[1] Within each development, at least one space, plus one
additional space for every 25 spaces provided, shall be
designated for use of handicapped persons.
[2] Within the downtown area, it is recognized that lot sizes
and building coverage are such that the provision of onsite
parking is sometimes impractical. Developers within
this area may offer to meet their parking requirement
through an agreement with the Town to assist in
implementing recommendations of the Madison
Downtown Parking Plan. The Planning Board may
designate a fee to be paid in lieu of parking, in proportion
to the estimated parking generation.
[3] Required off-street parking for all uses shall be located on
the same lot as the principal structure, except when the
Planning Board authorizes the joint use of a parking
facility by two or more principal uses where it is clearly
demonstrated that the parking facilities would
substantially meet the intent of the requirements by
reason of variation in the probable time of maximum use of
the facilities by the employees and patrons of the uses
involved.
§ 484-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-24
405:365
§ 484-25. Public services.
A. No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the emission of
odorous air contaminants from any source so as to result in detectable
odors at the lot line of the source which are measured in excess of the
following limits:
(1) For areas used for residential or commercial purposes within 500
feet of the lot line of the source, it is a violation if odors are
detected after the odorous air has been diluted with seven or more
volumes of odor-free air.
(2) In all other land use areas, it is a violation if odors are detected
after the odorous air has been diluted with 15 or more volumes of
odor-free air.
B. For the purposes of this regulation, two odor measurements shall be
made within a period of one hour, these measurements being separated
by at least 15 minutes. These measurements shall be made outside the
property line of the property from which the emission originates.
C. When approving an application for development that may result in
odorous emissions, the Board may, as a condition of approval, require
periodic monitoring and correction of any odors in violation of this
standard. The Bamebey-Cheney Scentometer, suitably calibrated, or
any other instrument, device, or technique equivalent, may be used in
the determination of the intensity of an odor and may be used as a guide
in the enforcement of this standard.
A. The proposed development will provide for adequate disposal of solid
waste. If the solid waste generated by the proposed development will
cause undue strain on the Town's solid waste disposal system, the
applicant will make alternate arrangements for the disposal of solid
waste. The alternate arrangements shall be at a disposal facility which
is in compliance with its license.
B. All hazardous and/or special wastes will be disposed of at a licensed
waste disposal facility, and evidence of a contractual arrangement with
the facility shall be presented.
C. The applicant must present evidence that proposed fire protection
measures are adequate, in the form of a written statement from the Fire
Chief that the proposed development will not exceed the capacity of his/
her department to provide adequate protection. The Fire Chief may
recommend protective improvements, including but not limited to fire
ponds, hydrants, fire lanes, isolation of flammable wastes, or sprinkler
systems.
D. Commercial development must be designed to provide protection from
the spread of fire. At a minimum, the requirements of NFPA 1 and NFPA
101 must be met. Whenever possible, a key box security system should
be installed, and may be required on some projects.
§ 484-24 MADISON CODE § 484-26
405:366
§ 484-26. Sanitary provisions.
§ 484-27. Signs.
A. When not serviced by the public sewerage system, the approval of
permit applications shall be subject to presentation of a completed
Maine Department of Human Services Site Evaluation Form (HHE-200)
which evidences adequate soil conditions for subsurface wastewater
disposal.
B. When two or more lots or buildings in different ownership share a
common sanitary treatment disposal system, the system shall be owned
and maintained in common by an owners' association. Covenants in the
deeds for each lot shall require mandatory membership in the
association and provide for adequate funding of the association to
assure proper maintenance of the system.
C. Industrial or commercial wastewaters may be discharged to municipal
sewers only and in such quantities and/or of such quality as to be
compatible with municipal sewage treatment operations. Such wastes
may require pretreatment at the industrial or commercial site in order
to render them amenable to municipal treatment processes.
Pretreatment includes, but is not limited to, screening, grinding,
sedimentation, pH adjustment, surface skimming, chemical oxidation
and reduction and dilution. The disposal of industrial or commercial
wastewaters by means other than the municipal sewerage system shall
comply with the laws of the State of Maine concerning water pollution.
Wash water or other process water carrying stone dust, stone particles,
silt or other mineral matter will not be accepted into the municipal
system.
A. For all development subject to this chapter, the following signs shall be
permitted:
(1) Signs shall relate to the premises on which they are located and
shall only identify the occupant of such premises or advertise the
service available within the premises. There shall be no temporary
promotion signs, banners, streamers, or placards erected,
suspended, posted or affixed in any manner outdoors for a
cumulative total period of more than 90 days in one calendar year,
and no such sign shall exceed 10 square feet without a waiver from
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) On each premises there is permitted one sign affixed to the exterior
of a building for each occupancy under common ownership,
operation or control therein. Signs shall not be placed on the roof of
a building.
(3) Freestanding signs are limited in number to one per building,
except that, where one occupant occupies more than one building
per lot or a combination of lots mutually adjoining and in common
§ 484-26 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-27
405:367
ownership, only one freestanding sign shall be permitted. The top
edge of any such freestanding sign shall not be higher than 16 feet
vertical measure above the average ground level from the base of
the sign. For traffic safety, where vision may be obscured entering a
public street, the whole of the sign board or display elements of any
freestanding sign shall be either below three feet in height or above
seven feet in height above the street grade. A freestanding sign
may be located within the front yard space, but shall not be closer
than 10 feet to the street right-of-way, or five feet to the nearest
side of the sidewalk (where applicable), and be no closer than 12
feet to either of the lot side lines. Where an existing principal
building is within 15 feet of the street right-of-way, a freestanding
sign may be located no closer than two feet to the street right-ofway.
(4) On each premises where one sign is permitted attached to the
building for each occupancy:
(a) If attached to the structure by way of a frame or bracket, which
overhangs a pedestrian walkway or public sidewalk, it shall not
extend beyond five feet of the structure face to which attached
and shall have a vertical height clearance between the sign
bottom and/or average grade at the base of the sign which
shall not be less than 10 feet.
(b) If the proposed sign is to be attached to the structure surface
without the use of overhanging frames or brackets, the "wall
sign" shall not extend or project more than 12 inches from the
structure surface. Cutout letters should not project more than
six inches from the building wall.
(c) No sign shall be permitted on the roof of any building.
(d) Signs posted within a window shall not cover more than 10% of
the window area.
(e) Attached signs shall not exceed five square feet in area without
a waiver from the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Illumination and location of signs.
(1) Intermittent display of lighted messages may be included in
"permitted" signs under § 484-27A. [Amended 6-11-2018]
(2) Display of lighted messages may change after four seconds.
(3) No sign shall be located off the site of the lot on which the related
services are located, except as provided for in this chapter and
except for directional signs.
C. The above regulations shall not apply to the following:
(1) Flags and insignia of any government.
§ 484-27 MADISON CODE § 484-27
405:368
§ 484-28. Soils.
No activity shall be permitted in any area where the soil is rated severe or
very severe for the proposed activity, according to the County Soil Survey
of the USDA Soil Conservation Service55 unless satisfactory evidence is
presented to the Code Enforcement Officer, within the application for a
(2) Legal notices, identification, information, or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies.
(3) Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property,
but bearing no advertising matter or commercial identification.
(4) Yard and garage sale signs posted for less than three days.
D. Temporary signs. Temporary signs for special events may be posted
upon written permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall only grant such a permit after presentation of
evidence that the owners of the proposed location of the sign have
approved its posting. A temporary sign shall be posted for a period not
to exceed 20 days in a calendar year. The applicant shall remove said
signs upon termination of the permit. Street banners shall be no larger
than 50 square feet in area. No temporary sign, other than a street
banner, shall be larger than 10 square feet in area. Permits for hanging
street banners across the public way shall be issued only upon
assumption of complete liability in writing by the person, firm or
corporation hanging the banner for any damage resulting from the
placement of said banner. Such liability shall be acknowledged upon the
application for the permit.
E. Nonconforming signs.
(1) All lots with permanent, complete and functioning nonconforming
signs as of March 6, 1989, may continue to use and maintain one
freestanding or roof-mounted and one attached nonconforming
sign and corner lots may continue to use and maintain two attached
nonconforming signs. All other nonconforming signs shall be
removed by March 6, 1992.
(2) Nonconforming signs not permanently located and functioning on
March 6, 1989, because of road construction activities may be
replaced and have the same status as if they were in place on
March 6, 1989.
F. Calculation of the sign area. The area limitations for the size of the sign
relate to one of two sides of the signboard, both sides of which may
have on it the sign message. For example, a sign limited to 10 square
feet may have two sides, with the result that the sign message covers an
area of 20 square feet but only 10 square feet would be visible at one
time.
55.Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 484-27 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-28
405:369
permit, that construction methods will overcome any pertinent soil
inadequacies.
§ 484-29. Soil erosion control.
§ 484-30. Storage of materials.
All materials stored outdoors shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent
the breeding and harboring of insects, rats or other vermin. This shall be
accomplished by enclosures in containers, raising materials above ground,
separation of material, prevention of stagnant water, extermination
procedures or other means.
§ 484-31. Stormwater management.
A. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies
shall be minimized. When a development involves alteration of the
ground surface or construction of structures, an erosion control plan
shall be developed and implemented. The erosion control plan shall
meet the standards of Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control BMPs,
published by Maine DEP (March, 2003 or as revised).
B. Contractors involved in site work shall be certified in erosion control
practices by the Maine DEP.
A. Where the development includes impervious surfaces in excess of
10,000 square feet, a stormwater management plan shall be prepared
by a professional engineer registered in the State of Maine. The
stormwater management plan shall meet the standards of Stormwater
Management for Maine, published by Maine DEP (2006 or as revised).
B. All components of the stormwater management system shall be
designed to limit peak discharge to predevelopment levels for every
storm between the two-year and the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour
duration, frequencies, based on rainfall data for Somerset County.
When the development discharges directly to a major water body, peak
discharge may be increased from predevelopment levels, provided
downstream drainage structures are suitably sized.
C. For projects including structural treatments, such as detention ponds, a
stormwater maintenance agreement shall be prepared, indicating how
stormwater management structures will be maintained through the
course of their projected life.
D. When a proposed development is within the direct watershed of
Wesserunsett Lake, the phosphorus export from development shall be
evaluated and controlled. The Department of Environmental Protection
manual Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for
Evaluating New Development (September 1989, or as revised) shall be
used for calculating, designing, and evaluating phosphorus controls.
§ 484-28 MADISON CODE § 484-32
405:370
§ 484-32. Street access and driveways.
A. Proposed developments shall provide safe access to and from public
and private roads. Safe access shall be demonstrated by providing
suitable location for access points, with respect to sight distances and
intersections.
B. Any development proposing access onto a state road shall obtain a
driveway, entrance, or traffic movement permit from the Maine
Department of Transportation. A copy of the permit shall be provided to
the Planning Board.
C. Sight distance.
(1) Any road or driveway entering onto a public road shall be so
designed in profile and grading and so located as to provide the
minimum sight distance in each direction. Sight distance is
measured from a point 10 feet behind the curb or edge of shoulder,
with the height of the eye 3.5 feet above the surface and height of
sighted object 4.25 feet.
(2) The minimum sight distance from a proposed entrance (in feet)
shall be 10 times the posted speed limit (in MPH) on the existing
road, or 350 feet if no speed limit is posted. Where necessary, the
land bordering the intersection shall be cleared of perennial
growth and sight obstructions to achieve the required sight line.
D. Access points to existing public roads shall be minimized to reduce
conflict points. Development shall be designed so that lots are accessed
through lesser roads, where applicable. Entrances shall be no more
than 32 feet in width, with 24 feet preferred. A single lot shall be limited
to two points of entry.
E. The center line of any new road or commercial driveway intersecting an
existing public road shall be at least 125 feet from the center line of any
other street intersecting that road, unless it is located directly across
from that intersection.
F. If a proposed development is projected to generate more than 100
vehicular trips during a peak hour, a traffic impact analysis completed
by a professional engineer with experience in traffic planning shall be
provided at the time of review. The Planning Board may use the results
of the analysis to require the provision of off-site road improvements to
manage traffic impacts.
G. Driveways shall be constructed to the following specifications:
(1) Minimum width of 15 feet if unpaved, 20 feet if paved.
(2) Minimum base gravel of 15 inches depth; minimum surface gravel
of three inches depth. The construction requirements for gravel
shall be as specified in Subsections 304.03 through 304.0 of the
§ 484-32 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-32
405:371
§ 484-33. Water quality impacts.
most current edition of the MDOT Standard Specifications
Highway and Bridges Manual.
(3) If pavement is applied, the base layer of pavement shall be mixed
and placed as per the most current edition of the MDOT Standard
Specifications Highway and Bridges Manual, Section 401 and
Section 703.9. The surface layer of pavement shall be mixed and
placed as per Section 401 and Section 701.4.
A. No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid
materials of such nature, quality, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or
temperature that run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or
groundwaters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters, or
cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or
submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness, or be
harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
B. All aboveground storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or
industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw materials, shall be located on
impervious pavement, and shall be completely enclosed by an
impervious dike which shall be high enough to contain the total volume
of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain falling into this
storage area during a twenty-five-year storm, so that such liquid shall
not be able to spill onto or seep into the ground surrounding the paved
storage area.
C. All below-ground tanks must meet the standards of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 484-32 MADISON CODE § 484-33
405:372
ARTICLE VI
Financial Guarantee and Insurance Coverage
§ 484-34. Financial guarantee required.
Prior to the Planning Board issuing a permit, the applicant shall file a
financial guarantee in an amount sufficient to cover project costs,
conditioned upon the completion of said project and full compliance with
any laws, ordinances and regulations of the Town of Madison applicable to
said project. When the applicant has completed the project as set forth in its
application, and in compliance with the Planning Board permit, the Planning
Board shall permit the applicant to cancel said guarantee. The financial
guarantee options are:
A. A performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in the State of Maine, which bond shall be payable to the Town
of Madison.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution
authorized to do business in the State of Maine, satisfactory to the
Planning Board and in a form satisfactory to said Board, which letter of
credit shall certify the following:
(1) That the applicant does guarantee funds in a specified amount and
for a specified duration.
(2) That, in case of failure on the part of the applicant to satisfactorily
complete the project within the required time period, the creditor
shall pay to the Town immediately, and without further action, such
funds as are necessary to finance the project's proper completion
up to the credit limit stated in the letter.
C. Evidence that cash has been deposited in an escrow account at a bank
or other reputable institution having an office in the Town of Madison
and acceptable to the Planning Board, and the escrow agreement
acceptable to the Planning Board. The agreement shall provide that in
case of failure on the part of the applicant to satisfactorily complete the
project within the required time period, the escrow agent shall pay to
the Town immediately, and without further action, such funds as are
necessary to finance the proper completion of said project, up to the
original cash deposit into the escrow account.
D. A letter from a bank, similar financial institution, or a government
agency demonstrating that credit is available to finance the proposed
project or that the funding institution intends to fund the project,
indicating the amount of funds and the specified uses will be acceptable
if compliance with Subsections A through C of this section would be
cost prohibitive as determined by the Planning Board.
E. The most recent corporate annual report(s) of the applicant, or a parent
company of the applicant, indicating sufficient financial capacity to fund
or obtain financing for the development, together with explanatory
§ 484-34 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-34
405:373
§ 484-35. Contents of guarantee.
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction, taking into account
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the
applicant, and a date after which the applicant will be in default and the
Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
material interpreting the report, will be acceptable if compliance with
Subsections A through D of this section is determined by the Planning
Board to be infeasible for the applicant.
§ 484-34 MADISON CODE § 484-35
405:374
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 484-36. Enforcement official.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
§ 484-37. Violations.
§ 484-38. Penalties.
The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any violation
of this chapter.
§ 484-39. Declaration to be submitted to owner.
In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
owner. The valid declaration shall consist of:
§ 484-40. Severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this chapter.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in any development
activity, including, but not limited to, earth-moving, road-building,
construction or occupancy of buildings or structures subject to this
chapter, without first obtaining approval under this chapter.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in activities subject to
review except in accordance with the plan submitted and terms and
conditions of approval. Any changes to the site plan or development
must be approved in accordance with the procedures in § 484-7 of this
chapter.
A. The name of the property owner and address or legal description of the
property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
B. A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a
cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
C. A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
D. Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation; and
E. A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 484-36 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-41
405:375
§ 484-41. Conflict with other provisions.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, regulation, bylaw, ordinance,
permit or provision of law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
§ 484-41 MADISON CODE § 484-41
405:376
ARTICLE VIII
Terminology
§ 484-42. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive;
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS POINT — The location at which a driveway or road serving a
development intersects with an existing public or private road.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use(s) or structure(s) which
is customarily both incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure, and which is located on the same lot with the principal
building, or on a lot adjacent to such lot if in the same ownership or
part of the same establishment.
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those devices
and procedures utilized in the cultivation of land in order to further
crop and livestock production and conservation of related soil and
water resources.
ALTERATION — Structural changes, rearrangement, change of
location, or addition to a building or structure (other than repairs and
modification in building equipment) involving more than 25% increase
in the overall floor space or bulk of the building or structure at any time
or in total since the effective date of this chapter.
BUFFER — A linear area designed and intended to provide visual and
aural protection for residential landowners from commercial land uses
through the use of structural or vegetative measures.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof or partial roof used for the
shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind.
The term "building" shall include multiple-family dwellings.
COMMERCIAL — Connected with the buying or selling of goods or
services or the provision of facilities for a fee.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — Any facility where
recreational activities are provided to participate or observe for a fee.
The term includes but is not limited to fitness clubs, gyms, racket clubs,
a golf course, go-kart track, stadium, race track, amusement park.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — The provision of customer service
facilities where the customer does not have to leave his or her vehicle
to get served, and drives away immediately, customarily (but not
exclusively) used in food service and banking.
§ 484-42 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-42
405:377
DRIVEWAY — A paved or hard-surfaced vehicular travel way intended
to service a single commercial building and not exceeding 100 feet in
length.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan depicting
effective soil conservation measures for the activity proposed, based
on practices described by the publication Maine Erosion and
Sedimentation Control BMPs published by Maine DEP (March 2003, or
as revised).
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The total number of square feet enclosed
within a building, including enclosed porches and display areas, but
excluding loading docks, porticos, and other attachments not enclosed
within walls.
HOME OCCUPATION — A commercial or industrial enterprise, the
providing of a service, or the practice of an occupation or profession
which occurs wholly within the principal residential structure; is clearly
incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling place as a place
of residence; is conducted by a member or members of the immediate
family and does not involve the outdoor storage of materials or goods
used in connection with the operation of the home occupation; does not
generate more than 10 auto trips by clients/customers in any one day;
and does not involve the alteration of the structure or premises in such
a way as to violate the residential appearance or character of the home
occupation site by use of colors, lighting, signs, the emission of sounds,
odors, vibrations, the placement of use of materials or premises layout.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any hard-surfaced, constructed area that
does not readily absorb water, including, but not limited to, building
roofs, paved or graveled parking and driveway areas, sidewalks, and
paved or compacted recreation areas.
INDUSTRIAL — Connected with the assembling, fabrication, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods or the extraction of
minerals.
INSTITUTIONAL — A building devoted to some public, governmental,
educational, charitable, medical or similar purpose.
MINOR REVISION or MINOR — Any proposal to modify an approval
or application, where the modification does not significantly expand
the project, change the nature of the project or significantly modify
any Planning Board finding with respect to an approval project or
significant terms of an application, if not yet approved.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building consisting of three or
more attached dwelling units.
PERSON — Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
municipal or other local government entity, quasi-municipal entity, state
agency, educational or charitable organization or institution or other
legal entity.
§ 484-42 MADISON CODE § 484-42
405:378
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Any structure built and intended for
use as a gathering place for large groups of people for an organized
purpose. Places of public assembly may include, but not be limited to,
grange halls, churches, fraternal organizations, union halls.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building containing dwelling units or
a building utilized by personnel or staff in regularly scheduled
operations.
SCHOOL — A use which is primarily intended for the purpose of
educating individuals. The term does not include private pre-schools
but does include private schools at other levels, such as private primary
or secondary schools, colleges or technical schools.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, erected or placed on the ground
or attached to something on the ground which is permanent, temporary
or mobile. Structures include, but are not limited to, buildings,
recreational vehicles, piers and floats, and storage and processing
facilities. Boundary walls, fences and flag poles are not considered
structures.
TOPSOIL REMOVAL — The excavation of loam or loamy materials from
an area for placement elsewhere.
USE — Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a
tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or
occupied; also any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried
on or intended to be carried on in a building or other structure or on a
tract of land.
WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a business to
provide suitable waste disposal procedures for all anticipated classes of
waste, including common waste, special waste, hazardous waste, and
items to be composted or recycled.
§ 484-42 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-42
405:379

ARTICLE IX
Abrogation
§ 484-43. Repealer.
This chapter repeals and replaces the previously enacted Site Review
Ordinance.
§ 484-43 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 484-43
405:381
Chapter 490
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street design and construction
standards — See Ch. 339.
Street naming and house numbering — See
Ch. 343.
Site review — See Ch. 484.
§ 484-43 MADISON CODE § 484-43
405:382
ARTICLE I
General
§ 490-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 490-2. Administration.
§ 490-3. No development activities without subdivision approval.
A. This chapter is intended to provide a framework for municipal review of
subdivisions in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401 et seq.
B. All subdivisions as defined by state law, M.R.S.A. 30-A § 4401(4), shall
by reviewed and approved by the Town of Madison prior to
development or sale of lots or dwelling units. This applies to all
divisions of land and all divisions of buildings, except as provided
below:
(1) Subdivision review of multifamily dwellings (as defined) and all
accessory structures to same, whether attached or detached, will
defer to review of the development under Chapter 484 of the
Madison Code of Ordinances (Site Review);
(2) No lot exceeding 40 acres shall be counted as a subdivision lot for
review purposes; and
(3) Additional conditions and exceptions within 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4401(4).
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Code Enforcement Officer
and the Planning Board. All applications for subdivision review shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Madison Planning Board is responsible for reviewing and
approving applications for subdivision review under this chapter. The
Planning Board shall decide if:
(1) A proposed development requires subdivision review under
§ 490-1B of this chapter.
(2) A subdivision application is, in fact, complete, and if not, what
additional items or information must be submitted.
(3) A subdivision application shall be approved or denied.
(4) Amendments or changes to an existing approved subdivision must
be reviewed under § 490-7 of this chapter.
(5) The applicant is exempt from review.
A. No person may sell, lease, develop, build upon, or convey for
consideration, or offer or agree to sell, lease, build upon or convey for
consideration any land or dwelling unit in a subdivision within the Town
§ 490-1 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-3
405:383
of Madison that has not been approved by the Town of Madison
Planning Board.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a permit for building or
use within a land subdivision unless the subdivision has been approved
by the Town of Madison Planning Board.
§ 490-3 MADISON CODE § 490-3
405:384
ARTICLE II
Application Procedure
§ 490-4. Multi-stage process.
Subdivision reviews are conducted in two or more stages, in order for the
Town and applicant to comply with the requirements of this chapter in an
efficient manner:
§ 490-5. Preapplication.
§ 490-6. Application process.
A. A preapplication process, as described in § 490-5 of this chapter;
B. A formal application and review process for approving a proposed
subdivision, as described in section 6 of this chapter;
C. If a proposed subdivision will require the construction of roads or
public water or sewer system, or will require additional approvals from
state or federal agencies, the Planning Board may issue a conditional
approval, with final review to follow;
D. A revision to a previously approved plan must be approved anew, as
described in § 490-7 of this chapter.
A. A prospective applicant shall contact the Code Enforcement Officer to
schedule a preapplication meeting with the Planning Board. The
preapplication meeting is intended to provide an opportunity for the
applicant to present a concept (sketch) plan to the Board, to discuss
specific ordinance requirements, or to identify concerns that should be
addressed in the application.
B. In order to be placed on the agenda for a preapplication meeting, the
prospective applicant must provide the information required by § 490-9
of this chapter to the Town office no less than seven days prior to the
meeting.
C. The Board's advice at the time of preapplication shall not constitute
review or comment on the merits of the application. The Board may
discuss timing of the application and other state or federal permitting
procedures, identify specific concerns or issues to be addressed in the
application, specify supplemental information to be submitted, or may
grant waivers for submission requirements. The Board may also
arrange with the prospective applicant to visit the development site for
the purpose of gaining a better perspective on the proposal.
D. At the time of the preapplication meeting, if not before, the prospective
applicant shall be provided a copy of this chapter at no cost.
A. All applications shall be made on subdivision application forms
available from the Town office, and contain the elements listed in
§ 490-4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-6
405:385
§ 490-10 of this chapter. Applications shall be submitted to the Town
office together with fees as provided in the fee schedule (§ 490-12). The
Town office shall issue a dated receipt for the application and fees.
B. When an application has been submitted, the Town office will
immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer and will notify all
owners of property abutting the proposed subdivision by mail, the
notice to include the location and general description of the project.
The Town office will also send written notice to the Town Clerk and
Planning Board of any town that abuts or includes a portion of the
proposed subdivision.
C. Consideration of the application shall be placed on the agenda for the
next Planning Board meeting, provided that the application must be
submitted no less than seven days prior to the meeting.
D. The Planning Board shall determine whether the application is
complete. If the application is complete, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing. If the application is not complete, the Board shall
provide a written listing of the items that are missing for a complete
application.
E. Within 20 days after the Planning Board determines that the application
is complete, and before taking final action thereon, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing.
F. Notice of the application and public hearing shall be published in a local
newspaper at least twice, the first time to be at least seven days in
advance of the required public hearing. Notice of the application shall
also be posted in an accessible, public location and mailed to the
applicant and to each owner of property abutting or adjacent to the
proposed development. Landowners shall be considered to be those
against whom property taxes are assessed. Failure of any person to
receive a mailed notice of application in a timely manner shall not
necessitate another notification, or invalidate any action of the Board.
The purpose of the notification shall be to inform the general public and
abutters that a public hearing is to be held on a pending application.
G. At the public hearing, the applicant and members of the public shall be
given the opportunity to present testimony or evidence in support of or
opposed to the application. The hearing shall be informal, at the
discretion of the Chairman of the Board, allowing the Board and
attendees to ask questions of the applicant.
H. Within 30 days of the public hearing, or within such other time limit as
may be mutually agreed to, the Planning Board shall prepare written
findings of fact that the application does or does not meet the review
criteria in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404, and shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application. The Board may consult with the
applicant or any other party in completing its review. In all instances,
the burden of proof shall be upon the person making the application.
The Board shall inform the applicant of its decision in writing, and in
§ 490-6 MADISON CODE § 490-6
405:386
§ 490-7. Revisions.
cases of denial or approval with conditions, reasons for such action
shall be stated. A copy of the Board's decision shall be filed with the
CEO.
(1) When an application is found to require additional information or
study or detailed engineering design, or when state or federal
permit(s) have not yet been issued, the Planning Board may make
its approval conditional on items yet to come. The conditional
approval shall give the applicant a specified number of days in
which to provide the required information, at which time the Board
may grant final approval. No construction or other development
work may commence prior to final approval unless specifically
authorized by the Board.
I. Construction of roads or other infrastructure must be commenced
within 12 months of final approval and completed within 24 months,
unless a phased development plan is part of the approval. After 24
months, the approval shall be deemed to have expired unless a special
schedule has been approved by the Planning Board or an extension has
been granted by it. Any deviation from the project as approved shall
require a revision to the approval.
A. A minor revision to an approved plan may be approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Minor revisions are those that do not involve the
creation or relocation of lot boundaries or public improvements,
including but not limited to roads, public water or sewer lines, or
drainage structures.
(1) The applicant shall submit a statement identifying the proposed
change and rationale for it.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny the proposed
changes within five working days. The Code Enforcement Officer
may refer the revision to the Planning Board for a decision if he or
she determines that the change is substantial.
B. A major revision to an approved plan shall be reviewed and may be
approved by the Planning Board.
(1) The applicant shall submit a revised plan to the Board for review,
clearly identifying the original plan by name and approval date, and
naming the proposed revisions. Supplemental materials shall only
be required if they have a direct bearing on the proposed changes.
(2) A public hearing is not mandatory for a revision, but the Board may
decide to hold a public hearing if it finds that the proposed change
may impact public services or abutting properties. Notice and
hearing requirements shall be in accordance with § 490-6F of this
chapter.
§ 490-6 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-8
405:387
§ 490-8. Board of appeals.
A. If the Planning Board takes final action that is objectionable to the
applicant, an abutting landowner, or any aggrieved party, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply, or that the true
intent and meaning of this chapter have been misconstrued or
wrongfully interpreted, the applicant, an abutting landowner, or
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Planning Board in
writing to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the decision. The
Board of Appeals review will be limited to a determination as to
whether reasonable factual basis exists to support the Planning Board's
decision or that the Board's decision was clearly contrary to the
provisions of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may sustain a Planning
Board decision or may remand the application to the Planning Board for
further review. When a Planning Board decision is remanded, the Board
of Appeals will articulate both the factual premises and the reasoning
that support the order for further review.
B. The Board of Appeals is also authorized to hear variance appeals under
this chapter. Variance appeals may only be taken from provisions
relating to dimensional standards, and shall be conducted according to
the procedures and standards of § 478-16H(2) of this code.
C. The decision of the Board of Appeals may be appealed by any aggrieved
party to Somerset County Superior Court within 30 days of the date of
the Board's decision.
§ 490-8 MADISON CODE § 490-8
405:388
ARTICLE III
Subdivision Application Requirements
§ 490-9. Preapplication requirements.
The following information is required for preapplication review under
§ 490-5: a sketch of the proposed property (may be hand-drawn but should
be to scale) with the following:
§ 490-10. Submission requirements.
The following information is required for subdivision applications. This
listing shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the Planning Board
to require additional submissions under specific circumstances.
A. Project name, applicant and surveyor/engineer;
B. Date, North arrow, scale;
C. Perimeter boundaries, area and acreage of proposed subdivision,
tentative lot layout or preliminary building footprints, any property area
not to be included in the subdivision;
D. Tentative locations of rights-of-way and easements;
E. Land cover areas, i.e., woods, fields;
F. General natural features of the area to be developed: areas of steep
slopes, bedrock outcrops, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains;
G. Tentative location of proposed roads and other structures;
H. A copy of the United States Department of Agriculture soil survey map
for the area with the parcel outlined on the map.
A. Application fees: as provided for in § 490-12 of this chapter.
B. Application information. An applicant for subdivision review shall
provide the following information on the subdivision application form:
(1) Subdivision name;
(2) Name, address, phone number of applicant;
(3) Name, address, phone number of owner;
(4) Name, address, phone number of authorized representative;
(5) Name(s), registration number, address, phone number of engineer,
surveyor, architect, landscape architect or planner;
(6) Legal interest of applicant in property, supported by photocopy of a
deed, option to purchase, contract to purchase, or a lease;
(7) Tax Map and lot numbers;
§ 490-9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-10
405:389
(8) Acreage to be developed;
(9) Description of covenants, deed restrictions, easements, or rightsof-
way existing or planned;
(10) Existing use of the property;
(11) Name, address, map and lot number of abutting landowners;
(12) Variances requested from the appropriate issuing authority.
C. Subdivision plat requirements. The subdivision plat drawing must
consist of three paper prints plus one mylar (reproducible) copy, with a
maximum size of 30 inches by 48 inches and at a scale of between one
inch equals 40 feet and one inch equals 100 feet. An additional seven
copies shall be provided at a reduced scale for Board use. The plat must
include the following:
(1) Date, title, scale, North arrow, name of project.
(2) A boundary outline with dimensions and lot area, in relation to
surrounding streets, walls and adjoining and land uses.
(3) Names and addresses of present landowner(s) and abutting
landowners.
(4) Locations of existing buildings and other structures, fire hydrants,
streetlights, utility poles, underground water and sewer facilities.
(5) Location of existing topographic and natural features, including
rivers, streams, and other water bodies, wetlands and vernal pools,
floodplain, critical natural areas, and high-value plant and animal
habitat identified by the Maine Natural Areas Program.
(6) Location and dimension of all proposed internal lot lines.
(7) Location map.
(8) All existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements.
(9) Location and accurate dimensions and detail of proposed streets
(including plans, profiles and cross-sections), sidewalks, parking
lots, water and sewer utilities, drainage structures.
(10) Location of any proposed water supply wells and test pits or
proposed septic system areas.
(11) Identification and boundaries of any shoreland zoning districts
affecting the property.
(12) If approval of the subdivision will be conditioned on a variance,
terms of the variance shall be listed on the face of the plan.
(13) A signature block for approval by the Planning Board.
§ 490-10 MADISON CODE § 490-10
405:390
D. Supporting documents.
(1) Evidence of the quality and quantity of proposed water supply. If a
public water supply system other than the Anson-Madison Water
District is proposed, a wellhead protection plan shall be provided.
(2) Evidence of the adequacy of proposed sewage disposal systems,
including an HHE-200 for any proposed subsurface wastewater
disposal system.
(3) A landscaping plan indicating grade change, vegetation to be
preserved, new plantings used to stabilize areas of cut and fill and
for screening; the size, location, purpose and type of vegetation.
(4) A stormwater management plan for any structural improvements,
including location, elevation, layout of catch basins, and other
surface and subsurface drainage features. If the development will
create more than 10,000 square feet of new impervious surface, the
stormwater management plan must be designed by a registered
professional engineer.
(5) A topographical plan, at two-foot intervals, showing existing and
proposed contours and finished grade elevations.
(6) An erosion control plan, or phosphorous control plan within the
Wesserunsett Lake Watershed.
(7) Plans, profiles, and cross-sections of roads, driveways, and parking
areas proposed to be added to the site.
(8) Identification of soils with severe or very severe limitations for the
type of development proposed in accordance with the United States
Department of Agriculture medium-intensity soil survey for
Somerset County. If soils identified by the survey as having severe
or very severe limitations are to be developed, a high-intensity soil
survey may be required.
(9) Locations of any critical areas of natural or cultural resources,
including but not limited to areas of potential archeological
significance, wetlands, vernal pools, critical wildlife habitat,
floodplains, and the location of any sand and gravel aquifers. If any
of these areas will be affected by the development, a plan to
mitigate or manage impacts to the resource shall be supplied.
(10) Any other exhibits or data deemed necessary by the Planning
Board to evaluate the proposed development for compliance with
the review criteria of this chapter.
(11) Construction schedule, costs and performance guarantee
arrangement, along with financial arrangements, if appropriate, for
maintenance of private roads, stormwater management facilities
and other public improvements.
§ 490-10 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-10
405:391
§ 490-11. Waiver or modification of application requirements.
The Planning Board, on the written petition of the applicant, may waive,
in its sole discretion, any of the submission requirements of § 490-10 of
this chapter, or otherwise modify the application requirements, including
application fees and documentation based on the unique circumstances of
the plans or site and provided such waiver does not unduly restrict the
review process. The Board shall make a written record of its decision to
waive requirements.
§ 490-12. Fee schedule.
The Board of Selectmen shall adopt and from time to time amend a fee
schedule for applications submitted under this chapter. The fees to be
assessed shall be at least sufficient to pay for the Town's cost of processing
the application, including public hearing notice expenses. Any fee schedule
so adopted shall become effective 30 days following its adoption.
E. Signed statements from the following municipal officials:
(1) The Anson-Madison Water District regarding the capacity and
conditions under which the District will supply water and approval
of the size and location of mains, valves, and hydrants proposed.
(2) The Fire Chief approving the features related to fire and
emergency protection.
(3) The Superintendent of the Anson-Madison Sanitary District
regarding the capacity and conditions under which the District will
provide sewage disposal service, or a statement relative to the
capacity of the District's system to treat septic tank pumping.
(4) The Road Commissioner regarding the adequacy and design of
drainage and street systems, both proposed and existing.
(5) The Police Chief/county sheriff, relative to traffic circulation, if
required by the Planning Board.
(6) Any other agency or committee deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
§ 490-10 MADISON CODE § 490-12
405:392
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Development Standards
§ 490-13. Review criteria and standards.
The provisions of this section are intended to assure that each of the
review criteria in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404 has been met. Each criterion is
accompanied by a set of development standards. Compliance with
development standards is prima facie evidence of meeting the criteria.
However, applicants for subdivision approval may propose alternative
designs and approaches that will satisfy the criteria equally as well or better
than the ordinance standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be
on the applicant to demonstrate that criteria have been met. This shall not
be construed as limiting the authority of the Board to require additional
evidence or impose additional standards based on characteristics of the site
or development.
§ 490-13.1. Pollution.
§ 490-13.2. Sufficient water.
A. Criterion: will not result in undue water or air pollution.
B. Standard.
(1) Discharge of point source pollutants is regulated by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the federal
Clean Air Act or the federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972. The applicant may demonstrate compliance
with this criterion if he or she is required to obtain a permit from
Maine Department of Environmental Protection and does so.
(2) Non-point source pollutants are controlled by the proper
management of stormwater. The applicant will identify all land
disturbance created by development of the subdivision, and will
provide for management of stormwater flows as provided in
§ 490-13.17, below.
A. Criterion: has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable
needs of the subdivision;
B. Standards.
(1) The applicant shall provide a written statement from the Anson-
Madison Water District that adequate water for both domestic and
firefighting purposes can be provided without placing an undue
burden on the source, treatment facilities or distribution system
involved.
(2) When the location of a subdivision does not allow for a financially
reasonable connection to the Water District, the Board may allow
the use of individual wells or a licensed public water supply system.
§ 490-13 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.2
405:393
§ 490-13.3. Impact on existing water supplies.
§ 490-13.4. Soil erosion.
(a) If a licensed public water supply system is provided, the
location and protection of the source, and the design,
construction and operation of the system shall conform to the
Standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water
(10-144 CMR Ch. 231). The applicant will demonstrate that an
adequate wellhead protection zone exists and submit a
wellhead protection management plan.
(b) If individual wells are proposed for the subdivision, the
applicant will provide evidence of the quantity and quality of
the source. A test well may be driven on the tract and test
results provided to the Board, or the applicant may provide test
results demonstrating both quantity and quality from at least
two existing wells within 500 feet of the tract to be subdivided.
(3) The subdivider will provide for fire protection. If proposed lots will
not be accessible to a public water supply, the subdivider will
construct ponds, dry hydrants, or measures to provide for adequate
access to and storage of water for firefighting purposes. An
easement shall be granted to the Town granting access to the water
source where necessary. If buildings within the subdivision will be
provided with sprinkler systems, the Board may reduce this
requirement accordingly.
A. Criterion: will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water
supply, if one is to be used.
B. Standards.
(1) When a subdivision is to be served by a public water supply system,
the complete distribution system, including expansion of existing
distribution lines if necessary, shall be installed at the expense of
the subdivider.
(2) The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service
connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the
Anson-Madison Water District prior to final approval.
A. Criterion: will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the
land's capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition
results.
B. Standards.
(1) Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies
must be minimized through the use construction practices
contained in Maine Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs, published
by Maine Department of Environmental Protection (March 2003, or
§ 490-13.2 MADISON CODE § 490-13.4
405:394
§ 490-13.5. Traffic conditions.
as revised). All areas of soil disturbed during development of the
subdivision will be addressed in an erosion control plan prepared
in accordance with the above-cited manual.
(2) All earth-moving must be done by or under the supervision of
contractors certified in erosion control practices by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be
removed from the site except for surplus topsoil from the
installation of impervious surfaces.
(4) Except for normal thinning, landscaping, and cutting of trees to
provide access to sunlight, existing vegetation shall be left intact to
minimize soil erosion and stormwater runoff.
A. Criterion: will not cause unreasonable highway or public road
congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways
or public roads, existing or proposed.
B. Standards.
(1) Street access: Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the
subdivision to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
and to avoid traffic congestion on any street.
(a) Street access to the subdivision shall be designed in
accordance with the standards of § 484-32A through F of this
Code.
(b) If a subdivision lot is proposed to have frontage on two or more
streets, access to the lot shall be restricted to the street where
there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards
to traffic and pedestrians. No individual lot shall access
directly onto United States Route 201; common driveways are
permitted.
(c) Provision shall be made for connections to adjoining lots of
similar existing or potential use wherever:
[1] The connection will facilitate fire protection services as
approved by the Fire Chief;
[2] The adjoining tract is deeded to or otherwise under the
control of the subdivider; or
[3] It would enable the public to travel between adjacent
developments without need to travel upon a street outside
the subdivision.
§ 490-13.4 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.5
405:395
(2) Street design, minimum standards for all streets: Any way designed
for the passage of motor vehicles within or accessing a subdivision
shall be constructed or improved to meet the following standards:
(a) A right-of-way shall be established a minimum of 40 feet in
width. Within a mobile home park, the right-of-way width may
be reduced to 23 feet. The right-of-way shall be separate and
distinct from the lots, and shall not be used in computation of
minimum lot sizes.
(b) The travelled surface must be no less than 18 feet in width, and
shall be surfaced as follows:
[1] A base course no less than 12 inches in thickness,
consisting of sand or gravel free from organic matter or
clay, and with no particles exceeding four inches in
diameter.
[2] A surface course no less than three inches in thickness,
consisting of sand or gravel free from organic matter or
clay, and with a minimum of 70% passing through a onehalf-
inch sieve.
[3] Bituminous pavement is not required, but if it is provided,
the pavement shall conform to the standards of subsection
B(3)(b), below, regarding depth.
(c) The street shall be aligned to facilitate the passage of
emergency vehicles: The minimum radius for a horizontal
curve shall be 150 feet. The maximum grade shall be 10%. A
turn-around shall be constructed on all dead-end roads as near
to the terminus as practicable. The perpendicular leg of the
turnaround shall be no less than 35 feet and constructed to the
same standard as the traveled way.
(d) All streets must be named at the time of subdivision approval.
Names shall be assigned in accordance with Chapter 343 of
this Code.
(e) A street which is not intended for acceptance by the Town of
Madison shall be noted on the subdivision plan as follows:
[Name of Street] shall remain a private street to be maintained
by the developer or lot owners and shall not be offered to,
accepted, or maintained by the Town of Madison unless
improved to meet public road standards.
(f) At the time of subdivision approval, the applicant shall
demonstrate with reasonable certainty that funding for
continued maintenance of the road has been provided for,
either through a self-funding mechanism or through an
§ 490-13.5 MADISON CODE § 490-13.5
405:396
organization with the authority to assess users of the road for
maintenance costs.
(3) Street design, public streets: Streets designed for public use and
which may be offered for acceptance by the Town of Madison shall
be constructed to the standards of this section. Construction of a
street to these standards and acceptance by the Planning Board of
the subdivision plan shall not be interpreted as acceptance by the
Town as a Town way.
(a) For the purpose of design, streets shall be classified as major
or minor streets. A major street is one which will serve 40 or
more residential lots or units or which will serve commercial
lots.
(b) Design standards.
Standard
Major
Street
Minor
Street
Right-of-way width 60 feet 50 feet
Minimum travel surface width 30 feet 20 feet
Minimum pavement width
(where required)
24 feet 18 feet
Minimum pavement depth, total
(after compaction)
4 inches 3 1/4 inches
Surface course 1 1/2 inches 1 1/2 inches
Base course 2 1/2 inches 1 3/4 inches
Thickness of aggregate base
Subbase course (maximum
stone 4 inches)
24 inches 18 inches
Crushed base course 6 inches 3 inches
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5%
Maximum grade 5% 8%
Minimum radius of horizontal
curves at center line
400 feet 230 feet
Minimum tangent between
reverse curves
200 feet 100 feet
(c) Material and construction requirements.
[1] All construction materials, including but not limited to
aggregate, bituminous pavement, fabrics, and culverts,
shall conform to Standard Specifications for Highways and
Bridges (MaineDOT, most current edition).
[2] Prior to grading, the entire right-of-way shall be cleared of
stumps, roots, brush, and other organic matter. Organic
§ 490-13.5 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.5
405:397
material and topsoil shall be removed to a minimum depth
of two feet below the finished grade within the roadway
area.
[3] In soils which are not compactible due to wetness or which
have been identified as unsuitable for road construction, a
filter fabric shall be placed as specified in Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges or the soil shall
be excavated to a depth of two feet below the subgrade
and replaced with materials meeting the specifications for
aggregate subbase.
[4] Areas disturbed during construction which have not been
used for the travel surface shall be revegetated in
conformance with the erosion control plan.
(d) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be no longer than 800
feet in length, and contain a turnaround at the closed end. The
turnaround may be circular, in which case it shall be no less
than a fifty-foot center line radius within a circular right-of-way
no less than seventy-five-foot radius, or may be a hammerheadstyle
turnaround consisting of a perpendicular leg no less than
25 feet in width and 40 feet in length.
(e) Sidewalks and crosswalks. The Planning Board may require
sidewalks within a development only if the street being
accessed has a sidewalk. All sidewalks and crosswalks shall
comply with standards pursuant to the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 USC § 12101).
(f) Parking lots. Any parking lots provided for common or public
use shall be designed and constructed as per standards in
§ 484-23 of this Code.
(4) Intersection design.
(a) All intersections shall be designed as closely to perpendicular
as practicable, but in no case shall a road intersect at less than
75°.
(b) The minimum curb or pavement radius at intersections shall be
25 feet adjoining major streets and 15 feet adjoining minor
streets.
(c) All streets entering a curbed street shall be curbed and paved
with materials matching the curbing and pavement of the
street being entered for a minimum distance of 50 feet from
the intersection. Runoff from curbed streets shall be managed
in accordance with the Stormwater Management Plan.
(5) Installation and inspection.
§ 490-13.5 MADISON CODE § 490-13.5
405:398
§ 490-13.6. Sewage disposal.
§ 490-13.7. Solid waste.
(a) If the proposed street has been designed by a registered
professional engineer (PE), the Planning Board may make as a
condition of approval that the engineer be required to inspect
the construction of the street at the expense of the applicant,
and report to the Board whether the street has been
constructed according to the approved design.
(b) If the street will not be inspected by a PE, the Road
Commissioner or his/her agent shall inspect the installation at
periodic intervals and report to the Planning Board whether
the street has been constructed according to the approved
design.
A. Criterion: will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not
cause an unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are
utilized.
B. Standards.
(1) When not serviced by the public sewerage system, the applicant
shall provide a completed Maine Department of Human Services
site evaluation form (HHE-200) which evidences adequate soil
conditions for subsurface wastewater disposal on each lot. Location
of test pits and proposed subsurface wastewater disposal fields
shall be shown on the plat.
(2) When two or more lots or buildings share a common sanitary
treatment disposal system, the system shall be owned and
maintained in common by an owners' association or, in the case of a
mobile home park, by the park owner. Covenants in the deeds for
each lot or unit shall require membership in the association and
provide for adequate funding to assure proper maintenance of the
system.
(3) Wastewater may be discharged to public sewers only and in such
quantities and/or of such quality as to be compatible with municipal
sewage treatment operations. The applicant shall provide a letter
from the superintendent of the Anson-Madison Sanitary District
stating that the development will not exceed the capacity of the
collection system or treatment plant and approving the design of
any new or expanded collection system.
(4) When a subdivision is to be served by connection to the public
sewer system, all elements of the expanded system, including
expansion of existing collection lines if necessary, shall be installed
at the expense of the subdivider.
§ 490-13.5 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.7
405:399
§ 490-13.8. Cultural and natural values.
§ 490-13.9. Conformity with local ordinances and plans.
A. Criterion: will not cause an unreasonable burden on the Town's ability
to dispose of solid waste.
B. Standard. If solid waste estimated to be generated by the proposed
subdivision exceeds the Town's waste disposal contract, or would cause
the disposal facility to no longer be in compliance with its license from
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, the applicant will
make alternate arrangements for disposal of solid waste from the
subdivision.
A. Criterion: will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural
beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat,
or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical
or visual access to the shoreline.
B. Standards.
(1) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practical, by minimizing tree removal and grade changes. The
Planning Board may require that the application include a
landscape plan that will show the extent of preservation of existing
trees, the replacement of trees and vegetation, graded contours,
streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic, or
environmentally significant areas.
(2) If the proposed subdivision contains any historical or archeological
sites identified by the comprehensive plan or information from the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission (MHPC), the applicant
shall contact the MHPC for a review of the development plan and
recommendations for preserving the resources. The applicant shall
describe how historic or archeological resources on the site will be
avoided or preserved.
(3) If any portion of the tract to be subdivided contains areas identified
on maps published by the Natural Areas Program of the Maine
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry as being
significant wildlife habitat, habitat for threatened or endangered
species, or a critical natural area, the applicant will retain a
qualified biologist to examine the area and submit
recommendations for its preservation or integration into the
subdivision.
(4) Any public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body or to
abutting property shall be included by means of easements or rightof-
way, or should be identified as public open space, with provisions
made for continued public access.
§ 490-13.7 MADISON CODE § 490-13.9
405:400
A. Criterion: is in conformance with the duly adopted plans and
ordinances for the Town of Madison.
B. Standards.
(1) Minimum dimensions for subdivision lots. Lots within the proposed
subdivision will conform to the dimensional standards and design
criteria below:
(a) When access to the public sewer system is provided,
residential units may not exceed a density of one per 10,000
square feet. Individual lots shall have a minimum of 80 feet of
frontage on an existing or proposed street and be a minimum
of 10,000 square feet in area.
(b) Lots serviced by individual subsurface wastewater disposal
systems shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on an
existing or proposed street and contain not less than 20,000
square feet in area.
(c) A subdivision proposed for commercial or industrial use shall
have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on an existing or
proposed street and a minimum lot area consistent with the
provisions of 12 M.R.S.A. § 4807-A.
(d) Lots within a mobile home park shall meet the following
standards:
[1] Lots connected to the public sewer shall contain not less
than 6,500 square feet;
[2] Lots connected to a central, on-site subsurface wastewater
disposal system approved by the Maine Department of
Human Services shall contain not less than 12,000 square
feet;
[3] Lots served by individual subsurface wastewater disposal
systems shall contain not less than 20,000 square feet;
[4] No lot shall be less than 50 feet in width.
(2) Development subject to shoreland zoning (Chapter 478 of this
Code) and/or floodplain management (Chapter 422) shall comply
with the provisions of those chapters in all respects. Permits
required to be granted under those chapters shall be granted prior
to final approval of the subdivision.
(3) All proposed lots shall be surveyed and monuments placed to
designate lot boundaries. Stone or concrete monuments or iron
pins shall be set at all corners and angle points of lots to be created
and at intersections and points of curvature or angle points of any
right-of-way. Stone or concrete monuments shall be a minimum of
four inches square and set so that the top is within four inches of
§ 490-13.9 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.9
405:401
§ 490-13.10. Financial and technical capacity.
§ 490-13.11. Surface waters, outstanding river segments.
the ground surface. All monuments shall bear the name and license
number of the surveyor who installed them.
(4) In order to ensure access to direct sunlight as required by 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4405, no building within a subdivision shall exceed 35
feet in height unless located at least 50 feet from all side and rear
lot boundaries.
A. Criterion: the developer has adequate financial and technical capacity
to meet the standards of this chapter.
B. Standards.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that he or she has adequate
financial resources to complete the subdivision development.
Adequate financial resources may be demonstrated by submission
of an estimate of development costs to be incurred and a plan for
providing or obtaining the resources necessary to meet the costs.
(a) A performance guarantee shall be provided adequate to cover
the costs of all public improvements prior to final approval.
Public improvements include, but are not limited to, streets,
parking lots, drainage structures, fire protection facilities, and
public water and sewer lines. The form and structure of the
performance guarantee shall be as provided in § 490-14 of this
chapter.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that he or she has the technical
capacity to complete the subdivision development. The applicant
will provide names and qualifications of contractors, engineers, or
other professionals retained for the development or describe the
process by which such individuals will be hired.
(3) The applicant shall make provision for long-term maintenance of all
land and facilities proposed for the general benefit of occupants of
the development, including but not limited to common open space,
landscaping, drainage systems, private roads and parking lots,
community recreation facilities or sewerage systems.
(4) The Planning Board shall not approve an application from a person
who has an unresolved violation of a previously approved
subdivision or commercial development plan.
A. Criterion: whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed
of any pond or lake or within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or
river, will not adversely affect the quality of such body of water or
unreasonably affect the shoreline of such body of water.
§ 490-13.9 MADISON CODE § 490-13.11
405:402
§ 490-13.12. Groundwater.
B. Standards.
(1) The applicant will demonstrate that he or she has complied with all
of the terms of the shoreland zoning (Chapter 478 of this Code).
Permits required to be obtained under shoreland zoning will be
provided prior to final review of the application.
(2) The Kennebec River from the Route 148 bridge north is defined by
state law, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401(7)I, as an outstanding river
segment. Within this segment, any lots with frontage on the river
shall include a covenant that all principal structures have a
combined shore frontage and setback of 500 feet. If subdivision lots
are separated from shore frontage by an unplatted strip of land less
than 250 feet in width, they shall be treated as if the lot lines
extend to the shore.
A. Criterion: will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities,
adversely affect the quality or quantity of groundwater.
B. Standards.
(1) No subdivision shall increase any contaminant in the groundwater
to more than 1/2 of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No
subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the
groundwater to more than the Secondary Drinking Water
Standards.
(2) If groundwater already contains contaminants in excess of the
Primary Standards, and the subdivision is to be served by on-site
groundwater supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated.
(3) If groundwater already contains contaminants in excess of the
Secondary Standards, the subdivision shall not cause the
concentration of the substance in question to exceed 150% of the
existing concentration.
(4) The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment of the tract to
be subdivided if it is located above the sand and gravel aquifer
mapped for the Town of Madison or if it exceeds 40 lots or dwelling
units with individual wells and septic systems, or if it is a
commercial or industrial subdivision. When a hydrogeologic
assessment is required, the assessment should contain at least the
following information:
(a) A map showing the basic soil types.
(b) The depth to the water table at representative points
throughout the subdivision.
(c) Drainage patterns throughout the subdivision.
§ 490-13.11 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.12
405:403
§ 490-13.13. Flood areas.
§ 490-13.14. Freshwater wetlands.
(d) Data on existing groundwater quality, either from test wells in
the subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring
properties.
(e) A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater
disposal systems and drinking water wells within the
subdivision and within 200 feet of the subdivision boundaries.
(f) An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on
groundwater resources. In the case of residential development,
the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of postdevelopment
nitrate-nitrogen concentration at any wells within
the subdivision, at the subdivision boundaries and at a distance
of 1,000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever
is a shorter distance.
(5) Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells
shall be constructed as shown on the subdivision plan. If
construction standards for drinking water wells are recommended
in the assessment, those standards shall be included as a condition
of plan approval, and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected
lots.
A. Criterion: based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps,
and information presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is
in a flood-prone area.
B. Standards.
(1) If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in a flood-prone area, the
applicant shall identify and map the base flood elevation.
(2) All public utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
the potential for flood damage.
(3) All structures within the subdivision shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards of flood management, Chapter 422
of this code. The subdivision plan and associated documents shall
contain a note to this effect, as required in § 422-9E.
A. Criterion: all freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have
been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application,
regardless of the size of these wetlands.
B. Standard. Freshwater wetlands shall be delineated on the ground and
on plan drawings submitted with the application. Wetlands shall be
§ 490-13.12 MADISON CODE § 490-13.14
405:404
§ 490-13.15. Farmland.
§ 490-13.16. River, stream or brook.
§ 490-13.17. Stormwater.
identified in accordance with the 1987 Corps of Engineers Wetland
Delineation Manual or subsequent revision. Mapping of freshwater
wetlands may be done with the help of the local soil and water
conservation district.
A. Criterion: all farmland within the proposed subdivision has been
identified on maps submitted as part of the application.
B. Standard. All areas of farmland must be identified on one or more plan
drawings. Farmland is defined by state law as "any area of five or more
acres of land that is classified as prime farmland, unique farmland, or
farmland of statewide importance by the USDA Natural Resource
Conservation Service, or is used for the production of agricultural
products as defined in 7 M.R.S.A. § 152(2)." Any mapping of farmland
may be done with the help of the local soil and water conservation
district.
A. Criterion: any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
subdivision has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the
application.
B. Standard. All rivers, streams and brooks within the proposed
subdivision shall be depicted on one or more plan drawings. For
purposes of this section, "river, stream or brook" has the same meaning
as in 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-B(9).
A. Criterion: the proposed subdivision will provide for adequate
stormwater management.
B. Standards.
(1) Adequate provisions must be made for the collection and disposal
of all stormwater that runs off proposed streets, parking lots, or
other impervious surfaces. A stormwater management plan,
prepared consistent with the publication Stormwater Management
for Maine (Department of Environmental Protection, January 2006,
or as revised) will be required when the subdivision involves the
construction or improvement of streets, parking lots, or other
impervious surfaces.
(2) To the extent possible, the plan should retain stormwater using the
natural features of the site and without adverse impacts on
abutting or downstream properties.
(3) Unless the discharge is directly to the Kennebec River, stormwater
runoff systems must detain or retain water such that the rate of
§ 490-13.14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-13.17
405:405
§ 490-13.18. Spaghetti lots prohibited.
§ 490-13.19. Lake phosphorous concentration.
flow from the site after development does not exceed the
predevelopment rate. The applicant must demonstrate that onand
off-site downstream channel or system capacity is sufficient to
carry the flow without adverse effects, including, but not limited
to, flooding and erosion of shoreland areas, or that he/she will be
responsible for whatever improvements are needed to provide the
required increase in capacity and/or mitigation.
(4) Any applicant for a project which requires a stormwater
management permit from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection must submit a copy of the approved permit at time of
final approval.
(5) For projects which do not require a stormwater management
permit, the use of low-impact development techniques as described
in Stormwater Management for Maine is highly encouraged.
(6) For projects involving structural treatments such as detention
ponds, a stormwater maintenance plan (SMP) must be submitted at
the time of application. The SMP must indicate how stormwater
management structures will be maintained through the course of
their projected life.
(7) The biological and chemical properties of receiving waters must
not be degraded by stormwater runoff. The use of oil and grease
traps in catch basins, the use of on-site vegetated waterways, and
vegetated buffer strips along waterways and drainage swales, and
the reduction in use of deicing salts and fertilizers may be required.
A. Criterion: if any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on
a river, stream, brook, or great pond as these features are defined in 38
M.R.S.A. § 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision will
have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
B. Standards.
(1) Within any shoreland zone, the ratio of lot length to width shall not
be more than 5:1 except where the rural setting of the lot and
topographic configuration of the land will permit a greater ratio,
there is no shore frontage involved, and deed covenants or other
restrictions prevent the resubdividing of the lot.
(2) Panhandle ("flag") lots and other odd-shaped lots in which narrow
strips are joined to other parcels in order to meet minimum lot size
requirements are prohibited.
A. Criterion: the long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision
will not unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus
§ 490-13.17 MADISON CODE § 490-13.19
405:406
§ 490-13.20. Impact on adjoining municipality.
§ 490-13.21. Lands subject to liquidation harvesting.
§ 490-14. Performance guarantees.
concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed
subdivision.
B. Standard. If the proposed subdivision is to be located entirely or partly
within the direct watershed of Wesserunsett Lake, the application will
demonstrate that the export of phosphorous will be controlled as per
standards in Stormwater Management for Maine, Volume II (Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, 2008 or as revised). In
calculating the allowable level of phosphorous import, a moderate level
of lake water quality protection is to be assumed.
A. Criterion: for any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal
boundaries, the proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable
traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of
existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of the
subdivision is located.
B. Standard. If any proposed subdivision crosses municipal boundaries,
the Board shall conduct a review parallel to the review of the adjoining
municipality, and shall attempt to conduct at least one joint meeting. If
either municipality requests a traffic study or traffic impact analysis
from the applicant, the study shall be made available to both review
authorities.
A. Criterion: timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been
harvested in violation of rules adopted pursuant to 12 M.R.S.A., section
8869, subsection 14, adopted by the Maine Forest Service to
substantially eliminate liquidation harvesting.
B. Standards.
(1) If the tract to be subdivided shows evidence of having been
forested within the preceding 10 years, the Planning Board shall
require a determination signed by the Department of Agriculture,
Conservation, and Forestry or a forester licensed pursuant to Title
32, Chapter 76, stating whether the timber was harvested in
compliance with rules adopted pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 8869.
(2) If a violation of the above-cited rules has occurred, the Board must
determine prior to granting approval for the subdivision that five
years have elapsed from the date the landowner under whose
ownership the harvest occurred acquired the parcel. The Planning
Board may request technical assistance from the Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in the interpretation of this
standard.
§ 490-13.19 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-14
405:407
A. Prior to submission for final approval, the subdivider shall prepare and
submit to the Board of Selectmen for approval a financial guarantee in
an amount sufficient to cover the cost of any public improvements. The
financial guarantee options available to the subdivider are:
(1) A performance bond from the surety bonding company authorized
to do business in the State of Maine, which bond shall be payable to
the Town of Madison.
(2) An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable
institution authorized to do business in the State of Maine
satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen, and in a form satisfactory to
said Board, which letter of credit shall certify the following:
(a) That the applicant does guarantee funds in a specified amount
and for a specified duration;
(b) That, in case of failure on the part of the applicant to
satisfactorily complete the project within the required time
period, the creditor shall pay to the Town immediately, and
without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance
the project's proper completion up to the credit limit stated in
the letter.
(3) Evidence that cash has been deposited in an escrow account at a
bank or other reputable institution having an office in Somerset
County, with the escrow agreement acceptable to the Board of
Selectmen. The agreement shall provide that in case of failure on
the part of the applicant to satisfactorily complete the project
within the required time period, the escrow agent shall pay to the
Town immediately, and without further action, such funds as are
necessary to finance the proper completion of said project, up to
the original cash deposit into the escrow account.
(4) A letter from a bank, similar financial institution, or a government
agency demonstrating that credit is available to finance the
proposed project or that the funding institution intends to fund the
project, indicating the required amount of funds and the specified
uses. This option will be acceptable only if compliance with
Subsection. A(1) through (3) of this section would be cost
prohibitive as determined by the Planning Board.
(5) The most recent corporate annual report(s) of the applicant, or a
parent company of the applicant, indicating sufficient financial
capacity to fund or obtain financing for the development together
with explanatory material interpreting the report, will be
acceptable if compliance with Subsection A(1) through (4) of this
section is determined by the Planning Board to be unfeasible for
the applicant.
B. The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction, taking into account
§ 490-14 MADISON CODE § 490-14
405:408
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction,
provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee
to the applicant, and a date after which the applicant will be in default
and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
C. When the applicant has satisfactorily completed the improvements as
set forth in its approval, the Town shall permit the applicant to cancel
said guarantee.
§ 490-14 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-14
405:409

ARTICLE V
Administrative Provisions and Definitions
§ 490-15. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 490-16. Severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this chapter.
§ 490-17. Conflict with other provisions.
This chapter shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, regulation, ordinance, permit
or provision of law. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon
the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
B. As enumerated in § 490-3, it shall be a violation of this chapter to
engage in any development activity, including, but not limited to, sale or
leasing of lots, earth-moving, road-building, or construction or
occupancy of buildings, without first obtaining approval under this
chapter. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer,
upon determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to
the owner. The declaration shall consist of:
(1) The name of the property owner and address or legal description of
the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(2) A clear and unequivocal declaration that the activity is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
(3) A clear statement that the Town has authority to find a violation
and a citation to that authority;
(4) Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation; and
(5) A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to this chapter.
C. If a violation has not been corrected to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer within a reasonable period of time, the CEO will
submit the declaration and his or her proposed enforcement action to
the Board of Selectmen for action as provided by Maine law.
D. Penalties. The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, shall apply
to any violation of this chapter.
§ 490-15 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-18
405:411
§ 490-18. Abrogation.
Effective the date of enactment by the Town Meeting, this chapter repeals
and replaces the previously enacted Chapter 490, Subdivision of Land.
§ 490-19. Definitions of terms.
In general, words and terms used in this chapter shall have their customary
dictionary meanings. More specifically, certain words and terms used herein
are defined as follows:
ABUTTING PROPERTY — All parcels of land which share a common
boundary or adjoin at any line or point, or which are separated only by
a street, right-of-way, or stream. An abutter is a person who is the listed
owner of abutting property as recorded in the Town of Madison tax records
or those of an adjoining town.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Any portion of the subdivision which is intended
for the general benefit of subdivision occupants or the public in general
and which has not been developed or substantially improved. Common
open space includes landscaped areas, parks, nature trails, and playground
areas.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application shall be considered complete
upon submission of the required fee and all information required by this
chapter, as determined by a vote by the Board.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The comprehensive plan of the Town of
Madison, including any other locally adopted policy documents, including,
but not limited to, plans for open space, downtown redevelopment, or
historic preservation.
DEVELOPMENT COSTS — The anticipated cost of developing all public
improvements within a subdivision.
DIRECT WATERSHED — With specific reference to a great pond, that
portion of a watershed which drains directly into the pond without passing
through an upstream pond.
DRINKING WATER STANDARDS — Thresholds for contaminants set in the
Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A CMR Ch. 231). Standards
have been established for contaminants which pose a health threat
("primary") and those which pose an aesthetic concern ("secondary").
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway serving one or two dwelling units or
commercial traffic of fewer than 50 vehicle trips per day.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which
is separate from other such rooms or suites of rooms, and which contains
independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities;
includes single-family houses, manufactured housing, and the units in a
duplex, apartment house, multifamily dwellings, and residential
condominiums.
§ 490-18 MADISON CODE § 490-19
405:412
FARMLAND — Any area of five or more acres of land that is classified
as prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland of statewide importance
by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resource
Conservation Service, or is used for the production of agricultural products
as defined in 7 M.R.S.A. § 152(2).
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Those land areas which are susceptible to
inundation during a one-hundred-year flood (a flood with a one-percent
probability of occurring in any given year). Flood-prone areas shall include
mapped areas of floodplain and floodway (zones A or AE). Where maps are
unavailable or of insufficient accuracy, a determination may be made by a
licensed professional surveyor.
FRESHWATER WETLAND —
FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot boundary which abuts a street or
shoreline. A frontage measurement consists of the horizontal distance
between the points where side lot lines intersect the street or shoreline as
measured along the lot boundary. On lots with more than one frontage, such
as corner lots, a requirement for street frontage shall apply to only one
frontage.
HYDROGEOLOGIC ASSESSMENT — An assessment of groundwater
quantity, quality, availability, and movement, for the purpose of determining
whether adequate water supply exists for development needs without
significant negative impact to neighboring properties.
MEDIUM-INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY — A soil survey designating areas of
similar characteristics with accuracy as small as three acres. For Madison,
the Soil Survey of Somerset County, Maine; Southern Part, published by
the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, is
recognized as a medium-intensity soil survey.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership, improved
for the placement of three or more mobile homes which are owned or leased
by individuals other than the landowner.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any surety or commitment that may be
accepted by the Town of Madison to assure that public improvements
required as part of the subdivision approval will be satisfactorily completed.
A freshwater wetland means freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas, which are:
Inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soils; and
(1)
(2) Not considered part of a great pond, river, stream or brook.
A.
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land
that do not conform to the criteria.
B.
§ 490-19 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-19
405:413
PERSON — Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Madison. Where
the term "Board" is used in this chapter, it shall refer to the Planning Board
unless a different board is specifically mentioned.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — Any building or structure in which the primary
use of the premise takes place. There may be more than one principal
structure on a lot if both or all are dedicated to the primary use, e.g.,
multiple single-family homes or multiple retail buildings.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — Structures placed within the subdivision or
intended to serve the subdivision residents, occupants, or lot owners or
the public in general, including but not limited to streets and sidewalks,
parking lots, drainage structures, fire protection facilities, and public water
or sewer lines.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A water supply system that provides
drinking water to at least 15 service connections or services water to at
least 25 individuals daily.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land intended for vehicular, pedestrian, or
utility passage within a larger tract of land, and not calculated for the
purposes of lot size.
STREET — Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, boulevards,
highways, roads and other rights-of-way, as well as areas on subdivision
plans designated as rights-of-way.
SUBDIVISION — A subdivision shall be as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401,
with the following modifications:
TRACT, OR PARCEL OF LAND — All contiguous land in same ownership,
whether or not the tract is separated at any point by an intermittent or
nonnavigable stream, or a private road established by the abutting land
owners.
TRAVELED SURFACE — That part of a street provided for the movement of
vehicles, exclusive of shoulders.
VARIANCE — Modification or relief of a provision of this chapter, as granted
by the Madison Board of Appeals.
VEHICLE TRIP — A single, one-way motor vehicle movement past a point or
into or out of a subject property.
A lot of 40 or more acres shall not be counted as a subdivision lot for
purpose of review; and
A.
A new commercial building shall be reviewed under Chapter 484, Site
Review, regardless of the number of occupancies. An existing lot or
building which is to be divided into multiple lots or occupancies shall be
reviewed as a subdivision if it is not otherwise required to be reviewed
under Chapter 484.
B.
§ 490-19 MADISON CODE § 490-19
405:414
WAIVER — A modification of one or more submission requirements for
subdivision review, granted by the Planning Board upon a finding that
the submission requirement is not necessary to proper review of the
application.
WELLHEAD PROTECTION PLAN — A plan document prepared for the
purpose of protecting the source water supply from contamination, using as
a preferred model the publication Do It Yourself Wellhead Protection Plan,
published by the Maine Drinking Water Program, Department of Health and
Human Services.
§ 490-19 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 490-19
405:415
Division 2: Board of Selectmen Regulations
Chapter 503
ADOPTION OF CODE BY BOARD OF SELECTMEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code — See Ch. 1.
§ 503-1. Adoption; effect.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Madison hereby adopts the
regulations and policies known as "Division 2, Board of Selectmen
Regulations" of the Code of the Town of Madison, as published by General
Code, together with the change of numbering, formatting and stylizing
thereof, a copy of said Code being on file with the Town Clerk, effective
on passage. This resolution shall supersede and replace by reference to
said Code the regulations and policies of a general and permanent nature
heretofore adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Madison.
§ 503-2. Specific revisions.
Throughout the Code, references to the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated
(M.R.S.A.) are revised to reflect the numbering of the statutes as of the
publication of this Code as follows: (Chapter and section number references
are to the regulations as they have been renumbered and appear in the
Code.)
Code Section &
Subject OLD Citation
REVISED to Current
Citation
Chapter 539, Complaints, Article I, Complaints Against Town
Employees
§ 539-5 (Manager) Section 2313 of Title 30
M.R.S.A.
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2633
Chapter 550, Donations
§ 550-2C (conditional
gifts)
Title 30, Section 1904 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5654
Chapter 606, Investment Policy
§§ 606-1B and
606-2B(1) (investment
objectives)
30 MRSA Sec. 5051A 30-A M.R.S.A § 5706
Chapter 644, Meetings, Article I, Public Participation
§ 644-5 (disorderly
conduct)
Title 17A, Section 501 17-A M.R.S.A § 501-A
§ 490-19 MADISON CODE § 503-2
405:416
Code Section &
Subject OLD Citation
REVISED to Current
Citation
Chapter 694, Roads and Highways, Article I, Seasonal Closing
§ 694-1 (statutory
authority)
Title 29 M.R.S.A
Section 902
29-A M.R.S.A § 2395
Chapter 729, Tax Increment Financing, Article I, Policy
§ 729-3A (statutory
authority); and
§ 729-6F
30-A M.R.S.A Section
5252-5254
30-A M.R.S.A §§ 5222
through 5224
§ 729-5F (no unequal
apportionment)
30-A M.R.S.A Section
5254
30-A M.R.S.A § 5224
§ 503-3. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this resolution are hereby made Chapter 503 of the
Code of the Town of Madison, and the sections of this resolution shall be
numbered §§ 503-1 to 503-3, inclusive.
Chapter 508
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, TOWN-OWNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational vehicles ordinance — See Ch.
405.
Use of Town equipment and facilities — See
Ch. 738.
§ 508-1. Use by employees only.
Town-owned ATVs will be used only by Town of Madison employees.
§ 508-2. Completion of safety course required.
Prior to operating any ATV for the purpose of official business, employee
must attend and successfully complete a Town-approved ATV safety course.
§ 508-3. Training on employee's own time.
If a Town employee wishes to utilize an ATV, employee will attend training
course on his/her own time.
§ 508-4. Transportation of public restricted.
Town-owned ATVs may not be used to transport members of the public
except in an emergency situation.
§ 503-2 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, TOWN-OWNED § 508-5
508:417
§ 508-5. Storage requirements.
Town-owned ATVs when not in use must be stored in such a manner that
they will not be accessible for unauthorized use.
§ 508-6. Use for transportation only.
ATVs are to be used by Town employees as a working tool to provide safe
transportation and are not to be used for pursuit purposes.
§ 508-7. Safety required.
ATVs are never to be used by employees to complete a particular task
whenever there is any question as to the capability of the ATV and/or the
operator to complete the task safely.
Chapter 514
ANIMAL CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog control ordinance — See Ch. 148, Art. I.
§ 514-1. Making complaint.
All animal control complaints will be directed to the Madison Police
Department, which will log complaints and notify the Town's Animal Control
Officer of the complaint. The Animal Control Officer will call complainant
to gather additional information and will log the name of person making
call, telephone number, date, time, location of complaint and nature of
complaint.
§ 514-2. Responding to complaint.
Procedures for responding to complaint:
A. Stray or abandoned animal is under control of complainant and
complainant will hold animal until Animal Control Officer arrives; then
Animal Control Officer will promptly go to site, pick up animal and
transport.
B. If stray or abandoned animal is running at large and complainant knows
who is owner of animal, Animal Control Officer will contact owner of
animal and issue warning; if animal is running at large again, a
summons will be issued. If there is a second complaint on the same
animal, and complainant will issue statement of facts, then Animal
Control Officer, under guidance of a police officer, will issue summons.
§ 508-5 MADISON CODE § 514-3
514:418
§ 514-3. Unwanted animals.
The Animal Control Officer will not pick up unwanted animals, such as a
litter of kittens or puppies, for the convenience of the owner.
§ 514-4. Animal shelter.
The Animal Control Officer will be provided a key to the Somerset County
Humane Society Animal Shelter. When an animal is brought to the shelter,
the Animal Control Officer will complete a form provided by the Society for
all animals left at shelter.
Chapter 532
(RESERVED)
Chapter 539
COMPLAINTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recall of elected official — See Ch. 120.
§ 514-3 COMPLAINTS § 514-4
539:419

ARTICLE I
Complaints Against Elected Town Officials
[Adopted 6-19-1979]
§ 539-1. Written, signed complaint required.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby declares that any citizen having a
complaint against an elected Town official where they desire some form of
action by the Board of Selectmen shall be required to file a written, signed
complaint with the Town Manager before the Board considers acting upon
said complaint.
§ 539-1 COMPLAINTS § 539-1
539:421

ARTICLE II
Complaints Against Town Employees
[Adopted 5-23-1983]
§ 539-2. Formal grievance.
Any member of the public who wishes to file a formal grievance against a
member of the Town workforce may do so in writing to the Town Manager
within 60 days. The Town Manager shall notify, in writing, all persons
involved as to the time, place and date of a hearing to be held on this matter,
and that the hearing may be opened to the public upon request of the
employee. At least three days' notice shall be given to allow for the parties
to prepare for the hearing. Informal rules of order shall apply which shall
be fair to the parties involved. The Town Manager or his or her designee
shall conduct the hearing and shall render final findings of facts and a
decision within seven days in writing, a copy of which shall be sent to all
parties involved. All personnel hearings shall be closed to the public unless
otherwise requested by the Town employee. The Town employee and the
party bringing the complaint shall be notified in writing of their right to be
represented by legal counsel.
§ 539-3. Hearing officer.
The Town Manager shall have the right to sit as the hearing officer even
though he or she may have had knowledge of the facts or could be
considered a witness for either party. The Town Manager may remove
himself or herself from the hearing officer's position and delegate either all
or part of his or her authority provided under this policy or state law to
another party. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final with respect
to Town administrative remedies, except in cases involving department
heads.
§ 539-4. Cases involving department heads.
In cases involving department head personnel, the department head or the
complainant shall have the right to appeal the hearing officer's decision to
the Board of Selectmen. In reviewing the decision, the Board shall see to it
that all due process rights were followed by the hearing officer and may at
its discretion hold a new hearing. The Board of Selectmen, in cases where a
new hearing is ordered, shall follow the same notice provisions as required
of the original hearing officer. The findings of the Board and its decision
shall be required to comply with the same provisions as required of the
original hearing officer. The decision of the Board of Selectmen shall be final
and shall be the end of all administrative remedies.
§ 539-5. Cases involving Town Manager.
In cases involving a grievance against the Town Manager, the procedures
outlined in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2633 shall be followed.
§ 539-2 COMPLAINTS § 539-5
539:423
Chapter 550
DONATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 49.
§ 550-1. Findings.
§ 550-2. Conditions for solicitation and acceptance of donations.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby outlines the conditions upon which
donations may be solicited and accepted by various departments and
agencies of the Town under the supervision of the Madison Board of
Selectmen:
A. Whereas, there is a need to provide fiscal responsibility in the
expenditure of all funds made available for public use regardless of the
source of the funds; and
B. Whereas, it is to the benefit of the citizens of Madison to keep the cost
of providing services to the absolute minimum by providing the
necessary incentives for raising funds from nonproperty tax sources;
and
C. Whereas, the availability of donations from nontax sources sometimes
results in the displacing of funds already raised through taxation and
frees these funds for other uses or return to the Town as a unexpended
balance; and
D. Whereas, there is a need to distinguish between funds raised by
departments of the Town and funds raised by unincorporated or
incorporated Volunteer Fireman Associations or any other group or
association raising funds for approved municipal purposes; and
E. Whereas, there is a need to identify which departments of the Town are
eligible for soliciting donations; now therefor be it resolved:
A. The Madison Public Library, Madison Fire Department, East Madison
Fire Department and the various recreational programs may solicit
funds from nontax sources. All other departments or agencies are
prohibited from soliciting monetary contributions and from keeping
funds in their possession.
B. Any and all monies raised, with the exception of monies raised for the
Madison Public Library, shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer
who shall duly issue a receipt for the same and deposit said money in a
reserve account. The reserve account shall consist of a checking and
savings account and monies entered into said reserve account shall be
§ 539-5 MADISON CODE § 550-2
550:424
accounted for and separated out in accordance with the program or
department for or by which the money was raised. Library funds shall
be deposited in the Library Fund checking or savings account in
accordance with the policy of the Library Trustees.
C. All conditional gifts shall be brought to the attention of the Madison
Board of Selectmen who shall follow the procedures outlined in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 5654.
D. Donations of a nonmonetary nature, such as supplies and equipment,
may be accepted without Selectmen's approval, provided the gift does
not have any conditions attached.
E. All monies deposited in the Reserve Account shall be withdrawn only
upon presentation to the Treasurer of a warrant signed by a majority of
the Madison Board of Selectmen.
F. No unexpended balances within department accounts caused by this
policy may be transferred to the Reserve Fund and all unexpended
balances shall therefore lapse into the Town general surplus account
unless provided otherwise by Town Meeting vote.
G. No monies raised by taxation in the General Fund shall be expended for
other uses should the need for said funds be displaced by a donation of
either a monetary or nonmonetary nature. Said funds may only be
withdrawn upon approval of the Madison Board of Selectmen in
accordance with Chapter 572, Expenditure of Public Funds, of the Code
of the Town of Madison.
H. Monies from reserve accounts may be drawn out by the Selectmen to
cover overdrafts from departments allowed to utilize the reserve
account, which were the result of mismanagement or failure to follow
this or other Town policies. Said money shall be deposited into the
General Fund.
I. The Madison and East Madison Volunteer Fireman Associations or any
other group or association raising funds for approved municipal
purposes shall be encouraged to incorporate and establish bylaws. The
receipt and disposal of funds raised or donated should be governed by
the association membership in accordance with any adopted bylaws.
J. The Madison and East Madison Volunteer Fireman Associations or any
other group or association raising funds for approved municipal
purposes shall be required to clearly identify their association or
group's name to the public when operating any fund-raising activity or
soliciting donations. The name of the Town of Madison or any of its
departments shall not appear in the name of any association or group.
These groups and organizations shall be required to inform the public
in writing that their contribution will be made available to said group or
association which is separate and distinct from the Town of Madison or
any of its departments.
§ 550-2 DONATIONS § 550-2
550:425
Chapter 554
DRUG AND ALCOHOL PREVENTION POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 673.
§ 554-1. Impairment prohibited.
No employee will work or report to work or be on Town property or on Town
business:
§ 554-2. Possession and/or use prohibited.
No employee will use, consume or possess, on Town property, time or
business, any illegal drugs, drugs or controlled substances not medically
authorized, or any other substances which impair job performance or pose
a hazard to the safety and welfare of the employee, the public or other
employees. The use of alcohol on Town premises is also prohibited, except
in connection with Town-sponsored social events.
§ 554-3. Violation of policy.
An employee who violates the Town's Drug and Alcohol Prevention Policy
will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment. However, the Town reserves the right, in its
discretion, to allow an employee to seek professional assistance in dealing
with a substance abuse problem rather than to be subjected to disciplinary
action.
§ 554-4. Drug-Free Workplace Policy.
A. With any illegal drugs, or drug or controlled substance not medically
authorized, in her/his system, or
B. Under the influence of or impaired by alcohol or any other substances
which impair job performance or pose a hazard to the safety and
welfare of the employee, the public or other employees.
A. In addition to the rules and procedures set forth above, the Town
maintains a drug-free workplace, in keeping with federal Drug-Free
Workplace Act of 1988. The Town prohibits its employees from
unlawfully manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, using or possessing
any illegal drug, or paraphernalia associated with illegal drugs, on the
Town's premises or while engaged in Town business.
B. As used in this policy, the term "illegal drug" means any controlled
substances as identified in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, as
further defined by federal regulations. "Town premises" include, but are
§ 550-2 MADISON CODE § 554-4
554:426
Chapter 565
ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS
§ 565-1. Findings; permit required.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds a need to implement a policy
on the installation of electrical service. It will be a requirement of this policy
for anyone seeking a new electrical service to first obtain a permit from
MEW or the Town of Madison's Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 565-2. Purpose.
The reason for this policy is Maine law prohibits a public utility from
installing services to a lot or structure unless written authorization attesting
to the validity and currency of all local permits required under the
Subdivision Control Law and the Shoreland Zoning Law have been issued
by the appropriate municipal officials. This prohibition is provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4406 for subdivisions and 38 M.R.S.A. § 444 for shoreland
zoning.
§ 565-3. Prerequisites for installing service.
Therefore, prior to installing service, it is necessary to have the appropriate
municipal officials (usually the Code Enforcement Officer) certify that these
laws do not apply (because the lot is not a subdivision or a shoreland zoning
area), or, if either or both laws apply to the lot or structure, certify that all
not limited to, the Town's offices, parking lots and any other area
where an employee is engaged in Town business and/or operating Town
equipment.
C. Compliance with this policy is a condition of employment and continued
employment with the Town. The Town may, as it chooses, report any
employee who violates this policy to law enforcement authorities.
Although any employee who violates the provision of this policy will be
subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of
employment, the Town also reveres the right, in its discretion, to
impose a lesser degree of discipline or refer the employee for drug
counseling, rehabilitation, or some other form of employee assistance.
However, the Town's reservation of this right is not intended to create,
and does not create, any right ion the part of any employee to a lesser
degree of discipline or employee assistance.
D. Any employee who is convicted under criminal drug law based upon
workplace conduct must notify the Town Manager in writing within five
days of such conviction. The Town, in turn, will notify any applicable
federal agency from which it receives a grant or contract of any
employee work-related drug conviction within 10 days after receiving
notice of such conviction.
§ 554-4 ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS § 565-3
565:427
local permits and/or authorizations required for the lot or structure have
been obtained and are still valid.
Chapter 566
ELECTRONIC SIGN USAGE POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park usage policy — See Ch. 667, Art. IV. Use of Town property — See Ch. 738.
§ 566-1. Purpose.
To establish rules regarding requests for information placed on the Town of
Madison electronic sign.
§ 566-2. Policy.
§ 566-3. Responsibility.
It will be the responsibility of the Town office to manage and submit
messages to the electronic sign. If there are any questions regarding
whether or not a group requesting use of the sign is authorized per this
policy, or regarding the content of a message, the Town Manager will make
a decision regarding the request.
A. Nonprofit community and civic groups may request announcements be
placed on the electronic sign either by calling the Town office at
696-3971 or by submitting the required information in writing, or from
the Town website at www.madisonmaine.com.
B. Requests56 should include the group name and a contact person with a
contact telephone number and e-mail address, and include who, what,
when, where, and why of the event. Requests will be placed on the sign
one week prior to the event date, if the Town is given appropriate
notification of the event. The Town Manager has the sole discretion to
accept or reject the organization making the request and/or the content
of the message, as well as the ability to alter the text accordingly to fit
the sign design. In the event there are several requests for any given
time period, the requests will be posted on a first-come first-serve basis.
C. In the event of an emergency, the Town has the right to suspend all
messages and use the sign for emergency purposes only.
D. No personal requests will be posted on the electronic sign, e.g.,
birthdays, engagements, weddings, etc.
56.Editor's Note: See the Electronic Message Sign Request attached to this chapter.
§ 565-3 MADISON CODE § 566-3
565:428
Chapter 567
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 44.
§ 567-1. Power and authority to issue proclamation.
The Madison Board of Selectman shall have the power and authority to
issue a proclamation that an emergency exists under the conditions
specified in Title 37-B M.R.S.A. sec. 742. The proclamation may declare the
fact that an emergency exists in any or all sections of the Municipality. A
copy of such a proclamation shall be filed within 24 hours with the Town
Clerk.
§ 567-2. Governing document.
The Madison Emergency Operations Plan shall be the Town's governing
document for emergency response and recovery by all municipal
organizations.57 An emergency situation shall be defined as an event that
threatens the life, safety, and property of the residents or visitors of
Madison or destruction of the environment.
Chapter 572
EXPENDITURE OF PUBLIC FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Expenditures for overdrafts ordinance — See
Ch. 53.
A. Notwithstanding the above, when consultation with the Board of
Selectmen would result in a substantial delay in an effective response in
alleviating or preventing an emergency or disaster, the First Selectman
is authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent the loss
of life and property in the Town of Madison.
B. Whereas, the Board of Selectmen is charged with the responsibility for
the well being of citizens within said Town; and whereas, the Board of
Selectmen is in session only at special times, and when the First
Selectmen is not available, they have empowered the Madison
Emergency Management Director with the authority to proclaim an
emergency state for or within the said Town should it exist.
57.Editor's Note: The Emergency Operations Plan is on file in the Town offices.
§ 566-3 ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS § 567-2
565:429
§ 572-1. Town Manager's authority.
§ 572-2. Department heads' authority.
Department heads shall be authorized to obligate funds appropriated or
otherwise credited to their departmental account(s) provided the obligation
of said funds will not exceed the total amount either appropriated or
credited to said account(s) (as authorized by Town Meeting vote). The
department heads shall exercise this right under the supervision and
control of the Town Manager, except where local or state law indicates
otherwise. The Town Manager and/or the Madison Board of Selectmen must
approve all obligations exceeding line item recommended amounts (subject
to the review criteria listed below).
§ 572-3. Adherence to budget.
The budget of the Town is prepared on a modified line basis. Expenditures
during the year should follow as closely as possible the items identified in
the budget document. The Board recognizes that unforeseen expenditures
develop which result in the need to purchase additional items not itemized
in the budget. Occasionally, circumstances arise in which items budgeted
for can be deleted and the funds need not be obligated. Any obligation
exceeding recommended line item appropriations in the published budget
must receive approval from the Town Manager. The Town Manager must
feel comfortable that the obligation of funds over the recommended amount
will not cause a future need to overdraft the "lump sum" operations
appropriation approved at Town Meeting. If the Town Manager does not
feel that the obligation of funds is appropriate, he/she has the authority
to veto the department head's decision. If the department head would like
A. The Town Manager is hereby authorized to obligate funds appropriated
or otherwise credited to:
(1) General fund accounts.
(2) The Cemetery Fund.
B. Said obligations of funds need not be approved by the Board of
Selectmen provided the obligation of said funds will not exceed the total
amount either appropriated or credited to said general fund accounts
or cemetery fund. No Warrant Article "lump sum" appropriation may be
overexpended by any amount without prior approval from the Board of
Selectmen. Any employee who obligates public funds without prior
permission will be subject to immediate discipline, up to and including
dismissal. Any elected official who obligates public funds over the
Warrant Article "lump sum" appropriation without prior permission will
be subject to a financial assessment for the amount of the unapproved
overdraft. The overdraft will be paid through payroll deductions from
the elected official's paycheck.
§ 567-2 MADISON CODE § 572-3
565:430
to pursue the matter further, the Town Manager will put the employee
on the next agenda for the next regularly scheduled Selectmen's meeting.
If the department head obligates said funds over the line item amount
(without permission), he/she will be subject to discipline. No capital project
will be overspent by any amount without prior approval from the Board of
Selectmen. In most cases, because the capital project was approved by the
voters as a Special Warrant Article, the overdraft will have to be "ratified"
by a Town Meeting vote.
§ 572-4. Emergency situations.
It is not uncommon to encounter an emergency situation that requires
overdrafting an approved warrant article by drawing from "surplus" or a
"general revenue" account. This is, by law, an unauthorized overdraft. When
this occurs, the Board of Selectmen should prepare a Warrant Article for
the next Town Meeting Warrant which very clearly seeks an appropriation
of whatever sum of money was overdrafted for the purpose of covering the
overdraft. If the Town Meeting refuses to authorize the overdraft, and one
or more taxpayers want to press it in court, it is possible that a judge will
order the municipal officers to repay the Town for the overdrawn amount
out of their personal assets.
§ 572-5. Exceptions.
There are two exceptions to the general rule prohibiting overdrafts:
§ 572-6. Competitive bidding.
A. General assistance.
B. The Road or Highway Account (operational budget, not capital). 23
M.R.S.A. § 2705 allows an overdraft to occur in the road or highway
account, provided the overdraft does not exceed 15% of the amount
appropriated for that purpose. The Road Commissioner is authorized to
incur this overdraft with the prior written consent of the majority of the
Board of Selectmen. Even though the law allows up to a 15% overdraft,
the Board of Selectmen are still required to include an Article in the
next Town Meeting Warrant to cover the amount of the Highway Fund
overdraft.
A. Any obligation of funds exceeding $1,500 per item may be submitted to
competitive bidding. Competitive bidding procedures shall not apply
when it appears after reasonable investigation that said service or
supplies may be procured from only one source; or when an emergency
exists and immediate procurement of services or supplies is essential;
or when the nature of the service is such as not to be conducive to
competitive bidding; or when derived benefits are expected to be less
than the cost of preparing bid documents for services or supplies. All
purchasing decisions over $1,500 will be clearly documented (i.e., list
of vendors researched, quotes from vendors, elements that went into
the purchasing decision, etc.) Documentation will be turned in to the
§ 572-3 ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTIONS § 572-6
565:431
§ 572-7. Board's responsibility.
Nothing in this policy shall negate the Board of Selectmen's responsibility
to sign Warrants authorizing expenditure of funds.
§ 572-8. Time limit on service contracts.
Town Bookkeeper and kept on file until the financial audit for the fiscal
year in which the item was purchased or the service retained has been
completed by the auditors, and reviewed and approved by the Board of
Selectmen. Bids may be required on other services or supplies, as the
Board of Selectmen deems necessary. All aspects of all capital projects
must go out to bid, unless decided otherwise by a majority vote of
the Board of Selectmen at a regularly scheduled Selectmen's meeting.
[Amended 2-25-2013]
B. The Madison Board of Selectmen shall retain the right to waive bid
procedures when it is in the best interest of the Town to do so. The
Board also directs that notice be placed in all "requests for proposals"
that the Madison Board of Selectmen reserves the right to reject any
and all bids and to waive all irregularities or informalities in any
proposal. Should the Town not successfully negotiate a contract, the
Town reserves the right to contract with the next lowest responsive and
responsible bidder. All items placed out to bid shall have the contracts
for said supplies and services awarded by the Madison Board of
Selectmen or their designee. In awarding contracts, the Madison Board
of Selectmen may consider responsible, responsive bidders who offer
the best price and quality for their supplies, services, or equipment. The
Board shall solicit and consider the recommendation of the Town
Manager and (if relevant) the department head before awarding a
contract or purchase.
A. No agent or official of the Town may enter into a contract for service for
a period longer than one year unless approved by the Town Meeting.
This should not be confused with employment contracts. The Board of
Selectmen may enter into multiyear employment contracts. The term of
office for appointed officials (except the Town Manager) is one year
unless specified by contract (written or oral), ordinance, or charter
(30-A M.R.S.A § 2601). Employees who are not officials (take no oath of
office) usually serve on an indefinite basis unless otherwise stated. The
Town Manager's term of office is indefinite unless otherwise specified
by contract (30-A M.R.S.A § 2633, Subsection 1).
B. Services provided to the Town of Madison should be competitively bid
every three years. These would include, but not limited to, such
services as banking, waste disposal, recycling, mowing and care of
Town-owned property. Bids for services and capital items over $10,000
will be reviewed and approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to
acceptance. [Added 2-25-2013]
§ 572-6 MADISON CODE § 572-9
565:432
§ 572-9. Purchase orders.
Chapter 577
FAIR HOUSING
§ 577-1. Findings.
Let it be known to all persons of the Town of Madison that discrimination
in the sale, rental, leasing, or financing of housing or land to be used for
construction of housing, or in the provision of brokerage services because
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin is
prohibited by Title VIII of the 1968 Civil Rights Act (Federal Fair Housing
Law). It is the policy of the Town of Madison to implement programs to
ensure equal opportunity in housing for all persons regardless of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. Therefore, the
Town of Madison does hereby pass the following resolution.
§ 577-2. Town assistance to persons seeking equity.
Within available resources the Town will assist all persons who feel they
have been discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin to seek equity under federal and
state laws by filing a complaint with the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Boston Regional Office Compliance Division.
§ 577-3. Intent to publicize.
The Town shall publicize this resolution, and through this publicity shall
cause owners of real estate, developers and builders to become aware of
A. Town Manager shall require the use of purchase orders to review all
expenditures within all departments. All items in excess of $1,500 (in
correlation with the bidding requirement of this policy) shall require a
purchase order approved by the Town Manager prior to funds being
obligated. Items under $1,500, and that fall within that year's
recommended line-item budget, are subject to purchase order, yet the
purchase orders shall be housed within the department in order to
"streamline" procurement. Copies of the purchase orders shall be
turned into the Town Bookkeeper at the same time as payroll time cards
each week. [Amended 2-25-2013]
B. Department heads do not need to submit purchase orders for
operational expenditures such as utilities, payroll, benefits, and as
determined by the Town Manager.
C. The Town Manager is instructed to send notice to all vendors (on the
Federal 1099 vendor list) in the month of January to require department
heads to submit a purchase order when purchasing or obtaining
services.
§ 572-9 FAIR HOUSING § 577-3
577:433
their respective responsibilities and rights under the Federal Fair Housing
Law and any applicable state and local laws or ordinances.
§ 577-4. Publicity program.
Said program will at a minimum include, but not be limited to:
Chapter 583
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemetery charges — See Ch. 532, Art. II. Collection of revenues — See Ch. 690.
A. The printing and publicizing of this policy and other applicable fair
housing information through local media and community contacts; and
B. Distribution of posters, flyers and any other means which will bring to
the attention of those affected the knowledge of their respective
responsibilities and rights concerning equal opportunity in housing.
§ 577-3 MADISON CODE § 577-4
577:434
ARTICLE I
Office Services Available to General Public
[Adopted 6-28-1999; printed as amended 4-10-2000]
§ 583-1. Listing.
A. Commitment book (paper or disk): $50. See Tax Assessor on Mondays.
B. Specialized tax list: $30. See Tax Assessor on Mondays.
C. Voter list (see Registrar of Voters):
(1) First page (paper): $1.
(2) Each additional page: $0.25.
(3) First 100 records (electronic): $0.05.
(4) Per record each additional record: $0.01.
(5) First page (labels): $1.
(6) Each additional page: $0.50.
D. Tax Map (8.5 inches by 14 inches): $12.50.
E. Tax Map (11 inches by 17 inches): $16.
F. Photocopies:
(1) First page: $1.
(2) Each subsequent page: $0.25.
G. Faxes:
(1) First page: $4.
(2) Each subsequent page: $0.50.
H. Fax reception:
(1) First page: $1.
(2) Each subsequent page: $0.50.
I. Recycling receptacles: two-bin limit at no charge.
§ 583-1 FAIR HOUSING § 583-1
577:435

ARTICLE II
Returned Checks; Notary Fees for Nonresidents
[Adopted 3-26-2001; amended in its entirety 8-25-2008]
§ 583-2. Returned check charge.
§ 583-3. Notary fee for nonresidents.
§ 583-4. Term of policy.
This policy will remain in effect until revoked or amended by the Board of
Selectmen.
A. Purpose. This policy will allow the Town of Madison the freedom to
assess a fee equivalent to the fee charged by the bank per returned
check to the individual or individuals named on said check. This will
help to retrieve some of the cost associated with the collection of said
check.
B. Payment. When payment is made to the Town of Madison for a returned
check, the payment can not be made by check.
C. Check acceptance. The Town reserves the right to refuse checks from
individuals at any given time.
A. Purpose. This fee is to compensate the Town for services rendered to
nonresidents of the Town of Madison.
B. Payment:. $3 per individual, per visit. This payment will be made by
nonresidents of the Town of Madison having documents notarized that
do not relate to Town business.
C. The service will remain free to residents of the Town of Madison.
§ 583-2 FAIR HOUSING § 583-4
577:437

ARTICLE III
Vital Records Search
[Adopted 8-25-2008]
§ 583-5. Purpose; request and fee required.
§ 583-6. Fee established; waiver.
A. The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds a need to implement a
policy to allow charging a research fee of vital records for genealogy
purposes.
B. It will be a requirement of this policy for anyone seeking to have vital
records searched to make the request in writing and to pay a fee.
A. The research fee is $4 per name/event.
B. The fee may be waived at the Clerk's discretion.
§ 583-5 FAIR HOUSING § 583-6
577:439
Chapter 588
FILL AND EARTHEN MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 189.
§ 588-1. Purpose.
It is the intention of this policy to set forth guidelines for Town personnel
concerning the disposition of earthen materials resulting from excavation
work, street sweeping, land clearing, road construction, ditching or other
such similar activities.
§ 588-2. Cost-effective disposal.
It is the expressed intention that earthen materials be disposed of in the
most cost-efficient manner possible. In order to achieve this end, some
degree of foresight and planning must be taken by supervisory personnel.
§ 588-3. Notification of availability of fill.
The Road Commissioner shall notify the public through a newspaper of
general circulation of the availability of fill within a designated area, giving
sufficient time to elicit public response. A list of all persons requesting
fill shall be kept and fill disposed of at the nearest and least costly site
available. In addition to placing fill on private property, publicly owned land
should be considered in determining which site has the best cost advantage.
§ 588-4. Other arrangements.
The Road Commissioner may also make arrangements with individuals who
are willing to pay for fill or Town employees who are willing to work on
their own time if the arrangements proposed offer a cost advantage to the
disposal options listed above.
§ 588-5. Unplanned events requiring disposal of material.
In the event of an immediate and unplanned-for need to dispose of material,
the Road Commissioner shall use good judgment as to the best location to
use in disposing of earthen material.
Chapter 591
FIXED ASSETS
§ 591-1. Findings.
§ 583-6 MADISON CODE § 591-1
588:440
§ 591-2. Determination of fixed assets.
§ 591-3. Inventory.
The following information shall be collected for each individual fixed asset:
A. Whereas: The auditor qualifies his opinion, places us in competitive
disadvantage in the credit market; and
B. Whereas: Management information is needed to locate and transfer
equipment from one department to another. Idle assets will be
identified and sold. Unexplained disappearances of fixed assets will be
reduced. Fixed assets will be identified for insurance purposes. Plans
for acquisition and retirement of assets will be based upon the system
of fixed asset account; and
C. Whereas: Stewardship needs provide for an accountability for Town
government capital expenditures over the years.
D. Now therefore, be it resolved: That the Board of Selectmen hereby
outlines a policy regarding fixed assets as follows:
A. All fixed assets belonging to the Town with a unit reproduction cost of
$300 or more will be included and will be grouped by following major
asset classifications:
(1) Buildings and structures; or
(2) Movable equipment.
B. The following assets will not be included in the system:
(1) Land;
(2) Landscaping;
(3) Spare parts;
(4) Improvements other than buildings;
(5) Records, reports, studies, plans, etc.;
(6) Discarded equipment with no monetary value;
(7) Supplies and expendables;
(8) Streets, sidewalks and bridges considered as part of rights-of-way;
(9) Storm drains and sewers;
(10) Art work and antiques, except for in-use value;
(11) Easements; or
(12) Assets with unit reproduction cost of less than $300.
§ 591-1 FIXED ASSETS § 591-3
591:441
§ 591-4. Valuing fixed assets.
A. Asset class — building and structures or equipment;
B. Function and activity — department;
C. Acquisition source — general fund purchase, capital purchase, gift,
lease, etc.;
D. Acquisition date;
E. Name and address of vendor;
F. Short description of asset with serial number;
G. Department with custody;
H. Location;
I. Estimated useful life;
J. Estimated salvage value; and
K. Date, method and authorization for disposition.
A. Historical costs can be found or estimated from a number of sources:
vendor invoices, purchase orders, cancelled checks, vouchers,
contracts, Town Meeting or Selectmen's minutes, ledgers, inventory
cards, maintenance records, general and capital budgets, offering
circulars, insurance policies, price list and independent appraisers. If
historical costs are still lacking, then current replacement costs may be
relevant price levels at the acquisition date to estimate original cost.
Donated fixed assets should be recorded at their estimated fair market
value at the time received. All interest costs incurred during
construction shall be included in cost of fixed asset as shall other
ancillary costs such as freight and transportation charges, site
preparation expenditures and professional fees.
B. Replacement costs information may be obtained from current vendors'
price lists, independent appraisers, and published price-trend data for
various asset classes.
C. Depreciation rates for each class of asset will be based upon past
experience for normal useful life. This will serve as a schedule for
replacement. Examples of this would be a fire truck has a thirty-year
life. It would be depreciated 1/30 each year and scheduled for
replacement 30 years after purchased.
D. Upon disposal or retirement, the fixed asset is removed from
accounting records by reversal of original entry and any salvage
proceeds are recorded as revenues in the general fund.
§ 591-3 MADISON CODE § 591-5
591:442
§ 591-5. Reporting on fixed assets.
Beginning January 1, 1985, all departments will maintain a record of fixed
assets under its custody. Annually, in December, each department head will
update the inventory of fixed assets and notify the Town Clerk of changes
by December 31.
Chapter 606
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 606-1. Investment objectives.
§ 606-2. Investment principles.
A. Maine State statutes authorize treasurers to deposit or invest municipal
funds by direction of the municipal officers.
B. Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5706, the Town of Madison shall adopt the
following investment objectives in the management and investment of
municipal funds:
(1) The primary objective of the Town's investment activities is the
preservation of capital and the protection of investment principal.
(2) In investing public funds, the Town staff will strive to maximize the
return on the portfolio but will avoid assuming unreasonable
investment risk.
(3) The municipality's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the municipality to meet operating requirements
that might be reasonably anticipated.
(4) The Town will diversify its investments to avoid incurring
unreasonable and avoidable risks regarding specific security types
or individual financial institutions.
A. The Municipal Treasurer shall invest funds for which there is no
immediate need, sell and exchange securities so purchased, and deposit
such securities for safekeeping. All investment decisions shall be made
considering the investment objectives contained in § 606-1 and
exercising judgment and care under the circumstances then prevailing.
B. The following investment principles shall guide the Treasurer in the
conduct of the municipality's investment program:
(1) The municipality may purchase only legally authorized investments
under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5706.
(2) The maturity date of new investments shall not be further than the
time the municipality anticipates that it will need the funds. To
§ 591-5 INVESTMENT POLICY § 606-2
606:443
§ 606-3. Reporting and control.
§ 606-4. Applicability of Code of Ethics.
All personnel involved in the investment program shall adhere to the
municipality's Code of Ethics58 to prevent any real or perceived violation of
maintain liquidity, new investments shall have a maturity of one
year or less for municipal operating funds.
(3) The Town shall not make investments for the purpose of trading or
speculating, such as anticipating an increase of capital through
changes in market interest rates.
(4) Deposit and investment of funds can only be made in financial
institutions that are insured by the FDIC or the FSLIC. Any funds
deposited or invested above the $100,000 insurance limit must be
collateralized by the financial institution, or the excess funds must
be placed with other financial institutions.
(5) Cash balances in all demand deposit accounts shall not exceed
compensating balances whenever possible. The Treasurer shall
strive to invest at least 95% of all available funds on a day-to-day
basis.
(6) The Town will invest in financial institutions with significant Maine
operations as much as possible and can only invest in out-of-state
financial institutions where a significant interest rate differential
exists.
(7) Repurchase agreements can only be obtained from known and
financially stable financial institutions. Repurchase agreements
must be collateralized by US Government securities with a market
value equal to or greater than the Town's investments and be
perfected under Maine statutes.
(8) The Treasurer shall competitively bid all municipal investments in
excess of $10,000 from qualified financial institutions to ensure
that finds are invested at the best rate of return, subject to the
limitation contained in Subsection B(6).
A. The Treasurer shall report monthly to the Town Manager for the
purpose of monitoring the performance and structure of the municipal
investments.
B. In addition, the Treasurer shall issue an annual investment report to the
Town Selectmen due no later than 60 days after the end of the fiscal
year. The report shall include an evaluation of the performance of the
investment program for the previous year and present an investment
plan for the ensuring year.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 49, Ethics, Code of.
§ 606-2 MADISON CODE § 606-4
606:444
their fiduciary responsibilities. Such responsibility carries with it the duty
to ensure that all investments are placed without the appearance of any
improper influence or personal gain.
Chapter 632
LOST MERCHANDISE
§ 632-1. Unclaimed merchandise.
Any lost merchandise, if still unclaimed after 30 days, shall belong to the
person who found it.
Chapter 644
MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Meetings — See Ch. 126.
§ 606-4 LOST MERCHANDISE § 632-1
632:445

ARTICLE I
Public Participation
[Adopted 7-28-1980]
§ 644-1. Findings.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds that it is desirous, for
purposes of orderly conduct of its business, for certain rules to be
established which set forth the perimeters by which the public may have
additional input into the actions of its municipal officers.
§ 644-2. Prerequisites for public to address Board.
The Madison Board of Selectmen does hereby declare that the public shall
not be allowed to address the Board unless recognized by the Chairman
or Acting Chairman of the Board of Selectmen. The Chairman or Acting
Chairman shall limit the discussion of matters brought before the Board
to the Board members, Town Manager, department heads of the Town and
any other persons recognized as having a direct interest in the matter
before the Board. "Direct interest" is defined to mean a close personal
interest or expertise as contrasted with the general interest of the public.
The Chairman or Acting Chairman may recognize members of the general
public provided a motion has been placed before the Board and discussion
has been exhausted among the Board members, Town Manager, department
heads of the Town and any other persons recognized as having a direct
interest in the matter before the Board.
§ 644-3. Authority of Chairman.
The Chairman and/or Acting Chairman may rule on any questions arising as
to whether a person will be recognized as having either a direct or indirect
interest in matters before the Board. Members of the Board who disagree
with the ruling of the Chairman or Acting Chairman may challenge the
ruling by vote.
§ 644-4. Orderly behavior required.
At all times the public is expected to behave in an orderly manner and not
to disturb the progress of the meeting by unnecessary noise, conversations
and/or visual distractions.
§ 644-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this policy shall be declared by the Board as being
disorderly and shall be required to leave the meeting and possibly subjected
to prosecution in accordance with 17-A M.R.S.A. § 501-A.
§ 644-1 MEETINGS § 644-5
644:447

ARTICLE II
Meeting Policy
[Adopted 3-20-1978; printed as last amended 12-13-199959]
§ 644-6. Purpose.
The Madison Board of Selectmen does hereby enact the following policy in
order to establish a clear understanding of the way Selectmen's meetings
will be conducted.
§ 644-7. Agenda.
A. The Town Manager will prepare the agenda of meetings two business
days prior to a meeting.
B. All items to be on the agenda shall be submitted to the Town Manager
three business days prior to a meeting.
C. The Town Manager shall use his/her discretion and the advice of the
Chairman in determining the items to be place on the agenda and their
order.
D. The order of business shall be as follows:
(1) General Assistance Hearings (6:30 p.m. in the Town Manager's
Office).
(2) Salute to the flag.
(3) Roll call (7:00 p.m. in the Assembly Room or Manager's Office).
(4) Consent agenda.
(5) Approval of minutes.
(6) Old business (Selectmen's concerns from immediately preceding
meeting).
(7) New business.
(8) Items of communication.
(9) Selectmen's concerns.
(10) Adjournment.
E. The agenda, and such additional information as deemed appropriate by
the Manager with the advice of the Chairman, shall be ready and
available for the Selectmen to pick up in the Town Manager's Office two
business days before a meeting.
59.Editor's Note: Interim amendments to this policy were adopted 7-28-1980, 6-1-1988,
10-29-1991, 8-10-1992, 8-23-1993and 6-24-1996.
§ 644-6 MEETINGS § 644-7
644:449
§ 644-8. Conduct of meeting.
F. The agenda shall be posted two business days prior to a meeting and
shall be available to the press at this time.
G. Notice of regular Selectmen's meetings and emergency meetings shall
be given to the public in the manner prescribed by 1 M.R.S.A. § 406.
H. Consent agenda presented for approval or ratification shall include
items such as Treasurer's disbursement warrant (date), licenses and
permits, such as beano, sealed tickers, liquor licenses, renewals, etc.
(specifically defined by date, type of permit, application and location/
premises); line extension agreements; grants, quit-claim deeds to clear
property titles. To qualify as an item for the consent agenda to the
regular agenda, it is moved by majority of the Selectmen.
A. All meetings shall be conducted by the Chairman, or, in his absence, by
whomever the Board elects as Acting Chairman.
B. The agenda shall be followed except when the Chairman determines
otherwise and the Board concurs.
C. All members, including the Chairman, shall have equal voting privileges
and may make motions.
D. Any questions of procedure shall be resolved by the Chairman who shall
use Robert's Rules of Order as a guide.
§ 644-7 MADISON CODE § 644-8
644:450
Chapter 667
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, cemeteries and water-access
areas — See Ch. 285.
Sex offenders — See Ch. 308.
Skateboarding — See Ch. 316.
Town electronic sign — See Ch. 566.
Smoking on playgrounds — See Ch. 702, Art.
II.
§ 644-8 MEETINGS § 644-8
644:451

ARTICLE I
Thomas Street Field
[Adopted 6-27-1989]
§ 667-1. Findings.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds the following facts:
§ 667-2. Purpose.
It is the stated purpose of this policy to establish reasonable limits as to
the time of day recreational activities shall be allowed to take place at
the Thomas Street Field, and to the conduct which shall be expected of
the users of the facility, so as to protect the interests of resident in the
community to use public facilities for legitimate recreational activities.
§ 667-3. Rules and regulations.
The Madison Board of Selectmen does hereby establish the following rules
and regulations regarding the use of the Thomas Street Field:
A. A need exists for properly maintained, convenient and safe recreational
facilities to be used by residents of the Town of legitimate recreational
purposes.
B. The rights of property owners and persons living near or adjacent to
recreation facilities should be reasonably protected.
C. The users of the Thomas Street Field have stipulated as to their
willingness to cooperate with the Town and its agents and to abide by
the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth.
A. The time of day when the field may be used is as follows: Sunday
through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The only exception to this rule
shall apply when league play must continue after 8:00 p.m. in order to
break a tie score and determine a winner. After a winner has been
determined, all play must cease.
B. No foul or abusive language shall be permitted.
C. No littering shall be permitted.
D. No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted.
E. Little League has preference over league and nonleague play. League
play has preference over nonleague play. This preference shall apply to
a reasonable time prior to play for preparation of the field and warmup.
§ 667-1 MEETINGS § 667-4
644:453
§ 667-4. Violations.
Persons violating these rules and regulations shall be required to leave
the premises. Cooperation of league organizations and nonleague users is
essential and individual or group sanctions should be brought to enforce
these rules and regulations in order to assure the continued use of the field.
§ 667-5. Waivers.
If permission for a special event or other use than what is addressed by
those rules and regulations above is requested, the Board of Selectmen
may waive these rules and regulations provided the Board finds that the
special event or use will not violate the expressed purpose of these rules
and regulations set forth above.
§ 667-6. Requests for use.
All requests for the field should be made through the Recreation Director.
§ 667-4 MADISON CODE § 667-6
644:454
ARTICLE II
Madison Community Skate and Basketball Park
[Adopted 7-22-2002]
§ 667-7. Hours; users.
§ 667-8. Warnings.
§ 667-9. Safety equipment.
§ 667-10. Rules.
A. Facility will be open from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. No trespassing 9:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Violators will be subject to prosecution
B. Experienced and inexperienced skateboarders, in-line skaters, BMX
bicyclists, and basketball players use this facility.
C. This area has been designed to provide users with a moderate
challenge for recreation purposes and to help develop their skills. It is
not possible to design and build a facility of this nature without hard
surfaces. The same hard surfaces that challenge the user pose
significant risk of injury if the user falls.
A. This facility is unsupervised. Users assume all risks inherent in the use
of this facility. Use may result in serious injury.
B. Skate, bike, and play basketball with safety in mind and remember
weather conditions may create unsafe surfaces for users.
A. It is required that all skaters, skateboarders, and BMX bicyclists wear:
(1) Protective helmets.
(2) Elbow pads.
(3) Knee pads.
(4) Wrist pads.
B. All parents should require their children to wear this protective
equipment while using this facility. Failure to wear protective
equipment will expose users to serious injury upon falling or collision
with other users.
A. No glass containers, food or beverage allowed on the basketball or
skating surface.
B. No other items such as benches, tables, wood materials, or other
objects used as ramps or jumps are allowed in the skate park facility.
C. No drugs, alcohol or tobacco products will be permitted at this facility.
§ 667-7 MEETINGS § 667-10
644:455
§ 667-11. Serious injuries.
In case of serious injury or other emergencies go to the police station to call
911.
§ 667-12. Right to close or restrict use.
Madison Parks and Recreation Department reserves the right to:
§ 667-13. Maintaining the facility.
§ 667-14. Reminders.
Please remember this is your park. Please cooperate and make this an
enjoyable and safe facility.
D. No loud music, disorderly behavior or profanity.
E. No skating or biking against traffic on ramps or pipes.
F. Do not proceed down a ramp until clear of other skaters.
G. No littering. Please use trash cans.
A. Close the facility for any circumstances deemed necessary.
B. Restrict entry to the facility and to ask persons to leave the facility if
any of the rules are not followed or if unsafe or inappropriate behavior
is observed.
A. Please report maintenance concerns to the Parks and Recreation
Department: 696-4151.
B. Messages may be left 24 hours per day.
§ 667-10 MADISON CODE § 667-14
644:456
ARTICLE III
Safe Zones
[Adopted 11-27-2006]
§ 667-15. Title.
Policy To Protect Children Using Madison's Athletic Fields and Parks from
Drug Dealers.
§ 667-16. Designation of areas.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Madison designates the following
areas (which are frequented by minors) as a Safe Zone pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3253:
§ 667-17. Enhanced penalties; signage.
These safe zones are treated similar to schools, i.e., drug dealing within
1,000 feet of these zones subjects the dealer to an enhanced penalty. Safe
Zone informational signs will be erected at each of the four designated
areas noted above.
A. Dillon Family Park (Municipal Basketball Courts); [Amended
6-11-2018]
B. Preble Avenue Ball Field,
C. Weston Avenue Ice Rink/Volleyball Courts; [Added 6-11-201860]
D. East Madison Basketball Court;
E. Boat Landing at Nathan Street;
F. Boat Landing at East Madison;
G. Swim area at Lakewood;
H. Main Street Park and Playground; and [Added 6-11-2018]
I. Fortin Family Playground (Locust Street). [Added 6-11-2018]
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, Thomas Street Field.
§ 667-15 MEETINGS § 667-17
644:457

ARTICLE IV
Park Usage Policy
[Adopted 9-30-2013]
§ 667-18. General usage rules.
Rules:
§ 667-19. Reservations for Main Street Park.
For the purpose of fairness and equitable access for large groups (more
than 20 people), the Main Street Park can be reserved 10 business days in
advance. Reservations are made at the Town office by calling 696-3971 or
through the Town website at www.madisonmaine.com.
§ 667-20. Town's electronic message board.
If a nonprofit community organization wishes to have its event promoted
on the Town's electronic message board, then see Electronic Sign Usage
Policy.61
A. In the use of athletic fields, good sportsmanship rules apply to all
players, parents, coaches and fans involved;
B. Programmed youth sports activities must be chaperoned by adults;
C. Electronic amplification for music or voice projection and artificial
lighting not provided by the Town of Madison must be approved in
writing;
D. No smoking, alcohol or illegal drugs;
E. No open fires;
F. No glass beverage containers;
G. No picking of flowers, plant materials, or physical contact with shrubs
or trees unless otherwise designated as part of a nature education
program;
H. No solicitation of funds or sales of merchandise; unless authorized by
the Town of Madison;
I. Litter pickup and disposal is the responsibility of the reserving entity.
Trash must be bagged, sealed and placed in the park's trash receptacle.
This includes cleaning up after pets. Entity may be charged if the Town
has to provide this service;
J. No pets in playground areas;
K. No parking on turf areas, with the exception of unloading and loading of
equipment or gathering supplies. Parking in only assigned areas.
§ 667-18 MEETINGS § 667-21
644:459
§ 667-21. Recreational fields.
All other Town parks with recreational fields can be used on a first-come
first-serve basis. Hard courts (basketball, skate board, ice skating) are also
provided on a first-come first-serve basis.
§ 667-22. Special requests.
Any special requests for amenities and or services (i.e., additional
restrooms, trash receptacles) must be requested at the time of reservation.
Fees for use may apply.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 566, Electronic Sign Usage Policy.
§ 667-21 MADISON CODE § 667-22
644:460
Chapter 673
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Complaints against Town employees and
officials — See Ch. 539.
Drug and alcohol prevention policy — See Ch.
554.
Smoking policy — See Ch. 702.
Treasurer's disbursement warrants for
employee's wages and benefits — See Ch. 742,
Art. I.
Chapter 679
PUBLIC WAYS, MAINTENANCE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Seasonal closing of roads — See Ch. 694, Art.
I.
§ 679-1. Purpose.
This document outlines the duties of the Road Commissioner and the
Selectmen's responsibilities and authority for maintaining public ways.
§ 679-2. Repair of highways and bridges.
The Road Commissioner will be in charge of the repair of all highways and
bridges within the Town under the direction of a majority of the Selectmen
(23 M.R.S.A. § 2701).
§ 679-3. Road Commissioner's bond.
The Road Commissioner will give bond to the satisfaction of the Selectmen
and be responsible to them for the expenditure of money and discharge of
his duties generally.
§ 679-4. Personnel; equipment and materials.
The Road Commissioner under the direction of a majority of the Selectmen,
has the authority to employ the necessary personnel and equipment and
purchase material for the repair of highways and bridges.
§ 679-5. Planning and work schedule; costs.
The Road Commissioner must plan ahead and discuss all repair,
maintenance and other projects with the Selectmen. He must develop a
work schedule detailing the work to be done, a cost estimate for the work,
and the location of the work projects. This schedule will be adhered to
§ 667-22 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 679-5
673:461
except in emergency situations such as snowstorms or other unpredictable
occurrences.
§ 679-6. Emergencies.
In case of sudden injury to ways or bridges, the Road Commissioner must,
without delay, repair them. In these emergency cases, prior approval from
the Selectmen is not required. However, the Road Commissioner must
file a detailed report the next business day after the emergency repair
is completed. For this purpose, and emergency is defined as any incident
which could immediately endanger life and/or property (23 M.R.S.A.
§ 3201).
§ 679-7. Inspection of ways.
The Road Commissioner will inspect Town ways in Madison each year and
report to the Selectmen the status of the Town ways and needed repairs.
§ 679-8. Budget for projects.
All projects, including but not limited to winter sand, tarring, road repairs
and construction, will be done only after the Road Commissioner submits a
detailed budget of the project to the Selectmen. The Selectmen will approve
or disapprove all projects.
§ 679-9. Removal of snow, brush and loose obstructions.
When any ways are blocked or encumbered with snow, the Road
Commissioner will remove the snow in a manner directed by the Selectmen
(23 M.R.S.A. § 3201). The Road Commissioner will also direct removal of
brush and loose obstructions from Town ways that impede travel.
§ 679-10. Expenditures.
The Road Commissioner will be responsible to the Selectmen for the
expenditure of money.
§ 679-11. Settling of accounts.
The Road Commissioner will settle his account in detail annually on or
before the 30th of June. This will be contained in the annual report (23
M.R.S.A. § 2703). The Road Commissioner will participate in the budget
process for determining appropriations for the coming year.
§ 679-12. Maintenance log.
The Road Commissioner will maintain a complete and detailed maintenance
log on all Town vehicles and equipment. These logs will be submitted to the
Selectmen for monthly review.
§ 679-5 MADISON CODE § 679-13
679:462
§ 679-13. Time worked.
The Road Commissioner and all employees of his Department, both full- and
part-time, will maintain and sign weekly time cards for all hours worked
for the Town. The Road Commissioner and employees shall work only those
hours necessary to maintain Town ways and equipment as required by these
guidelines.
§ 679-14. Recordkeeping.
The Road Commissioner will document and approve all bills and specify to
what project or equipment accounts these bills are charged.
§ 679-15. Insufficient appropriation for road repairs.
When the amount appropriated for road repairs is not sufficient, the Road
Commissioner may, with the written consent of the Selectmen, employ
Townspeople to perform the necessary work to an amount not exceeding
15% of the amount so appropriated (23 M.R.S.A. § 2705).
§ 679-16. Storage of Town-owned vehicles and equipment.
Only Town-owned vehicles and equipment will be stored or serviced in the
Town Garage unless otherwise approved by the Selectmen.
§ 679-17. Restriction on work in private ways.
The use of Town vehicles or equipment on statutory private ways (public
easement) is prohibited, unless the use is approved in advance by the
Selectmen. The use of Town equipment for private purposes is prohibited.
§ 679-18. Hazardous conditions for vehicular traffic.
If a majority of the Selectmen determines that a condition exists which
creates a hazard and renders a way unsafe for motor vehicle traffic, they
will give the Road Commissioner written notice of the condition and order
to remedy the situation within 24 hours. If the Road Commissioner fails to
act as directed, a majority of the Selectmen may take any steps necessary
to eliminate the safety hazard.
§ 679-19. Compliance with other provisions.
The Road Commissioner will follow all Town ordinances and policies as they
relate to the operation of the Highway Department.
Chapter 688
REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION
§ 679-13 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 688-1
688:463
§ 688-1. Minimum hours required just before election.
The Registrar's office must be open on the last five business days that the
Clerk's office is open before Election Day, during the same hours that the
Clerk's office is open, and for two hours between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
at least one of these days.
§ 688-2. Statutory authority; effective date.
This policy is adopted in accordance with 21-A M.R.S.A. § 122, Subsections
6 and 8, and shall become effective on February 23, 2004.
Chapter 690
REVENUES, COLLECTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 583.
§ 688-1 MADISON CODE § 688-2
688:464
ARTICLE I
Internal Control
[Adopted 3-22-201062]
§ 690-1. Objective.
Internal controls are techniques used by management to achieve its
objectives and to meet its responsibilities. It is the objective of the Board of
Selectmen to safeguard Town funds and have administrative procedures in
place that will enable them to meet this objective and thereby fulfill their
responsibility.
§ 690-2. Applicability to excise tax; printed receipts.
In most Maine municipalities, motor vehicle excise tax poses the greatest
risk for fraud. The high risk comes from the potential loss, to the Town of
Madison, of over $600,000 in excise taxes per year. The potential loss is due
in part to the fact that many people pay their excise tax in cash. The second
risk comes from not issuing a receipt for the transaction. Many towns
have used the registration form as the receipt. The state registration forms
are sequentially numbered, and all forms are accounted for. In Madison,
however, the policy is that any time money is received a receipt is issued.
Having a printed receipt is a method of insuring that money goes in the
right place.
§ 690-3. General practices.
In order to have general oversight over revenues collected, the Town of
Madison will:
A. Issue a receipt for all money received.
B. Separate the duties of the bookkeeper from collecting money.
C. Reconcile cash receipts daily.
D. Deposit funds in a timely manner (daily).
E. Reconcile to general ledger daily.
F. Reconcile bank statements monthly.
G. Maintain cash drawers individually.
H. Randomly audit cash drawers on a monthly basis.
I. Make an effort to ensure that there is always more than one person on
duty.
62.Editor’s Note: This resolution also superseded former Art. I, Internal Control, adopted
4-28-2008.
§ 690-1 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 690-3
688:465
§ 690-4. Financial accountability; protection against fraud or
misuse.
Financial accountability is a top priority for the Town of Madison. This
policy formalizes the expectations of personal honesty and integrity
required of Town officials and employees. The Town of Madison is
committed to protecting its revenue, property, information and other assets
from any attempt, either by members of the public, contractors,
subcontractors, agents, intermediaries or its own employees, to gain by
deceit, financial or other benefits. This policy prohibits fraud or misuse
of the Town of Madison's assets and sets forth specific guidelines and
responsibilities regarding appropriate actions that must be followed for the
investigation of fraud and other similar irregularities.
§ 690-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the following
definitions:
ASSETS — Refers to the entire property of the Town, association,
corporation, or estate applicable or subject to the payment of debts.
"Assets" include, but are not limited to, all Town vehicles and building
properties, computers and software and cash receivables.
EMBEZZLEMENT — Any loss resulting from the misappropriation of Town
of Madison assets.
EMPLOYEE(S) — Refers to all Town of Madison employees, independent
contractors, consultants, and temporary workers.
EQUIPMENT — A fixed asset that is not consumable or expandable; it is
movable, even though sometimes attached to other objects or buildings;
and its removal does not create a readily observable physical impairment
or deterioration. Examples include, but are not limited to: office equipment
including computers, desk cabinets, printers and scanners, any electronic
data processing equipment, training/educational equipment, medical
supplies, and furnishings, audio-visual, cameras and recording devices.
Equipment also includes, but is not limited to, all construction and
maintenance equipment, air conditioners, firefighting equipment, and tools,
rescue equipment and tools.
J. Overpayments shall not be accepted when the intention is to provide a
cash refund back to the customer.
K. Upon any suspicion of fraud, appropriate personnel will be notified.
L. Checks returned for nonsufficient funds are taken to the bank that
issued the check and a bank check is received. If the transaction is on
real-estate, payment is reversed until full payment is received, if it is
motor vehicle, registration is suspended.
M. Management reviews all bank statements and reconciliation of bank
accounts.
§ 690-3 MADISON CODE § 690-5
688:466
FRAUD — The intentional misrepresentation or omission of facts for
personal gain.
LOSS — The Town of Madison losing possession or control of any type of
asset through fraudulent activities.
MISAPPROPRIATE — To take or make use of any item without authority or
right.
§ 690-6. Statement of policy.
The Town of Madison has adopted a zero tolerance policy regarding fraud.
No employee of the Town, Town of Madison resident, or Town of Madison
property owner who resides outside the Town limits shall remove any
Town of Madison asset from the property, misuse any Town asset for one's
personal gain, or willfully misappropriate any Town of Madison asset. Any
evidence supporting fraud, theft or embezzlement of Town of Madison
assets and equipment may be subject to the following actions, including but
not limited to, suspension, termination, restitution, and criminal charges.
Any utility fraud by the public will be subject to restitution and possible
criminal charges.
§ 690-7. Prohibited acts.
Fraud and misuse of Town of Madison assets are prohibited. Examples of
fraud and misuse of Town assets include but are not limited to:
§ 690-8. Complaint procedure.
A. Embezzlement.
B. Misappropriation, misapplication, destruction, removal, or concealment
of Town of Madison property.
C. Alteration or falsification of documents.
D. Theft of any asset (money, tangible property, etc.).
E. Authorizing or receiving compensation for goods not received or
services not performed.
F. Authorizing or receiving compensation for hours not worked.
G. Misrepresentation of fact.
A. Employees shall read and it is recommended that residents of the Town
of Madison should read and understand this policy. Additionally,
suspected or known fraudulent acts by employees shall be reported to
their respective supervisor or to the Town Manager. If the employee has
reason to believe that his/her supervisor may be involved, the employee
shall notify the Town Manager or the Board of Selectmen.
B. Supervisors shall:
§ 690-5 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 690-8
688:467
§ 690-9. Prevention of loss.
Each department will maintain an internal control environment to protect
the department and the Town from loss or other damages as a result of a
fraudulent act.
§ 690-10. False allegations.
False allegations of suspected fraud with the intent to disrupt or cause
harm to another may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including
termination of employment.
§ 690-11. Corrective actions and discipline.
Appropriate and timely action will be taken against those proven to have
committed a fraudulent act. These remedial actions may include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Communicate the provisions of this policy to all staff;
(2) Take no action without consulting the department head;
(3) Recommend appropriate temporary disciplinary action when there
is evidence of wrongdoing; and
(4) If suspension or termination is recommended, consult with the
labor relations representative.
C. Supervisors and/or department heads shall communicate any suspected
or known fraudulent act to the Town Manager. The Town Manager may
initiate internal investigative actions of the suspected act. The internal
investigation may include but is not limited to surveillance, either
electronic or visual. Document research may include, but is not limited
to, cash terminal journal rolls, ledgers, and accounting records.
D. All participants in a fraud investigation shall keep the details and
results of the investigation confidential.
E. No supervisor or person acting on behalf of the Town of Madison shall
dismiss or threaten to dismiss an employee; discipline or suspend or
threaten to discipline or suspend an employee; impose any penalty
upon an employee; or intimidate or coerce an employee because the
employee has acted in accordance with the requirements of the policy.
Any violation of this section may result in disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment.
A. Disciplinary action (up to and including immediate termination of
employment).
B. Restitution for all losses, including investigation and legal expenses, to
the fullest extent of the law.
§ 690-8 MADISON CODE § 690-11
688:468
§ 690-12. Confidentiality.
All investigations will be conducted in confidence insofar as reasonably
possible. The name or names of those communicating information about a
fraudulent act and the name or names of those suspected of a fraudulent
act will only be revealed when required by law in conjunction with the
investigation or legal action.
C. Forwarding information to the appropriate authorities for criminal
prosecution.
D. Institution of civil action to recover losses.
E. Where the Town of Madison elects to take corrective or disciplinary
action, it will proceed under the procedures in place under policy or
under any collective bargaining agreement for the respective
employment classification.
F. The Town of Madison may take corrective or disciplinary action without
awaiting the resolution of criminal or civil proceedings arising from the
fraudulent conduct.
§ 690-11 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 690-12
688:469
Chapter 694
ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Maintenance of public ways — See Ch. 679.
§ 690-12 MADISON CODE § 690-12
688:470
ARTICLE I
Seasonal Closing
[Adopted 5-7-1979; printed as last amended 2-_-198663]
§ 694-1. Findings.
Pursuant to the authority invested in the Madison Board of Selectmen by
29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395, the Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds the
following:
§ 694-2. Closing of roads; violations and penalties.
A. During certain times of the year, the road base of certain roads is
insufficient to sustain motor vehicle traffic whose weight, loaded or
unloaded, exceeds 23,000 per square foot.
B. It is in the public interest to limit traffic on Town ways during certain
times of the year to protect those designated roads from damage
caused by heavy vehicles.
A. Therefore, the Madison Board of Selectmen hereby orders the seasonal
closing of Town ways designated below to vehicles whose gross weight
exceeds 23,000 pounds, loaded or unloaded, during such times as the
Road Commissioner determines necessary to protect said ways from
damage. Further, the Road Commissioner shall be responsible for
placing conspicuous notice of this order at the beginning of said Town
ways, notifying the public of the closing. Any violation of this article
shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of not less than $250 (29-A
M.R.S.A. § 2395) nor more than $1,000. Each violation shall be deemed
a separate offense. In addition to any fine, the municipal officers may
seek legal action restitution for the cost of repairs to any damaged way
or bridge and reasonable attorney fees and court costs. [Amended
6-10-2019]
B. The following roads, or portions thereof, are hereby designated for
seasonal closing:
(1) Russell Road.
(2) Bagley Road (from East Madison Road to Route 43). [Amended
6-11-2019]
(3) Shusta Road.
(4) River Road.
(5) South Solon Road (from Route 43 to the Solon Town line).
[Amended 6-11-2019]
(6) Old County Road.
63.Editor's Note: An interim amendment to this regulation was adopted 5-19-1980.
§ 694-1 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 694-2
688:471
§ 694-3. Exempt vehicles.
Vehicles or combination vehicles exempt from this rule and regulation are:
(7) Kincaid Road.
(8) Ward Hill Road.
(9) Preble Avenue.
(10) Foss Road.
(11) Eames Hill Road.
(12) Reed Road.
(13) Blackwell Hill Road.
(14) Lower Mills Road.
(15) Trolley Line Drive. [Added 6-10-2019]
(16) Orchard Road. [Added 6-10-2019]
(17) Adams Road. [Added 6-10-2019]
(18) Boardman Road (from Route 43 to the Solon Town line). [Added
6-10-2019]
(19) Stoutameyer Road. [Added 6-10-2019]
(20)Weston Avenue (from Wedge Street north to road end). [Added
6-10-2019]
(21) Golf Course Road. [Added 6-10-2019]
A. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles, with or without a load,
registered for a gross weight of 23,000 pounds or less; and
B. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for 23,000 pounds
without load other than tools or equipment necessary for the proper
operation of such vehicle or combination of vehicles; and
C. Any vehicle engaged in highway maintenance under the direction of the
Maine Department of Transportation (DOT) or the Town of Madison;
and
D. Any two-axle home heating fuel delivery truck registered in excess of
23,000 per square foot, with an exemption certificate issued by Maine
DOT, carrying a partial load and having a gross weight of 23,000 pounds
or less; and
E. Any vehicle engaged in the transportation of bulk milk or bulk feed
which is registered in excess of 23,000 pounds with an exemption
certificate issued by Maine DOT carrying a partial load having a weight
§ 694-2 MADISON CODE § 694-3
688:472
§ 694-4. Exemption for frozen highways.
This rule and regulation shall not apply to any section of highway which has
been closed when that section of the highway is solidly frozen.
equal to or less than indicated on the exemption certificate as
documented by delivery slips or bills of lading carried in the vehicle.
The allowable weight indicated on the exemption certificate will be
calculated based on various reduced loads per inch width tire,
manufacturer's rating.
§ 694-3 REGISTRAR HOURS PRIOR TO ELECTION § 694-4
688:473
Chapter 702
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 62.
§ 702-1. Findings.
The Town of Madison recognizes that smoking and the use of tobacco
products at Town-owned properties is detrimental to the health and safety
of everyone.
§ 702-2. Purpose; effective date.
The Town of Madison supports an environment where nobody is exposed
to the harmful effects of secondhand smoke and everyone is supported in
efforts to live tobacco-free. The Town of Madison is dedicated to providing
everyone with a safe and healthy environment at all of the Town properties,
effective June 12, 2018.
§ 702-3. Prohibited on town property.
§ 702-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. This policy prohibits all smoking and the use of all tobacco 24 hours a
day, 365 days a year:
(1) In all Town of Madison-owned, -leased and -affiliated buildings.
(2) On all Town of Madison-owned or -leased properties (not to include
Town-owned rights-of-way, roads or sidewalks).
(3) At all Town of Madison-permitted or -sanctioned events, both
indoors and outdoors when on Town of Madison property, unless
otherwise designated.
(4) In all Town of Madison-owned, -leased or -rented vehicles.
B. This smoke- and tobacco-free policy applies to all people utilizing Town
of Madison space, including Town employees, organizers of, and
attendees at, public events, including but not limited to, athletic events,
concerts, productions, conferences, meetings, lectures, social events
and/or cultural events using Town of Madison-owned, -leased and -
affiliated property.
§ 694-4 MADISON CODE § 702-4
688:474
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or heated
cigar, cigarette, pipe or joint, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or
plant product intended for inhalation, including hookahs and marijuana,
whether natural or synthetic in any manner or in any form. Smoking also
includes the use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or
vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device
for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this policy.
Nonsmoked marijuana products, including, but not limited to, edibles and
dabs are also included in this policy.
TOBACCO — Is defined as all tobacco-derived or -containing products,
including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, cigarillos, bidis,
kreteks; all smokeless and dissolvable tobacco products, including but not
limited to, dip, spit/spitless, chew, snuff, snus and nasal tobacco; and any
product intended to mimic tobacco, containing tobacco flavoring or
delivering nicotine, including but not limited to, electronic nicotine delivery
systems, e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-hookahs, vape pen or any other product
name or descriptor, or the use of any other type of tobacco or nicotine
product for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of tobacco in this
policy. This does not include products specifically approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the purpose of cessation or
nicotine replacement therapy.
§ 702-5. Communication.
This policy will be communicated through tobacco-free signs posted at all
property entrances and throughout the facility. Everyone is required to
comply with the Town of Madison tobacco-free policy.
§ 702-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations by Town employees will result in disciplinary action in
accordance with the Town of Madison Personnel Policy. All other persons
violating the Town of Madison tobacco-free policy shall be required to leave
the premises.
Chapter 707
SOCIAL SERVICES APPROPRIATIONS POLICY
§ 707-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to determine which social service agencies
will receive Board of Selectmen support for appropriation of local dollars.
Agencies providing charitable or social services in Madison and which
request local dollars will, for funding purposes, prioritize requests based
upon how the request matches the needs of the community. This policy is
established to ensure fair and equitable treatment of agencies.
§ 702-4 SOCIAL SERVICES APPROPRIATIONS POLICY § 707-2
707:475
§ 707-2. Form of application.
An agency submitting a request will provide the following information:
name of agency, agency address and contact, amount of request, historical
Town support to the agency, what services this funding will help provide,
how many people in the community would be served, references, a summary
budget sheet itemizing agency revenues and expenditures, and other
relevant financial information about the agency.
§ 707-3. Criteria for funding.
The following criteria will be used to evaluate agency requests: total budget
of agency, source of core funding, availability of references or grant
compliance documentation from source of core funding, amount of budget
going towards administrative overhead, comparison with similar providers
in other regions, and references from clients.
§ 707-4. Recommended funding.
Agencies will be considered for funding, if agency has been funded in
previous year by Town; and if agency is funded by Somerset County it will
not be funded.
Chapter 713
STREETLIGHTING GUIDELINES
§ 713-1. Findings.
The Madison Board of Selectmen finds the following facts relating to
streetlighting:
A. Inadequately illuminated streets engender a sense of fear from the
citizenry, especially the elderly and defenseless members of the
community.
B. Adequate illumination of streets provides for increased visibility to
motorists, greater sense of security for pedestrians and is conducive to
the general safety and welfare of the public.
C. Streetlighting is a continuing financial burden upon the taxpayers of
the community and, therefore, should be installed only where need can
be substantiated.
D. Differences exist as to the need for lighting in various areas within the
Community and as to the type and size of fixtures to meet these needs.
E. Streetlighting is not viewed by all members of the community as being
an essential governmental service. Some consider lighting annoying
and an infringement upon the reasonable use and control of real and
personal property.
§ 707-2 MADISON CODE § 713-2
713:476
§ 713-2. Purpose.
Therefore, the Madison Board of Selectmen hereby adopts the following
policy to provide guidance to the Board in the following instances.
§ 713-3. New streetlight installation requests.
Requests for new streetlights will not normally be approved unless the
installation is to occur at the intersection of two or more public roads.
Additionally, a minimum of 3/4 of the affected property owners must be in
favor of the installation. This guideline may be waived at the discretion of
the Board when it is determined to be in the best interests of the Town.
§ 713-4. Removal of streetlights.
Any affected property owner may request the removal of an existing fixture;
however, all affected residents in the illumination must be polled for
concurrence. Upon acquiescence of a simple majority of affected residents,
the Board will order removal of the streetlight.
§ 713-5. Relocation of streetlights.
The aggregate of the guidelines governing new installation and removal
shall apply.
§ 713-6. Type and size of streetlighting.
Type and sizing of streetlighting shall be determined by the Madison Police
Chief, Madison Town Manager and the applicable utility representative.
§ 713-7. Associated costs.
As a Town asset, the costs of installation, removal, maintenance and
operation of a streetlight will normally be borne by the public. In unusual
circumstances, the Board may pass these costs on to the individual(s)
making the request on a case-by-case basis.
Chapter 720
TAX-ACQUIRED PROPERTY, DISPOSITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property tax abatement — See Ch. 724, Art. I.
§ 720-1. Advertising.
After proper consideration and approval by the Selectmen, the parcel or
parcels shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in this area
and shall be posted in the public notice space in the Town Office.
§ 713-2 TAX-ACQUIRED PROPERTY, DISPOSITION OF § 720-2
720:477
§ 720-2. Requests for bids.
All requests for bids shall contain a general description of the land, location,
and a clause reserving the right to reject any and all bids and/or accept any
bid.
§ 720-3. Special listing.
The Town Treasurer's Office will list all Town-owned property in a special
listing and whenever possible, affix a plan or map showing location and size.
§ 720-4. Separate listing for Town-acquired property.
In reference to Town-acquired property, the Town Manager's Office will
maintain a separate listing.
§ 720-5. Determination of future use.
Town-acquired property will not be sold before the Board of Selectmen has
decided whether or not to retain the same for the Town future uses.
A. Listing shall be in alphabetical order.
B. Listing shall list name of prior owner.
C. Listing shall list taxes due-periods.
D. Listing shall show all steps taken by the Town in establishing its right to
the tax lien imposed against the property.
(1) History of lien process:
30-day notice prior to lien
Lien filed
Expiration notice
Lien expired
Treasurer purchase
(2) Was a 30-day notice received? ___
By whom?
If not, was it returned?
Why? When?
E. Listing will show a plan or map of the property concerned.
A. Administrative remarks:
(1) Management and/or legal
(2) Assessor
(3) Public works
§ 720-2 MADISON CODE § 720-5
720:478
§ 720-6. Retention; title assurance.
§ 720-7. Disposition of funds; high bidder.
All funds received from the sale of tax-acquired property must be placed
in the general surplus of the Town. Generally, the high bidder will be the
successful bidder, if the option to accept is exercised by the Madison Board
of Selectmen. However, if it is apparent that an undue hardship or injustice
will result, the high bid will not necessarily be acceptable.
§ 720-8. Exceptions.
§ 720-9. Procedures for sale.
1. Authority: Board of Selectmen
Date
2. Advertised:
a. Newspaper: Name:
Date:
b. Posted: Places:
(4) Protection
(5) Planning Board
(6) Conservation Committee
(7) Safety Committee
A. If the Board of Selectmen decides to retain tax-acquired property,
proper steps will be taken to assure the Town of a good title to the
same. 36 M.R.S.A. § 946
B. All tax-acquired property will be listed, if retained, in the name of the
inhabitants of the Town of Madison. 36 M.R.S.A. §§ 1071 through 1084
A. There are times when tax liens are not paid on time due to
administrative detail, such as departmental error or mix-up and/or
when a lien is not valid because of some legal insufficiency.
B. In either of the instances above, or other valid reasons other than just
nonpayment, where the taxpayer is not at fault, it is the policy that the
Treasurer, upon evidence and contingent upon payment of all amounts
due the Town, will issue a quit-claim deed to the property owner.
C. A detailed report will be kept on file to substantiate the action taken,
and a report will be given to the Board of Selectmen prior to the
issuance of the quit-claim deed.
§ 720-5 TAX-ACQUIRED PROPERTY, DISPOSITION OF § 720-9
720:479
3. Bids:
a. Amount $
Date
b. Amount $
Date
c. Amount $
Date
d. Amount $
Date
e. Amount $
Date
f. Amount $
Date
4. Awarded to:
$
Date
Chapter 724
TAXES, PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
General assistance — See Ch. 200. Disposition of tax-acquired property — See
Ch. 720.
§ 720-9 MADISON CODE § 720-9
720:480
ARTICLE I
Abatement Policy
[Adopted 3-18-1991]
§ 724-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 724-2. Applicant's burden of proof of eligibility.
Applicants seeking a poverty abatement have the burden of proving that
they are eligible for the abatement; it is not the Selectmen's responsibility
to prove that the applicant is not entitled to an abatement.
§ 724-3. Application.
Persons desiring an abatement must complete an application for abatement
of property taxes,64 and must complete general assistance application
forms. Applicants who are requesting abatements for previous tax years
must demonstrate no ability to contribute to the public charge, both
currently and during the tax year or years for which the abatement is
being requested. Persons desiring an abatement will be given the options of
applying for general assistance and the poverty abatement process. People
who meet annualized general assistance eligibility standards are eligible for
a poverty tax abatement if there are no mitigating factors, such as projected
income, excess real or personal property, or unreasonable expenses; and,
eligibility determination will subtract annualized household income from
annual need.
§ 724-4. Selectmen review.
The Board of Selectmen will review applicant's income and expenses.
Factors to take into consideration include the applicant's income, both
current and projected; assets such as an excessively expensive single
vehicle, plus extra cars, recreational vehicles, boats, real estate, etc.; actual
expenses which may not be reasonable or necessary and which may be
reduced or eliminated; and other sources of income or methods to alleviate
A. Whereas: Maine Law, 36 M.R.S.A. § 841, Subsection 2, permits the
municipal officers "on their own knowledge or on written application
(to) make such abatements as they believe reasonable in the real and
personal property taxes on all persons who, by reason of infirmity or
poverty, are in their judgment unable to contribute to the public
charges."
B. Whereas: The Town desires an alternative to forcing the sale of
property in order to collect taxes from those otherwise unable to pay.
C. Now, therefore, be it resolved the Board of Selectmen hereby outlines
the conditions upon which poverty abatements will be granted:
64.Editor’s Note: See also the Application for Abatement of Local Property Tax included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 724-1 TAX-ACQUIRED PROPERTY, DISPOSITION OF § 724-4
720:481
their financial distress such as relatives. The Selectmen will evaluate the
information presented by the applicant and determine if the applicant has
met his/her burden of proof and the eligibility standards. A denial could
issue if Selectmen are unable to determine eligibility because the applicant
failed to produce necessary documentation. A denial could issue if
Selectmen assess a resource (general assistance) is available.
§ 724-5. Request to delay action.
When an application is filed, the Selectmen will ask the applicant to permit
them to delay action on the request. The Selectmen prefer to wait to make
their final decision until just prior to when the lien forecloses. This policy
is based on the Selectmen's hope that the applicant's financial condition
will have improved by that time so that the abatement is not needed. If
applicant agrees with the proposed delay, he/she should sign and return the
"Postponement Notice" within 14 days.65
§ 724-6. Grant of abatement; partial abatement.
If applicants are clearly poor and have little or no likelihood of any
prospects which would enable them to pay the taxes, the Selectmen are
obligated to grant an abatement. A partial abatement is appropriate in those
cases where the applicant can pay part of the taxes or will be able to pay a
portion of the taxes prior to the tax lien expiring. Selectmen may consider
abating only fees and interest that would accrue as a result of the lien.
65.Editor's Note: Said Postponement Notice is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 724-4 MADISON CODE § 724-6
720:482
ARTICLE II
Payments Applied to Delinquent Taxes
[Adopted 4-14-199766]
§ 724-7. Authorization; order of payments.
We, the Municipal Officers of the Town of Madison, upon request of the
Tax Collector and Treasurer of said Town, hereby authorize and direct
said Tax Collector and Treasurer, pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 906, to apply
any tax payment received from an individual as payment for any property
tax against outstanding or delinquent taxes due on said property in
chronological order beginning with the oldest unpaid tax bill; provided,
however, that no such payment may be applied to any tax for which an
abatement application or appeal is pending unless approved in writing
by the taxpayer. These payments shall be applied first to lien costs, then
interest, then to outstanding principal balance.
66.Editor's Note: This order was acknowledged on 4-15-1997 as follows: "We, the Tax
Collector and Treasurer of said Town, hereby acknowledge making the aforesaid request
and receipt of a copy of the within Order."
§ 724-7 TAX-ACQUIRED PROPERTY, DISPOSITION OF § 724-7
720:483
Chapter 729
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
§ 724-7 MADISON CODE § 724-7
729:484
ARTICLE I
Policy
[Adopted 12-28-1998]
§ 729-1. Overview.
§ 729-2. Purpose.
A. Tax increment financing (TIF) is a state-sanctioned economic
development incentive tool which allows municipalities to use all, or a
portion of, the new property taxes that result from a commercial
investment project within a designated district to assist in that project's
financing. To accomplish this, the municipality has the option of issuing
bonds which are retired using the tax increment, or paying the tax
increment directly to the investing business to cover project costs
through a credit enhancement agreement (CEA). When CEAs are
utilized, municipalities incur no financial liability for the costs of the TIF
project. In accordance with state law, TIF districts may be designated
for a period of up to 30 years. Bonds may be issued under this program
for up to 20 years. The municipal legislative body and the State of
Maine, Office of Economic and Community Development, must approve
TIFs.
B. Since increased value within the TIF District is not included in the state
valuation, the TIF designation allows the Town to avoid decreases in
revenue sharing and increases in the school and county assessment,
which would occur if the value of the improvements was not sheltered
by the TIF. The state law allows the municipality to pass along to the
investing business the benefits of that sheltered value at no net
financial loss to the municipality as well as any additional portion of the
taxes assessed on the increased value that the Town deems
appropriate. The balance of the taxes on the increased value, which the
Town retains, may be designated as a Development Fund Account.
A. The purpose of this policy is to articulate to existing or potential
businesses Madison's desire to encourage and support economic
development that is determined by the Board of Selectmen to be
compatible with the Comprehensive Plan and/or existing local
ordinances and which provides a community benefit.
B. Notwithstanding compliance with any or all of the guidelines below, the
creation of a TIF District is a policy choice to be evaluated on a case-bycase
basis by the Board of Selectmen, and upon the Board's
recommendation, placed upon an Annual or Special Town Warrant for
approval at Town Meeting. A TIF is not a right under Maine law and
meeting the state TIF requirements or the criteria established in the
policy does not create a right or entitlement for any applicant.
C. In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the burden of
establishing the public value of a TIF shall be placed upon the applicant
§ 729-1 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-2
729:485
§ 729-3. Authority.
§ 729-4. Approval at Town Meeting.
§ 729-5. Basic provisions.
and the application must substantially meet the criteria contained
herein. The Board, however, reserves the right to bring any TIF
proposal (regardless or whether it meets the criteria below) to Town
meeting for public vote provided a majority of the Board believes that
acceptance of the TIF is in the best interest of the Town of Madison.
A. The authority for creation of Tax Increment Financing Districts is
established in 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 5222 through 5224.
B. This policy may be modified at any time by a majority of the Board of
Selectmen after the Board has entertained comments and concerns at a
properly advertised public hearing to be held prior to, or
simultaneously with, the Board meeting at which the proposed
amendment will be considered.
A. A TIF application may only be approved at a Town Meeting. Whenever
practical, a TIF application shall be considered at the Annual Town
Meeting. However, if the Board determines there is clear and pressing
community need to act immediately, or if the applicant provides
evidence that delayed approval will be detrimental to the proposed
project, the application may be voted upon at a Special Town Meeting.
B. A TIF shall only be presented to the public for vote if a majority of the
Board recommends adopting the TIF District. In the event the
Selectmen desire to present to the public a proposal which is different
from the original application, the Selectmen shall work with the
applicant to create a proposal which is agreeable to all parties
concerned and the negotiated proposal shall be submitted to the public
for vote (see note below).
C. The TIF Article to be voted upon shall contain language giving the
Board of Selectmen the authority to modify the CEA during the term of
the agreement provided such modifications are in accordance with the
provisions of this policy and such changes do not increase any annual
tax benefit to the applicant.
D. NOTE: Nothing herein shall be interpreted to be contrary to the public's
right to petition to place an issue on a Warrant for public vote under
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2522.
A. The Town of Madison TIF mechanism shall be utilized as an economic
development incentive for the Town's existing businesses as well as for
attracting desirable new commercial establishments to the area. The
Board shall accept and review TIF applications for projects creating
$100,000 or more of new taxable value. When determining whether the
§ 729-2 MADISON CODE § 729-5
729:486
project should be presented to the public for approval, the Board
shall consider the value of the proposed improvements and increased/
retained employment or other public benefits in relationship to the size,
profitability and business environment of the applicant. The Board may
determine that a modest financial investment and creation of one or
two new quality jobs constitutes significant growth (and community
benefit) for a particular small business; however, the Board may require
a proportionally larger economic development effort from larger
businesses.
B. In order to minimize risk to the citizens of Madison, tax increment
financing will be provided through credit enhancement agreements
only, except that the Board of Selectmen reserves the right to initiate a
public infrastructure TIF project which requires bonding. The applicant
utilizing a credit enhancement agreement must provide any and all
documentation requested by the Town that will protect the Town's
economic and financial position, and/or that confirm both the letter and
the spirit of the underlying credit enhancement agreement between the
applicant and the Town.
C. The applicant may propose that any amount up to 100% of the
additional tax value generated by the proposed activities be sheltered
from Madison's tax valuation for any period up to 20 years. Absent any
extenuating circumstances, the term of the TIF shall not exceed the
expected longevity of the improvements proposed. The Board may
approve incentives to businesses on a straight line (i.e., 100% of
incremental value retained by applicant in years one through five; 75%
retained in years six through 10; 50% retained in years 11 through 15)
and may recommend separate schedules for real property and personal
property within the same TIF District.
D. Up to 85% of the financial benefit associated with the "captured value"
as defined in the state TIF guidelines may be utilized for the benefit of
the commercial applicant. The Board shall determine the appropriate
percentage based on the community benefit of the project. The number
of quality jobs created/retained and the value of public infrastructure
improvements (which will serve businesses other that the applicant)
will be among the Board's top priorities when determining the
appropriate percentage. (See performance standards and approval
criteria sections of this policy: §§ 729-9 and 720\9-8, respectively.) The
remaining "captured value" retained by the Town shall be placed in a
development fund to benefit further economic development through
revolving loan funds, matching grants to encourage facade upgrade
and/or improve areas of slum and blight or upgrade of public
infrastructure which will enhance future economic development. Use of
the retained captured value will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
E. The credit enhancement agreement (CEA) shall provide for a recapture
of the benefits if the project should move to another municipality prior
to the end of the TIF term. CEA assignments will be allowed only for
conventional, commercial financing purposes and where the proposed
§ 729-5 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-5
729:487
assignee agrees to be bound by the same terms and conditions as
the original applicant. The initial application shall contain a written
statement confirming that:
(1) The applicant agrees, if the TIF District is approved, to notify the
Town in writing prior to any transfer of ownership of real or
personal property within the district; and,
(2) The applicant will obtain from the new owner a written agreement
to accept the provisions of the TIF and credit enhancement
agreement as presented to and approved at Town Meeting.
F. In accordance with the state assessing standards and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 5224, Subsection 4A, nothing in this policy allows or sanctions
unequal apportionment or assessment of the taxes to be paid on real
property within the Town of Madison. Furthermore, all real and
personal property within the tax increment-financing district shall be
assessed real and personal property taxes equitably with real and
personal property taxes assessed elsewhere in the municipality. The
Board of Assessors shall make a determination regarding the "frozen"
or existing value of the proposed district (based solely upon accepted
assessing standards) prior to making final determinations regarding the
TIF application. The applicant must provide verified documentation as
to the value of the fixed assets, being real and personal property, as of
the date of the acceptance of the application.
G. Economical necessity to fund the proposed project is a factor that
should be considered when evaluating a TIF proposal.
(1) Justification for economic need should be demonstrated by one of
the following scenarios:
(a) A need to offset infrastructure costs unique to the site; or
(b) A need to offset economic advantages available to the
commercial applicant if it should build or expand outside of
Madison; or
(c) The unavailability of sufficient private or other public funding
sources to meet the full capital investment needs of the
corporate entity seeking assistance; or
(d) The need for assistance in meeting the costs of implementing
improved technology for the business to become or remain
competitive in the global market.
(2) The Board of Selectmen reserves the right to consider other
scenarios offered by the company making the proposal if, in its best
judgment, they feel doing so is in the best interest of the
community.
H. Financial capability to complete the project must be fully documented
prior to the Board of Selectmen's review as follows:
§ 729-5 MADISON CODE § 729-5
729:488
(1) A letter from a financial institution, governmental agency, or other
funding agency indicating a commitment to provide a specified
amount of funds and the uses for which those funds may be utilized.
(2) In cases where funding is required but there can be no commitment
of money until approvals are received, a letter of intent from the
appropriate funding institution indicating the amount of funds and
their specified uses will be accepted.
(3) The most recent corporate annual report indicating availability of
sufficient funds to funds to finance the development together with
explanatory material interpreting the report.
(4) Evidence indicating availability of funds if the developer will
personally finance the development.
I. Applicant must comply with all statutory and regulatory guidelines of
the Town and state.
J. All proposed projects must be consistent with the Town Comprehensive
Plan, if such Plan has been approved prior to the date of application.
K. All costs of the project that are included in the TIF proposal must be
documented through invoices and other appropriate records from
nonaffiliated companies. Payments of project costs to affiliated
companies will be disallowed unless the applicant makes full disclosure
of the relationship between the parties of the Town in writing prior to
public approval of the district.
L. The applicant must declare in the TIF application all state and local
economic development programs for which the applicant intends to
apply over the term of the district. This disclosure must include
information regarding applicant's intent to participate in programs
including, but not limited to, employment tax increment financing
(ETIF), STIF and business equipment property tax reimbursement
program (BETR). After TIF approval, if the applicant is awarded any
state or local economic development incentives (such as those listed
above or any newly created programs) which were not disclosed in the
application, the Board reserves the right to reconsider the terms of the
TIF District and, if appropriate, renegotiate the terms of the CEA.
Applicants are advised to coordinate with the Town before applying for
state or local economic development incentives that were not fully
disclosed in the original application.
M. All applicants will be required to sign a professional fee consent form
agreeing to reimburse the Town for all reasonable outside professional
costs, such as legal and accounting, incurred as a result of the tax
increment financing proposal, whether or not the TIF District is
approved. In addition, any reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred
by the Town in connection with the tax increment financing proposal
will be reimbursed by the applicant, whether or not the TIF District is
§ 729-5 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-5
729:489
§ 729-6. Application contents.
Applicants are encouraged to develop applications in consultation with
the Town. Members of the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Office may be involved in these preliminary discussions, even
when they may be involved in a subsequent review of the application. All
TIF applications must:
§ 729-7. Application procedures.
approved including, but not limited to, expenses related to calling a
Special Town Meeting, advertising, printing and postage.
N. If the tax increment financing proposal is approved, an annual
administrative fee equal to 1% of the incremental taxes reallocated
back to the project will be charged by the Town and credited to the
general fund to offset annual administrative costs and overhead
associated with overseeing the TIF District.
A. Provide enough detail to clearly describe the scope of the project,
beneficiaries and costs;
B. Include a detailed description of any public improvements to be
financed using captured funds, and information regarding how the
funds will be spent;
C. Compare the impact of the proposed activities on the SAD No. 59 and
county assessment and on state revenue sharing that is based on tax
valuation, both with and without a TIF District;
D. Clearly describe the benefits of the TIF to the applicant;
E. Provide a statement explaining the impact of proposed project upon the
general community;
F. Present all data required by the state, 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 5222 through
5224; and
G. Provide any additional information the Board of Selectmen deems
necessary to review and evaluate the application.
A. Applicants are advised that the process of reviewing, evaluating and
scheduling a TIF application for public vote may take up to 60 days.
Applications will be accepted at any time; however, applications
submitted less than 60 days prior to Annual Town Meeting may require
a Special Town Meeting, at the Selectmen's discretion.
Notwithstanding an applicant's need to present a TIF application when
the business is ready to proceed with the proposed project, the Town
prefers such applications be voted upon at Annual Town Meeting,
whenever possible.
B. The Board of Selectmen shall solicit nonbinding recommendations
regarding the TIF proposal from the following: Town Manager,
§ 729-5 MADISON CODE § 729-7
729:490
§ 729-8. Approval criteria.
The following criteria shall be used to determine the public benefit of
the application and whether or not the proposal should be placed before
the voters for consideration. It is not mandatory that all criteria be met.
The Board may negotiate with the applicant regarding specific elements
of the application in an effort to create an amended proposal. (In addition
to the provisions contained in this section, the Board of Selectmen shall
use § 729-9, Performance standards, below to determine the recommended
percentage of financial benefit associated with the captured value to be
utilized for the benefit of the applicant.)
Community Development Director, Assessor's Assistant, Planning
Board, Code Enforcement Officer, Treasurer and any other department
head or outside agency whose operations may be affected by the
proposal or who may offer relevant advice.
C. The Town Manager, Assessor's Assistant and Treasurer shall be
responsible for verifying completeness of the application and verifying
the assessment, tax shift and other calculations submitted by applicant.
The applicant and/or its consultant will be given the opportunity to
make an oral presentation to the Selectmen at a regularly scheduled
Board meeting and the Town Manager shall advise the Selectmen
regarding the major elements of the proposal and the costs and benefits
to the community.
D. The Town will hold a public hearing to solicit public comments and
questions regarding the TIF District either immediately prior to the
Town Meeting or at a public hearing held no earlier than 30 days prior
to the Town Meeting in which the public will vote upon the TIF
proposal. The public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Madison area at least 10 days prior to the
public hearing.
E. When the application will be considered at the Annual Town Meeting,
an Article containing the appropriate wording shall be included in the
Annual Town Warrant and posted in the customary manner. When a TIF
application will be considered at a Special Town Meeting, the Town
shall advertise that meeting in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Madison area on at least two occasions, one occasion at least two weeks
prior to the Special Town Meeting date, and another occasion some
time between the meeting date and two weeks prior to the meeting
date. The applicant shall pay advertising costs.
F. If the public approves the TIF proposal, the Town shall submit the
application, after any required public hearings, to the State of Maine
Office of Economic and Community Development for final approval
within 15 days of the public vote.
A. Does the application meet the "basic provisions" outlined above?
§ 729-7 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-8
729:491
§ 729-9. Performance standards.
This section shall utilized to evaluate the appropriate percentage of
financial benefit associated with the captured value to be utilized for the
benefit of the applicant.
B. Does the project create or retain long-term permanent employment
with wages equal to or higher than the local average? (See § 729-9,
Performance standards, below.)
C. Will any new jobs created be advertised and promoted within Madison?
(See § 729-9, Performance standards, below.)
D. Does the proposal improve the general economy of the community?
E. Will the improvements have a net positive impact on Madison's
business community after considering all factors, including effects on
established businesses?
F. Does the project minimize traffic impacts and is it designed in a manner
that does not contribute to commercial sprawl?
G. Are the structures to be built, if any, which are visible from a public
road, compatible with the surroundings with regard to style and setting
and in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan as well as state and
local ordinance?
H. Does the project create public infrastructure facilities that have
applications beyond the particular development such as traffic
upgrades, public parking facilities, etc.? (See § 729-9, Performance
standards, below.)
I. Does the project improve and/or broaden the tax base?
J. Does the proposal improve blighted buildings or areas in need of
redevelopment?
K. Does the proposed district support community projects or create public
benefits such as granting access to open spaces, creating student
internships, providing job training, supporting local contractors and
suppliers?
L. Will this project encourage other businesses to invest in their buildings,
purchase equipment or create jobs?
A. If the infrastructure improvements proposed under the TIF are likely to
directly encourage additional businesses to relocate or expand within
Madison: or, if the TIF proposal will create new public service or
training endeavors (i.e., higher education facilities such as a University
of Maine satellite site), the Board should consider awarding additional
credit enhancement percentage points to the proposed agreement.
General speculation regarding possible future development due to the
proposed upgrade will not hold as much weight as professional opinions
§ 729-8 MADISON CODE § 729-9
729:492
from KVCOG, Community Development Director or other
knowledgeable sources.
B. For proposed TIF applications retaining or creating quality jobs, which
are paid equal to or higher than the local average, the Board may
consider providing the applicant with a value of $4,000 annually per job
retained or created. This amount may be made in addition to any
amounts or percentages awarded pursuant to Subsections A and C of
this section.
C. To obtain an incentive for retained jobs the applicant must provide clear
and convincing documentation that the TIF approval will provide the
financial incentive which will make the difference between relocating or
going out of business. A pro forma or business plan will be required to
show that the applicant is seriously considering a viable alternative
location.
D. Both the retained jobs and newly created jobs shall be monitored by the
Town on a monthly, quarterly, semiannually or annual schedule as
determined appropriate by the Town. In the event that any approved
TIF District does not meet its job creation/retention obligations under
these standards, the Board of Selectmen reserves the right to
renegotiate the CEA to reduce the tax benefit to the applicant
accordingly.
§ 729-9 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-9
729:493

ARTICLE II
Guidelines
[Adopted 12-28-1998]
§ 729-10. Policy guidelines.
§ 729-11. Basic provision.
§ 729-12. Required guidelines.
In all instances, applicants requesting tax increment financing must
demonstrate:
A. For a TIF application to be considered by the Town's Department of
Economic Development, the Economic Development Committee, or the
full Board of Selectmen, the application must meet a majority of the
following guidelines.
B. Notwithstanding compliance with any or all of the guidelines, the
creation of a TIF district is a policy choice to be made by the Madison
Board of Selectmen on a case-by-case basis; a TIF is not a right under
Maine law and meeting these guidelines does not create a right or
entitlement to any applicant.
A. In order to minimize the risk to the citizens of Madison, tax increment
financing will be provided via credit enhancement agreements only. The
applicant must provide any and all documentation that will protect the
Town's economic and financial position, and/or that confirm both to the
letter and spirit of the underlying agreement between the applicant and
the Town.
B. The Town's share shall not exceed 75% of the incremental taxes over
the life of the district.
A. The Town's participation is economically necessary and involvement by
the Town is needed in order to the project to be undertaken.
Justification for economic need and Town involvement must be
demonstrated by:
(1) A need to offset infrastructure costs unique to the site; or
(2) A need to offset economic advantages available to the corporate
entity if it should build (or expand) outside of Madison; or
(3) The unavailability of sufficient private or other public funding
sources to meet the full capital investment needs of the corporate
entity seeking assistance.
B. The project creates a significant new tax value equal to or greater than
$2,000,000 or a significant employment impact.
§ 729-10 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-12
729:495
§ 729-13. Employment conditions.
All applicants must, at a minimum, comply with the following conditions:
C. Financial capability to undertake project must be evidenced prior to
review.
D. Compliance with all statutory and regulatory guidelines of the Town
and state.
A. For any employees employed in the state, the employer may not
discriminate, with respect to wages, benefits or terms and conditions of
employment between full-time employees and other employees, except
that benefits may be prorated based on the amount of time worked. This
subsection does not prohibit variations in the rate of pay based on a
difference in employee seniority.
B. The employer must offer health insurance coverage to all employees
employed in the state on the same financial terms, except that
employees who are not full-time permanent employees may be offered
coverage on a prorated basis based on the amount of time they work.
C. The employer must provide to all employees employed in the state a
pension plan that includes an employer contribution of at least 3% of
gross pay.
D. The employer may not pay an employee an hourly wage that is less than
the prevailing wage for that occupation in the state as determined by
the Commissioner of Labor or a living wage, whichever is higher. For
the purposes of this subsection "living wage" means an income
calculated on a calendar year basis that is greater than the average
annual per capita income in the labor market area in which the
employee is employed.
E. The employer must develop and implement a closing and layoff policy,
which must, at a minimum, require that the employer will not close,
relocate or eliminate jobs without providing at least six-months' notice
to the state and the unit of local government that provides the economic
development incentive, without engaging meetings with state and local
government officials and local unions to explore alternatives and
without engaging locally in at least one public hearing in the affected
community.
F. If an employer sells a business that has qualified for an economic
development incentive, the purchaser is subject to this section for five
years beyond the termination of the economic development incentive or
for a length of time equal to the period during which the business
received the economic development incentive if that period was less
than five years. The purchaser must conform to the terms of any
existing collective bargaining agreement between the former employer
and any of that employer's employees.
§ 729-12 MADISON CODE § 729-14
729:496
§ 729-14. Determination of level of Town participation.
Although an applicant need not meet each of the following criteria, they will
be used to determine the level of participation by the Town.
§ 729-15. Standard operating procedures.
The Town will act as a clearinghouse and coordinate all activities regarding
tax increment financing proposals. Working with potential applicants, the
Town will:
A. The project assists an established business in the Town of Madison,
thus creating or retaining employment;
B. The project creates long-term, permanent employment;
C. The project improves a blighted area in need of redevelopment, or an
area identified as a priority by the Town;
D. The project creates public infrastructure facilities which will have
application beyond the particular development such as traffic upgrades,
public parking facilities, etc.
E. If not from the beginning on the district, then as soon as is financially
possible, the project will support community projects or create public
benefits such as granting access to open spaces, creating student
internships, providing job training, supporting local contractors and
suppliers, etc.
A. Provide information on tax increment financing;
B. Discuss project proposals and accept preliminary applications from
applicants;
C. Review preliminary applications based on policy guidelines;
D. Advise applicants on findings of the Town staff's review;
E. Following a review and evaluation of an application, the Town Manager
will make a written determination whether to accept or reject the
application. The written decision approving an application and the
application will be sent to the Economic Development Committee of the
Board of Selectmen for review and a recommendation (Decisions
rejecting an application will also be sent.);
F. Provide assistance, if required, when the Economic Development
Committee makes its recommendation to the full Board of Selectmen;
G. Submit application to the state, based on the direction of the Board of
Selectmen;
H. Monitor ongoing public and private investment in the development
project.
§ 729-14 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 729-16
729:497
§ 729-16. Disclosure; fees.
A. An investment that qualifies the employer for an economic development
incentive of $250,000 in one year over 10 years must be disclosed to the
Commissioner and the Legislature. Annually, an employer receiving an
economic development incentive shall submit a written report to the
Commission disclosing the employer's level of employment in the state
and the effect on employment as a result of the economic development
incentive, assessing the public benefit resulting from the economic
development incentive and identifying any provisions of this section
with which the employer is unable to comply. The State Tax Assessor
shall keep a record of and provide an annual report to the Legislature
on the amount of public funds expended and the revenues foregone
through tax exemptions, credits or abatements, grant payments or real
estate transfers to provide economic development incentives. That
report must include a breakdown that shows the amount of subsidy
received by each employer.
B. Preliminary tax increment financing application will be provided by the
Town Manager's Office, 26 Weston Avenue, Madison, Maine 04950.
C. All applicants must pay a $250 nonrefundable application fee at the
time of submission. If tax increment financing is approved, an annual
administrative fee equal to 1% of the incremental taxes reallocated
back to the project will be charged.
D. All applicants will be required to sign a legal fee consent form agreeing
to reimburse the Town of all legal costs incurred as a result of the tax
increment financing proposal, whether or not tax increment financing is
approved.
E. In addition, any out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Town of
Madison in connection with the tax increment financing proposal will
be reimbursed by the applicant, whether or not tax increment financing
is approved.
§ 729-16 MADISON CODE § 729-16
729:498
Chapter 738
TOWN PROPERTY, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cemeteries — See Chs. 26, 285 and 532. Town-owned ATVs — See Ch. 508.
§ 738-1. Findings.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby finds a need to define the
parameters of acceptable use of Town property by groups, individual
members of the public and Town employees to safeguard the public's
interest and coordinate request for use of public facilities.
§ 738-2. Municipal conference room; fee for nongovernment use.
A. The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby directs that facilities such as
the Municipal Building Conference Room and the meeting rooms at the
Old Point School shall be made available for community use based upon
the following order of priority: [Amended 6-10-2019]
(1) Town government uses. Meetings by local boards, departments,
and commissions of the Town of Madison.
(2) Other government uses. Meetings by various agencies of the state
government, regional governmental agencies and quasigovernmental
agencies.
(3) Nongovernment uses. Nonprofit organizations, fraternal
organizations, social organizations, civic organizations, charitable
organizations, and individual members of the community.
B. Profit organizations, religious organizations or parties affiliated with
religious organizations shall be prohibited from using Town facilities.
[Amended 6-10-2019]
C. Use of facilities shall be based upon the priority system as listed above.
Within priority categories, use of the facility will be based on a firstcome
first-served basis. The Madison Board of Selectmen shall have
first priority at all times and reserves the right to request and direct any
group, board, commission, agency, individual, etc., to reschedule
meetings to another time and place when it is in the best interest of the
Town to do so. The Town shall not be responsible for compensating any
group, board, commission, agency, individual, etc., for expenses
incurred because of such a request or directive.
D. All applications for use of the Municipal Conference Room shall be
made through the Town Manager's office. The Manager may make
§ 729-16 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 738-2
729:499
§ 738-3. General facility and equipment use by Town employees.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby directs that the Manager supervise
the implementation of the following policy:
available other space in the Municipal Building to accommodate
requests.
A. Employee use. Town employees may use Town facilities and equipment
only in situations specifically permitted by department policy and
authorized by the department head. Town vehicles may not be used for
personal reasons except vehicles made available for department head
use under separate policy or contractual provisions. Supplies of the
Town may not be used by employees of the Town for personal use. No
charge for the use of facilities shall be assessed against employees
provided the facilities are returned to their original state prior to use.
Tools and equipment lost or broken due to other than natural wear shall
be reimbursed to the Town. No employee is permitted to use any
equipment or vehicles without proper training and without proper
authorization by the department head. Employees may not use facilities
and equipment to benefit friends or relatives, nor shall facilities and
equipment be used for other persons for which some form of
remuneration is received. Town Garage facilities may not used by any
Town employees from November 1 through May 1.
B. Department head responsibility. Departments of the Town shall be
responsible for establishing a written policy concerning employee use
of departmental property consistent with this Selectmen's policy. This
policy shall be designed to safeguard the public's interest in
departmental property. Said policy shall be presented to the Town
Manager for review as to its consistency with this policy.
C. Agent in charge. The Town Manager shall be deemed the agent in
charge of all Town property and may delegate this authority to another.
The Manager may adopt additional rules to cover items of property not
covered specifically in the Selectmen's policy and not covered in
department policy. Any person or group may be barred from any Town
property or facility by the Town Manager or his designee, and any
person refusing to leave the premises shall be considered criminally
trespassing. During public meetings of any Town board or commission,
it shall be prima facie evidence that upon the call of order of the
meeting, the Manager has delegated his authority to act as the agent of
the Town in the control of the meeting area of the facility in which the
board is meeting to the chairman of the board or commission.
D. Contracting of work. Nothing in this policy shall prohibit the Town
workforce equipment and supplies from being used for nonpublic use
when a reasonable fee for said services is negotiated. Contracted work
shall be at the discretion of the department head. A reasonable fee shall
allow the Town to recover full cost for labor, materials, and
maintenance of equipment as well as a cost for depreciation of
§ 738-2 MADISON CODE § 738-3
729:500
§ 738-4. Additional policies.
The Madison Board of Selectmen reserves the right to adopt additional
polices from time to time on the use of Town property. All preexisting
written and enacted policies not inconsistent with this policy shall remain
in full force.
Chapter 742
TREASURER'S DISBURSEMENT WARRANTS
equipment similar to the State Department of Transportation charge for
heavy equipment. Any contract work entered into by agents of the Town
is subject to review by the Madison Board of Selectmen.
E. Noncontracted work. No work shall be performed by Town labor using
Town equipment and supplies unless in compliance with the contract
work provision of this policy. The following are the exceptions to this
prohibition:
(1) Assistance rendered to persons due to financial hardship or
emergency circumstances.
(2) Work performed in fulfillment of an agreement, either written or
verbal, entered into by the Town or its agents where the interests of
both parties are benefited. Such agreements shall include
agreements for the disposition of wood from within Town rights-ofway,
and maintaining watercourses. Any agreements entered into
by agents of the Town are subject to review by the Madison Board
of Selectmen.
(3) To protect property from damage during times of natural disaster
or emergencies.
(4) To perform work in conjunction with Town projects or programs for
road or sidewalk improvement, fire prevention, community
beautification or other public projects where the public interest
shall be served.
(5) Any project deemed to be in the public's interest to undertake, and
specifically approved by the Madison Board of Selectmen.
(6) Snow removal from employee driveways by Town snowplowing
equipment.
(7) To perform work or repair damage for which the Town may be held
liable.
§ 738-3 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 738-4
729:501

ARTICLE I
Employee Wages and Benefits
[Adopted 8-23-1993; amended in its entirety 6-23-200867]
§ 742-1. Purpose.
This policy allows designated Selectmen, acting on behalf of the full Board
of Selectmen, to review, approve, and sign municipal treasurer's
disbursement warrants for wages and benefits only.
§ 742-2. Policy additional to, not in lieu of, majority power.
Nothing in this policy is intended to replace the authority of the full Board
of Selectmen, acting by majority vote, to act on any treasurer's warrant,
including warrants for wages and benefits.
§ 742-3. Delegation of authority.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5603, Subsection 2A(1), the following authority
is granted with respect to treasurer's disbursement warrants for municipal
employee wages and benefits only.
§ 742-4. Individual Board members authorized to act.
§ 742-5. Effective date.
This policy becomes effective on the date indicated below.68
§ 742-6. Copies.
The Chairman of the Board of Selectmen will furnish copies of this policy
to the Municipal Clerk and to the Municipal Treasurer. If the Clerk and the
Treasurer is the same person, a copy shall nonetheless be provided to that
person in each capacity.
§ 742-7. Term of policy.
This policy lapses one year after its effective date, if not sooner amended or
canceled.
A. Current Board of Selectmen. The Selectmen in office at the time of
execution of this policy are: George F. Elias, Albert Veneziano, Robert
Hagopian, Bruce E. Bristow and Keith Blackwell.
B. Any one or more of the Selectmen named above, acting alone, may
review, approve, and sign such warrants.
67.Editor's Note: This policy is reenacted regularly; interim amendments and reenactments
are not noted.
68.Editor's Note: The effective date is the late date of adoption by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 742-1 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING § 742-8
729:503
§ 742-8. Renewal.
This policy may be renewed at any time before its lapse. Thereafter, it may
be readopted at any time. Any renewal is valid for one year from its effective
date, unless a sooner date of expiration is specified.
§ 742-9. Reminder.
If the Municipal Treasurer is an appointed official, the Treasurer shall
remind the Board of Selectmen to consider renewing this policy annually
before it lapses. If the Municipal Treasurer is an elected official, the
Treasurer is requested to provide such an annual reminder.
§ 742-10. Maintenance of original.
The Chairman of the Board of Selectmen will maintain the original of
this policy on file unless the Municipal Clerk is an appointed official, in
which case the Clerk shall maintain it on file, if requested to do so by the
Chairman.
§ 742-8 MADISON CODE § 742-10
729:504
Chapter 767
WARNING SIGN REQUESTS
§ 767-1. Establishment of criteria.
The Madison Board of Selectmen hereby establishes the following criteria
for consideration of warning sign requests by the general public.
§ 767-2. Authorized officials to take request.
All requests for warning signs shall be made to either the Road
Commissioner, Chief of Police or Town Manager.
§ 767-3. Payment of costs.
Persons desiring the installation of warning signs shall be required to pay
the full cost of the signs in advance of installment or order if the signs are
not in stock.
§ 767-4. Labor.
The Town will not charge for labor involved for installation of signs.
§ 767-5. Findings of Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall determine if there is sufficient grounds for erecting
the requested signs and shall notify the person making the request in
writing of his or her findings.
§ 767-6. Appeals.
Any person may appeal the findings and decision of the Town Manager
provided they file a request for appeal in writing within 30 days of receipt
of notice by them of the Manager's decision. The Town Manager shall be
required to notify the petitioner in writing of the appeal rights outlined in
this section.
§ 767-7. Hearing on appeal.
Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal, the Manager shall place
the matter before the Madison Board of Selectmen for hearing at its next
regular meeting, provided there is sufficient time to give the public three
days' notice of the meeting. The Selectmen may either overturn or affirm
the Manager's decision. Board action shall be final with regard to
exhausting administrative appeals.
Chapter 775
WOOD AND BRUSH REMOVAL
§ 742-10 WARNING SIGN REQUESTS § 775-1
767:505
§ 775-1. Removal by adjacent property owners.
Whenever wood and brush are cut in the Town's rights-of-way, owners of
adjacent properties may take the wood, upon signing an agreement that the
wood will be removed and the resultant debris will be cleaned up to the
satisfaction of the Road Commissioner.
§ 775-1 MADISON CODE § 775-1
775:506