1
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
CODE OF ETHICS
Sec. 101 code of Ethics
101.1. Declaration of Policy. The proper operation of democratic government requires
that Selectmen be fair, impartial and responsive to the needs of the people and each other in
the performance of their respective functions and duties; that decisions and policy be made in
proper channels of the Town’s governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that such Selectmen maintain a standard of conduct that will inspire public
confidence in the integrity of the Town’s government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of
Ethics is hereby established for all Selectmen. This Code of Ethics is no intended to deny
Selectmen their constitutional rights nor violate their civil rights.
101.2 Statutory Standards. There are certain provisions of the general statutes of the
State of Maine which should, while not set forth herein, be considered an integral part of this
Ordinance. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections of the general statutes of the
State of Maine, as may be amended, are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of
this Code of Ethics, and shall apply to all Selectmen whenever applicable as if more fully set
forth therein, to wit:
17 MRSA SS 3104 Conflicts of Interest; Purchases by the State
17-A MRSA SS 456 Tampering with Public Records of Information
17-A MRSA SS 602 Bribery in Official and Political Matters
17-A MRSA SS 603 Improper Influence
17-A MRSA SS 604 Improper Compensation for Past Action
17-A MRSA SS 605 Improper Gifts to Public Servants
17-A MRSA SS 606 Improper Compensation for Services
17-A MRSA SS 607 Purchase of Public Office
17-A MRSA SS 608 Official Oppression
17-A MRSA SS 609 Misuse of Information
17-A MRSA SS 903 Misuse of Entrusted Property
21 MRSA SS 533 Persons Ineligible to Serve as Election Officials
30-A MRSA SS 2605 Conflicts of Interest
30-A MRSA SS 5122 Interest of Public Officials, Trustees or Employees
101.3 Definitions
A. Business – Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint venture, or any other legally recognized entity
organized for the purposes of making a profit.
2
B. Selectmen – Duly elected member of the Town of Norridgewock Board
of Selectmen.
C. Town Employee – any individual working for, on a permanent or
temporary basis, and drawing a salary, wages or stipend from the Town
of Norridgewock, except employees of School Administrative District 54.
The term “Town Employee” shall not include consultants or special
personnel providing services on a short-term contractual basis for less
than one year.
D. Immediate Family – Spouse, and the following when living in the
household of a Selectman or appointee of the Selectmen: children,
parents, brothers, and sisters or significant other.
E. Financial Interest – A direct or indirect interest having monetary or
pecuniary value including, but not limited to the ownership of shares of
stock.
F. Special Interest – A direct or indirect interest having value peculiar to a
certain individual or group, whether economic or otherwise, which value
may accrue to such individual or group as a result of the passage or
denial of any order, ordinance or resolution or the approval or
disapproval thereof, by the Selectmen or their appointees, and which
interest is not shared by the general public.
H. Censure – A judgment or resolution condemning a person for
misconduct.
101.4 Standards of Conduct – The purpose of this code is to establish minimum ethical
standards of conduct for all Selectmen by setting forth those act or actions deemed to
be in conflict or incompatible, or to created the appearance of conflict or
incompatibility, with the best interest of the Town of Norridgewock.
101.5 Conflicts of interest – No Selectman shall participate directly by means of
deliberation, approval or disapproval, or recommendation, in the purchase of goods and
services for the Town, and the award for any contracts with or by the Town (except that
he or she may be allowed to submit bids for same in accordance with the Town
ordinances and under the laws of the State of Maine), where to his or her knowledge
there is a financial interest, or special interest other than that possessed by the public
generally, in such purchase or award, held by:
A. Himself or herself or a member of his or his or her immediate family ;
3
B. a business in which he or she or a member of his or her immediate family
serves as an officer, director, trustee, partner or employee in a policy making
position; or
C. any other person or business with whom he or she or a member of his or her
immediate family are in business, or are negotiating to have an arrangement
concerning future employment.
No Selectman shall participate by means of deliberation, approval or disapproval, or
recommendation, in the decision to hire, promote, discipline, lay off or to take any other
personnel action in respect to any applicant for Town employment or Town employee,
as the case may be, where the applicant or employee is:
A. a member of his or her immediate family;
B. A person with whom either he or she or a member of his or her immediate
family are in business.
101.6 Disclosure of Confidential Information – No Selectman shall, without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the Town, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial or
private interest of himself or herself or others. For purposes of this subsection, the term
“confidential information: shall mean any information, oral or written, which comes to
the attention of, or is available to, such Selectman only because of his or her position
with the Town, and is not a matter of public record. Information received and discussed
during an executive session of committee shall be considered within the constraints of
this section, and shall not be disclosed to any third party unless permitted by affirmative
vote of such body.
101.7 Gifts and Favors – No Selectman shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the
form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person and/or business which to his or
her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business
dealings with the Town; nor shall any Selectman:
a) Accept any gift, favor or thing of value that tends to influence him or her in
the discharge of his or her official duties; or
b) Grant in the discharge of his or her official duties any improper favor, service
or thing of value.
101.8 Use of Town Property – No Selectman shall use, or permit the use of, any Town
owned property including, but not limited to motor vehicles, equipment and buildings,
for any private purposes. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of Town buildings and
equipment at rates and/or on terms as may be established (for the public at large).
101.9 Conflicts of Interest
4
(A) Deliberation and Vote Prohibited
No Selectman shall participate in the deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in
the decision making process, on any agenda item before his or her collective body in
which he or she or a member of his or her immediate family has a financial or special
interest, other than an interest held by the public generally.
(B) Disclosure of Interest in Agenda Items
Any Selectman who believes he, or a member of his immediate family, has a
financial or special interest, other than an interest held by the public generally, in
any agenda item before his or her collective body shall disclose the nature and
extent of such interest, and have it recorded by the Clerk on the Town records of
such item.
(C) Determination of Conflict
Once the issue of conflict has been initiated relative to the individual Selectman, and
disclosure has been made as provided above, the individual initiating the issue of
conflict may request unanimous consent for the affected individual to be excused
from participating in the deliberation or vote on the agenda item; if there is any
objection to this unanimous consent request, such individual’s fellow Selectman
shall vote on whether or not such individual shall be excused from participating in
the deliberation or vote, or otherwise taking part in the decision making process, on
the relevant agenda item. Such individual shall be excused only upon a vote of the
majority of his or her fellow Selectmen, that a conflict of interest in fact exists.
(D) Avoidance of Appearance of Conflict
Once any individual Selectman, has been determined to have a conflict of interest in
respect to any agenda item, said individual may immediately remove himself or
herself from the meeting room, or to the area of the room occupied by the general
public, until deliberation and action on the agenda item has been completed.
(E) Personal Interest
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any Selectman from representing his
or her own personal interest by appearing before his or her collective body on any
such agenda item.
101.10 Disclosure Statement by Selectmen – Every Selectman shall file with the
Town Clerk within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Section, and during
the month of April during each calendar year thereafter, a written statement under
5
oath containing the following information, to the best of his or her knowledge or
belief:
The name of each person or business doing business with the Town in an
amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) during the preceding calendar
year from which such Selectman, or a member of his immediate family, has received
money or other thing or value in an amount in excess of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) during the preceding calendar year, including campaign contributions.
For purposes of this Code, a list prepared by the Town Clerk of those persons or
businesses doing business with the City in amount in excess of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for the preceding calendar year shall be determinative for purposes of
reporting under this section.
101.11 Political Activities – No Selectman shall participate in any political activity
which would be in conflict or incompatible with the performance of his or her official
functions and duties for the Town. In conjunction therewith:
No Selectman may solicit funds or contributions or accept or receive funds or
contributions from Town employees for political purposes.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any
Selectman from participating in the political process in his or her capacity as a
private citizen.
102 Penalties – In addition to any other penalties or remedies as may be
provided by law, violation of this Code shall constitute cause for censure, after
notice and hearing conducted by the Board. A majority of the Board of
Selectmen shall conduct such proceedings. In addition, on the application of at
least ten (10) residents of the Town, the Superior Court may restrain proceedings
in violation of this code.
103 Separability – If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
Invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the
remaining portions of this Code.
104 Adoption – Administrative Code – Code of Ethics
is adopted pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 2605 (7) by the Board of
Selectmen this 23rd day of February, 1994.
6
10. ETHICS
The members of the Board of Selectmen commit themselves to the highest
ethical standards and adopt as their own the ethics policy approved by a prior Board
in February, 1994. However, this policy should be reviewed and submitted to town
Meeting to make it applicable to all elected officials of the Town of Norridgewock.
Board members shall make diligent effort to remain open-minded and receptive
during any debate or deliberation, and shall not take an uncompromising or
unyielding position prior to the discussions by the full Board. Individual members
shall not contrive, scheme, nor barter votes on issues prior to meeting discussions,
in order for the democratic process to continue unfettered in the public view.
Rather, they shall examine the issues thoroughly in advance, so far as possible. They
will solicit and share information with each other and the Town Manager, and
permit the public Board discussions to determine the votes they will make,
recognizing the need for negotiation and compromise on some occasions.
Adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Norridgewock this 3rd day of
April, 2013
Original signed document at the Town Office
Ronald Frederick Matthew Everett
Charlotte Curtis James Hilton
Sallie Wilder
.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
NORRIDGEWOCK REGIONAL AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE
ADOPTED JANUARY 18, 1990
SECTION 1: PURPOSE
An obstruction in the vicinity of the Norridgewock Regional Airport has the potential for endangering lives and
the users of the airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity. An obstruction may effect existing and
future instrument approach minimums of the airport and such an obstruction may reduce the size of areas
available for the landing, taking off, and the maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility
of the airport and the public investment therein.
It is in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and that the prevention of these obstructions
should be accomplished to the extent legally possible through the adoption of airport zoning regulations
pursuant to 6 MRSA Section 241.
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. AIRPORT-Means Norridgewock Regional Airport.
2. AIRPORT ELEVATION-270 feet above sea level.
3. APPROACH SURFACE-A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope set forth in
Section V of this Ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach zone.
4. APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL ZONES-These zones are set forth in Section IV of
this Ordinance.
5. HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION-An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on
the sage and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
6. HEIGHT-For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance and
shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
7. HORIZONTAL SURFACE-A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
8. NONCONFORMING USE-Any pre-existing structure, object or natural growth, or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto.
9. OBSTRUCTION-Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth in Section IV of this Ordinance.
10. PERSON-An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company association, joint stock association, or
governmental entity; including a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of
them.
11. PRIMARY SURFACE-A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway.
When the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface
ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in Section III of this
Ordinance. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
12. RUNWAY-A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and taking off of aircraft along its length.
13. STRUCTURE-An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but
without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission
lines.
14. TRANSITIONAL SURFACES-These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway center
line extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surfaces.
15. TREE-Any object of natural growth.
16. UTILITY RUNWAY-A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven
aircraft of 2500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
17. VISUAL RUNWAY-A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach
procedures.
18. INSTRUMENT RUNWAY-A runway intended for the operation of aircraft using precision instrument
approach procedures.
SECTION III: AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
A. Authority
1. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII-A of
the Maine Constitution and 30 MRSA Section 2151-A and 6 MRSA Section 241 et. seq.
2. This Ordinance shall be known as the “Norridgewock Airport Zoning Ordinance” of the Town of
Norridgewock, Maine adopted and effective by vote of the Town Meeting on January 18, 1990.
SECTION IV: AIRPORT ZONES
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree
shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable limitations are hereby established for each of the zones
in question as follows:
1. Utility Runway-Non-Precision Instrument Approach Zone-Slopes thirty-four
feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5000
feet along the extended runway center line.
2. Utility Runway-Visual Approach Zone-Slopes twenty feet outward for each
foot upward, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5000 feet along the extended
runway center line.
3. Transitional Zones-Slopes seven (70 feet outward for each foot upward, at the
sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach
surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation or
420 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward,
at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface.
4. Horizontal Zone-Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or 420 feet
above mean sea level.
5. Excepted Height Limitations-Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as
prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth of any
tree to a height up to 40 feet above the surface of the land.
SECTION VI: USE RESTRICTIONS
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone
established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals of
radio communication between the airport and aircraft, making it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, resulting in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or other wise in anyway endangering or interfering with the
landing, the taking off, or the maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
SECTION VII: NON-CONFORMING USES
Regulations Not Retroactive-The regulations prescribed by this Ordnance shall not be construed to require the
removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any
structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is
diligently prosecuted.
SECTION VIII: PERMITS
1. Future Uses-Except as specifically provided in Section V, Paragraph 5
(Accepted Height Limitations), no material change shall be made in the use of
land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been
applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose
for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in
accordance with Section VIII-4 (Variances).
2. Existing Uses-No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an obstruction or permit a conforming use, structure, or tree to
become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of
this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for
a permit was made. Except as indicated, all applications for such permit shall
be granted.
3. Nonconforming Uses-Abandoned or Destroyed-Whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer for the Town of Norridgewock determines that a
nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty
percent is torn down, physically deteriorated, or destroyed, or decayed no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
4. Variances-Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure,
or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance with the
regulations prescribed in this Ordinance, may apply to the Norridgewock
Planning Board for a variance from such regulations. The application for
variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation
facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall
be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be
contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this Ordinance.
Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this Ordinance
may be considered by the Planning Board unless a copy of the application has
been furnished to the Norridgewock Regional Airport Authority for advice as to
the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Airport Authority does not
respond to the application within fifteen days after receipt, the Planning Board
may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
5. Obstructing Marking and Lighting-Any Permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner’s expense such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the
Planning Board, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the Norridgewock
Regional Airport Authority, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary
markings and lights.
SECTION IX: ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer and the Municipal Officials of the Town of Norridgewock
to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the Norridgewock Planning Board upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by
this Ordinance to be submitted to the Planning Board shall be promptly considered and granted or denied.
SECTION X: APPEALS
If the Planning Board disapproves an application for permit or grants approval with conditions that are
objectionable to the applicant or any abutting landowner or any aggrieved party; the applicant, an abutting
landowner, or the Norridgewock Regional Airport Authority may appeal the decision of the Planning Board
through the Norridgewock Board of Appeals. When errors in administrative procedures or interpretations are
found, the matter shall be remanded to the Planning Board with instructions explaining proper procedures or
interpretation of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals does not have the authority to issue a variance of the
requirements of this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall have thirty days to revise their decision in
accordance with the instructions of the Board of Appeals and notify the applicant of their decision. A decision
of the Board of Appeals or the Planning Board may be appealed to court as provided for by 30 MRSA Section
2411.
SECTION XI: PENALTIES
Each violation is a class E crime and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition, the Town of Norridgewock may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action an action
to prevent, restrain, correct, or failure to obey any violation of this Ordinance and the court shall adjudge to the
Plaintiff such relief, by way of injunction, which may be mandatory or otherwise as may be proper under all the
facts and circumstances of the case in order to fully effectuate purposes of this Ordinance.
SECTION XII: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
When there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations PRESCRIBED IN THIS Ordinance
and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of
structures or trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail.
SECTION XIII: SEVERABILITY
If any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared
to be severed.
SECTION XIV: AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at the Town Meeting. Amendments may be initiated by a
majority vote of the Planning Board or by request of the Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board or on
petition of ten percent of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election in the Town. The Planning Board shall
conduct a Public Hearing on any proposed amendment.
SECTION XV: EFFECTIVE DATE
Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of this Ordinance is necessary for the preservation of the
public health, public safety and general welfare, an EMERGENCY is hereby declared to exist, and this
Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication and posting as required by
law. Adopted by the Inhabitants of the Town of Norridgewock this January 18, 1990.

TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
ALCOHOL AND DRUG POLICY AND TESTING PROCEDURES
1. PURPOSE
The Town of Norridgewock is committed to a drug and alcohol free workplace.
In order to ensure the safety of its employees and the general public, as well as
to comply with 49 CFR Part 382 and other pertinent federal laws, the Municipal
Officers have adopted this employment policy.
The Town takes pride in its employees who perform critical duties in a truly
effective manner with safety foremost in their minds. This policy strengthens
our commitment to a safe workplace.
2. PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR
The Town Manager is designated by the Town as the Alcohol/Drug Testing
Program Administrator. The Program Administrator is responsible for
answering questions from drivers, employees, or the public in general. The
Program Administrator will maintain the confidentiality of all information
relating to drug and alcohol testing. The Program Administrator may provide
such information as necessary to enable the appropriate supervisor to take the
appropriate action to ensure compliance with this policy. In addition to his/her
duties under this policy, the Program Administrator is also responsible for
compliance with the Program Administrator Guidelines.
3. SCOPE OF POLICY
This policy applies to all regular full-time, part-time and temporary employees
who are required to hold a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) for their
position. All applicants for employment positions requiring a CDL are required
to pass a drug test as a prerequisite of employment, prior to hiring. Any
applicant who fails a drug test shall not be hired, although may re-apply for
employment in the future.
4. COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS
All CDL employees subject to alcohol and drug testing must be in compliance
with this policy at all times while working for the Town. This includes all time
spent operating commercial vehicles, as well as time spent maintaining or
repairing those vehicles.
NOTE REGARDING INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS: Independent contractors and
their employees who must hold a CDL for the contracted activity are subject to the
requirements of 49 CFR Part 382 and are responsible for compliance. The Town will not
provide or pay for tests or rehabilitation for independent contractors or their employees.
The Town shall make compliance with the law a condition of any contract which requires
a CDL driver.
5. SUBSTANCES TESTED
When drug and alcohol screening is required by this policy, a breath test and/or
urine test will be given to detect the following:
a. Alcohol
b. Marijuana
c. Cocaine
d. Amphetamines
e. Phencyclidine (PCP)
f. Opiates
6. PRESCRIPTION DRUG USE
Employees covered by this policy may use prescription drugs and “over the
counter” medications provided that:
a. The prescription drugs or their generic equivalent have been prescribed to
the employee within the past 12 months by an authorized medical
practitioner.
b. The employee does not consume prescribed drugs more often than as
prescribed by the employee’s physician.
c. Any employee who has been informed that the medication could cause
adverse side effects while working shall inform his/her supervisor prior to
using these substances. The Town at all times reserves the right to have a
licensed physician determine if use of a prescription drug or medication by
an employee produces an adverse effect. If such finding is made, the Town
may notify the employee’s doctor (with the employee’s permission) to
determine if other medications are available which would not seriously
effect the employee’s ability to work safely. If an appropriate substitute
medicine is not available, the Town may limit or suspend the employee’s
work activities to non-safety sensitive duties.
7. TESTS REQUIRED
All employees subject to this policy shall be tested for alcohol and/or controlled
substances in the following circumstances:
a. Pre-employment. Drug tests will be conducted when an offer is made to
hire an employee for a CDL position. The offer for employment is
contingent on the applicant passing these tests. This includes existing
employees who are applying for CDL positions.
b. Random. Drug and alcohol tests will be conducted on a random,
unannounced basis. The number of annual drug tests shall equal 50% of the
number of CDL required positions while the number of annual alcohol tests
shall equal 10% of the CDL required positions. The Town has entered into
an agreement with a third party administrator (TPA) to randomly select the
CDL employees for testing and then notify the Program Administrator of
the person or persons chosen.
c. Post-accident. As soon as is practicable after an accident, the employee
shall be tested for alcohol and drugs if: (a) the accident involved the loss of
human life; or (b) the employee received a citation for a moving traffic
violation arising from the accident.
d. Reasonable suspicion. All employees who exhibit to a trained supervisor
and/or drug abuse while on the job, prior to reporting to work, or just after
work will be requires to submit to an alcohol and/or drug test. The
supervisor shall document the specific facts, symptoms or observations by
completing a “Reasonable Suspicion Record” form.
NOTE; Do not allow an employee to drive him/herself to the testing facility for a
reasonable suspicion test. Instead, the supervisor or another employee should provide
transportation to the testing facility.
e. Return-to-duty. An employee who engaged in conduct prohibited by
Section 9 must submit to an alcohol test and drug test to return to duty. The
results of a drug test must be negative to return to duty, and the results of an
alcohol test must be less than 0.02 to return to duty.
f. Follow-up. An employee who previously tested positive and has returned to
duty must submit to a combination of at least six (6) alcohol and drug tests
during the first year after returning to work. Follow-up tests will be
unannounced and may continue for up to sixty (60) months after returning to
work, not to exceed twelve (12) a year.
8. TESTING PROCEDURES
Drug Testing: Drug testing is accomplished by analyzing the employee’s urine
specimen (urinalysis). Specimens will be collected at an off-site facility selected
by the Town. Once the employee provides a urine specimen, it is sealed and
labeled by a certified/authorized agent of the testing facility. A chain of custody
document is completed in the presence of the employee, and the specimen is
shipped to a SAMSA/NIDA certified laboratory.
All urinalysis procedures are required to include split-specimen techniques.
Each urine sample is sub-divided into two containers and labeled as primary and
split specimens. Both specimens are forwarded to the laboratory. Only the
primary specimen is used in the urinalysis. In the event of a confirmed positive
test result, the split specimen may be used for a second confirmation test if
requested by the employee.
During testing an initial screening test is performed. If the test is positive for
one or more drugs, a confirmation test will be performed for each individual
drug using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analysis.
If the analysis of the primary specimen results in a confirmed positive test, the
employee may within 72 hours request that the split specimen also be tested at
the SAMSA/NIDA laboratory of his choice. The second test is at the
employee’s expense unless the test result is negative, in which case the Town
would reimburse the employee.
All test results are reviewed by a Medical Review Officer (MRO) prior to results
being reported to the Town. In the event of a positive test result, the MRO will
first attempt to contact the employee and conduct an interview to determine if
there are any alternative legitimate reasons for the positive results (such as overthe-
counter or prescription medications). If the MRO determines there is a
legitimate medical explanation for the presence of drugs, the result will be
reported as negative. If the MRO is unable to contact the employee, then the
employer will be contacted and requested to advise the employee to contact the
MRO. Urine samples shall be provided in a private test room, stall or similar en
closure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing the
sample. Street clothes, bags, briefcases, purses, and other containers may not be
carried into the test area. N The water in the commode, if any, shall b e colored
with dye to protect against dilution of test samples.
Alcohol Testing. Alcohol testing will be conducted using an evidential breath
testing (EBT) device. The breath test must be performed by a certified Breath
Alcohol Technician (BAT) trained in the use of EBT and alcohol procedures.
Two (2) breath tests are required to determine if an individual is over the alcohol
concentration limit permitted. Any result of less than 0.02 concentration is
considered a negative result. Any result of 0.02 or greater requires a
confirmation test. A confirmed test of 0.02 or greater is considered a positive
result.
9. PROHIBITED CONDUCT
During the time that the Town’s CDL employees are performing their work,
prior to reporting to work, including reporting for storms and emergencies, they
shall not do any of the following:
a. No employee shall use, sell, distribute, dispense, possess, or
manufacture any alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs or any other
intoxicating substance on a job site, or Town property while on duty, or
while in a Town vehicle, a vehicle leased for Town business, or a
privately owned vehicle being used for Town business during the
employee’s work hours.
b. No employee shall report to work unfit for duty at the beginning of a
shift, including reporting for storms and emergencies or upon returning
from any break, lunch or rest period as a result of consuming alcohol,
illegal drugs or other intoxicant.
c. An employee in a safety-sensitive position is prohibited from the use of
alcohol four (4) hours prior to performing safety-sensitive functions.
No supervisor having knowledge that an employee in such a position
has used alcohol within four (4) hours shall permit that employee to
perform safety-sensitive functions.
d. Report to or remain on duty when using any controlled substance,
except when used under a physician’s orders and when the physician
has informed the CDL employee in writing that the use will not affect
the safe operations of a commercial vehicle. If it is determined that the
prescription drug or medication produces an adverse effect, the Town
may notify the employee’s doctor (with permission) to determine if
other medications are available which would not seriously affect the
employees ability to work safely. If an appropriate substitute medicine
is not available, the Town may have to limit or suspend the employee’s
work activities to non-safety sensitive duties, if available.
e. Use any alcohol within eight (8) hours after an accident which has
required the CDL employee to be tested for alcohol concentration.
Further, for employees in non-safety sensitive positions, any workrelated
accident or injury involving Town vehicles, equipment, or
property where it can be demonstrated that the use of alcohol, drugs or
other intoxicants was a contributing factor, may result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination of employment.
f. Refuse to submit to a required alcohol and/or controlled substance test.
g. Report to or remain on duty if the employee has tested positive for
controlled substances.
Failure to comply with these rules is a violation of this policy and will result
in disciplinary action or referral to a certified rehabilitation program.
10. REFUSAL TO TEST
An employee’s failure to submit to testing may result in disciplinary action up to
and including dismissal, and is also grounds for referral to a substance abuse
professional. Failure to submit to a test by an applicant will result in denial of
employment. Specifically, the following circumstances will be considered a
refusal to test:
a. Failure to report to the designated testing area within thirty (30) minutes of
being notified to submit to a required test.
b. Failure to accurately provide a sufficient sample to be tested, either breath or
urine as the case may be, unless medically determined impossible to do so.
11. ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION OF 0.02 OR GREATER BUT LESS THAN
0.04
Provided that the employee has not violated Section 9, any employee whose
alcohol test results in a concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 shall
not be permitted to perform any safety-sensitive function for at least 24 hours
following the test. The employee will not be paid for work-time lost as a result
of this section unless he/she works in another capacity of the Town during that
time period. The employee will not be required to undergo evaluation by a
substance abuse professional if the test result is 0.02 or greater but less than
0.04, nor will a return-to-duty test be required unless there is reasonable
suspicion that the employee is still under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
12. NOTICE AND CONSENT
Before a drug or alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants will
be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting the release of
test results to those officials with a need to know. The chemical screen consent
form shall provide space to indicate current or recent use of prescription and
over-the-counter medication. All recruitment announcements for any positions,
including in-house recruitment and promotion, will disclose that a drug
screening test will be required of the applicant.
13. CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATION OF THIS POLICY
a. Any employee who violates Section 9 or 10 of this policy shall be
immediately removed from the safety-sensitive function and will be
advised by the Town of the resources available for evaluating and
resolving drug and alcohol abuse problems. The employee is required
to be evaluated by a substance abuse professional. All evaluation and
rehabilitation shall be at the employee’s cost. An employee shall not be
allowed to return to the safety-sensitive function until he/she has a
return-to-duty alcohol test result of less than 0.02 or a return-to-duty
drug test with a verified negative result.
b. In addition, any employee who violates Sections 9 or 10 of this policy
may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.
Before discipline, reassignment or dismissal is imposed, the employee
shall have the opportunity to participate for up to 6 months in a
rehabilitation program. The employee is responsible for all costs
associated with the rehabilitation program. Factors to be considered in
determining the appropriate disciplinary response include, but are not
limited to the following: Employee’s work history, length of
employment, current job performance and existence of past disciplinary
actions. Disciplinary action is imposed by town policy; it is not
required by federal law.
c. Further grounds for discipline or dismissal under town policy include,
but are not limited to:
1. Refusal to submit to a rehabilitation program after testing positive.
2. Failure within 6 months to successfully participate in a rehabilitation
program after receiving a positive test, or failure to pass a return-toduty
drug or alcohol test.
3. Evidence that the employee has substituted, adulterated, diluted or
otherwise tampered with his/her urine sample.
4. Failure to contact a substance abuse professional within five (5)
regular working days after being notified of a confirmed (MRO
certified) positive test for the improper use of alcohol or
unauthorized substances.
d. During the period the Town is awaiting an employee’s test result due to
a post-accident or reasonable suspicion circumstance, the Town may
transfer the employee to another position with no reduction in pay or
benefits. The Town also reserves the right to place an employee on paid
or unpaid suspension. A determination whether an employee is placed
in another position or placed on paid or unpaid suspension may be
based, but not limited to who is responsible for and/or the severity of the
accident if applicable; the observed condition of the employee, if
applicable, the employee’s work history, length of employment, current
job performance, the existence of past disciplinary actions and the
availability of another position.
In the event of positive test results the Town will refer to a substance
abuse professional for evaluation and assessment. The cost to be borne
by the employee.
14. EMPLOYEE/APPLICANT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
It is the responsibility of each employee to seek help before alcohol and drug
problems lead to disciplinary action.
In the event of a positive test result, employees and job applicants shall have the
opportunity to present an alternative explanation for the test result by contacting
the Medical Review Officer (MRO). This shall be done no later than five (5)
days after notification of the result. No further action will be taken if there is a
justified explanation, or there is a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the
result or chain of custody of the sample.
Any employee or job applicant with a positive test result may also upon written
request within five (5) working days, have the right to any information relating
to the test result and procedure.
Any permanent employee who tests positive for a first offense, and cannot
provide a satisfactory explanation, will be offered referral to a certified
rehabilitation program.
Any first offense referral may require an indefinite suspension of regular
employment or the transfer of the employee to a non-safety sensitive position
with an appropriate reduction in pay, if available. If the position is in a lower
pay classification, then the employee will remain in his/her current step, but with
a reduction in classification which would result in a reduced pay until the
admission and completion of an approved drug/alcohol treatment program and
the satisfactory passing of a return-to-work substance abuse test. A suspension
may be based but not limited to who is responsible for and/or the severity of the
accident, if applicable/ the observed condition of the employee, if applicable; the
level of the test result; the employee’s work history; length of employment;
current job performance and the existence of past disciplinary actions. The
employee must use accumulated sick or vacation time during the in-patient
rehabilitation.
Upon successfully participating in a rehabilitation program (within 6 months
after it commences) and upon passing a return-to-duty and/or alcohol test, the
employee is entitled to return to his/her job with full pay (but not back pay) and
benefits, unless conditions unrelated to the employee’s previous test make the
employee’s return impossible. The rehabilitation or treatment provider in
consultation with the Town shall determine whether the employee has
successfully participated in the rehabilitation program. The Town is not required
to hold the employee’s job open for more than 6 months after the employee
commences a rehabilitation program.
Any subsequent second offense positive test will result in immediate suspension
without pay and termination after notified of a second confirmed (MRO
certified) positive test for the use of an unauthorized substance.
15. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION
Unless the employee or applicant consents, all information acquired by the Town
in connection with the testing processes is confidential and may not be released
to any person other than to the employee or applicant who is tested, the Program
Administrator, officials with a need to know, and the rehabilitation provider.
The foregoing shall not prevent the release of information that is required or
permitted by state and federal law, or the use of information in any grievance
procedure, administrative hearing or lawsuit relating to the imposition of the test
or the use of the test results.
16. DOCUMENTS PROVIDED
The Town will provide each person subject to this policy a copy of the policy.
The Town will also provide printed material which describes the effects of
alcohol and/or controlled substances on the individual’s health, work and
personal life, as well as information on the signs and symptoms of alcohol or
controlled substances and methods of treatment or intervention of drug and
alcohol abuse.
Enacted June 5, 1991
JY1 (1-3-91)
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS AND JUNKYARDS ORDINANCE
This Ordinance concerns the operation and regulations of automobile graveyards
and junkyards in accordance with Title 30-A Maine Revised Statutes Annotated
(M.R.S.A.), Sections 3751 – 3760).
SECTION
3751. Purpose 3757. Provisions regarding nuisances
unaffected.
3752. Definitions. 3758. Violation.
3753. Permit required. 3759. Rules
3754. Hearings. 3760. Relocation, removal, disposal,
compensation and condemnation.
3755. Limitations on Permits.
3756. Permit fees.
Section 3751. PURPOSE
Junkyards and so-called “Auto Graveyards” have been steadily expanding and
frequently encroach upon highways. These junkyards and graveyards have become a
nuisance and a menace to safe travel on public ways, often distracting the attention of
drivers of motor vehicles because it appears cars are parked on the highway or that an
accident has occurred. It is declared that such junkyards and automobile graveyards are a
nuisance and are properly subject to regulation and control.
Section 3752. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms have the following meanings.
1. AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. “Automobile Graveyards” means a yard,
field or other area used to store 3 or more unserviceable, discarded, worn-out
or junked motor vehicles as defined in Title 29, section 1, subsection 7
(“Motor Vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively
on tracks, and ALL=
Terrain Vehicles that are registered for highway use by the Secretary of State,
or parts of such vehicles. This does not include snowmobiles).
A. An unserviceable vehicle as used in this subsection shall mean any
motor vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, cannot be operated
legally on any public highway or which is not being used for the
purpose for which it was manufactured.
B. “Automobile Graveyard” would exclude temporary (not more thatn
90 days shall be used until such time the definition is changed by
either a Legislative Act or by the decision from a Court of Law:
storage by an establishment or place of business which is primarily
engaged in doing repairs of wrecked or dismantled vehicles which are
awaiting parts and/or adjustment, such as damaged insured vehicles
awaiting auto body work for the purpose of making repairs to render a
motor vehicle serviceable.
2. HIGHWAY. “Highway” means any public way.
3. INTERSTATE SYSTEM. “Interstate System” means those portions of the
Maine Turnpike and the State Highway System incorporated in the National
System of Interstate and Defense highways, as officially designated by the
Department of Transportation.
4. JUNKYARD. “Junkyard” means a yard, field or other area used to stores:
A. Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, household
appliances and furniture;
B. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber.
C. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material; and
D. Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills.
NOTE: If either the automobile or the salvage material is inside a building,
neither would be subject to the statute in most cases.
SECTION 3753. PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. No person may establish, operate or maintain an automobile graveyard
or junkyard without first obtaining a nontransferable permit from the
Selectmen of the Town of Norridgewock. Any automobile graveyard
or junkyard established, operated or maintained is required to be
licensed whether or not the person is actually in the junk business.
This then, is a privilege granted to an individual by the State acting
through the Selectmen and not an inherent right of the individual.
2. The Selectmen require the applicant to make a written request for the
granting of the permit, stating such things as location, size, and other
information pertaining to the operation (see from at appendix A). The
written application must be accompanied by a fee as provided in
section 3756 plus the cost of posting and publishing the hearing notice.
3. Permits issued under this section are valid until the first day of the
following year.
SECTION 3754. HEARINGS.
The Selectmen as provided for in section 3753, shall hold public hearing
before granting a permit to establish, operate or maintain an automobile graveyard
or junkyard. They shall post a notice of the hearing at least 7 and not more than
14 days before the hearing in at least 2 public places int eh municipality and
publish a notice in one newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
The Selectmen shall give written notice of the application to the Department of
Transportation by mailing a copy of the application at least 7 days and not more
than 14 days before the hearing.
SECTION 3755. LIMITATIONS ON PERMITS.
1. HIGHWAYS; Interstate and Primary Systems. No permit may be
granted for an automobile graveyards or junkyard within 1,000 feet of
the right-of-way of any highway incorporated in the Interstate and
Primary Systems or within 600 feet of the right-of-way of any other
highway (State or State-aid highway or County or Town roads
(secondary highways), except for:
A. Those automobile graveyards or junkyards which are kept entirely
screened to ordinary view from the highway at all times by natural
objects, planting or fences:
(1). Screening required by this paragraph must be well constructed
and properly maintained at a minimum height of 6 feet and acceptable
to the Selectmen. It must comply with the rules adopted by the
Department of Transportation. The permit shall specify that
compliance with these rules is required.
B. Those automobile graveyards or junkyards located within areas which
have been zoned for industrial use and located more than 600 feet but
less than 1,000 feet from the right-of way of any highway incorporated
in the Interstate and Primary Systems.
2. PUBLIC FACILITIES. No permit may be granted for an automobile
graveyard or junkyard which is:
A. Located within 300 feet of any public park, public playground, public
bathing beach, school, church or cemetery; and
B. Within ordinary view from that public facility.
3. LIMITATION OF NEW PERMITS. No permit may be granted for
any automobile graveyard or junkyard established after October 3,
1973, and located within 100 feet of any highway. All bona fide
automobile graveyards and/or junkyards in existence within 100 feet
of the highway Right-of-Way prior to October 3, 1973 may remain if
they were there legally prior to that date. Those automobile
graveyards and/or junkyards which have been illegally established,
operated and maintained, on or before October 3, 1973 would be
considered “new yard” and cannot be within 100 feet of any highway
Right-of-way.
4. RULES.
A. No permit may be granted for an augomobile graveyard or junkyard
that does not comply with the rules adopted under section 3759. The
Selectmen shall clearly state all conditions in the space provided on
the permit which makes for clear notice of the conditions for the
operator and the enforcement agency.
B. The Selectmen, as provided for in section 3753 may apply more
stringent restrictions, limitations and conditions in considering whether
to grant or to deny any permit for an automobile graveyard or junkyard
adjacent to any highway.
C. The municipality conditions include, but not limited to:
(1). Compliance with all State and Federal hazardous waste
regulations.
(2) Fire and traffic safety regulations.
(3) To reduce the noise level, all dismantling, with power tools,
shall take place within a building.
(4) All motor vehicles shall be stored in a dry condition. A
cement pad with catch basin shall be installed for the purpose
of removing all lubricants or fluids from the vehicle. The
battery shall be removed and stored to prevent any
contamination. The battery and all lubricants and fluids shall
be disposed of in accordance with Federal and State Laws.
(5) All motor vehicles or junk shall be located no closer than 20
feet from property lines.
(6) To ensure the quality of the ground and surface waters, the
applicant (permit holder), at his sole expense, shall employ
qualified geotechnical advisors satisfactory to the Selectmen to
ascertain the need, type and quantity of ground and surface
water monitoring wells at or near the perimeters of the
proposed automobile graveyard and /or junkyard and if such
wells are necessary, forthwith installed the same according to
the recommendations of the geotechnical consultant and
supply to the Selectmen and well owners complete reports at
least quarterly unless contamination is found and then
monthly.
(7) No motor vehicle or junk shall be located within 300 feet of
any water body.
(8) No motor vehicle or junk shall be located within 100 feet of
any freshwater wetland.
(9) All wells within 1,000 feet of an automobile graveyard or
junkyard shall, if requested by the well owner, will be tested
yearly at the expense of the automobile graveyard or junkyard
owner and a copy of the test results will be provided to the
well owner.
(10) Seasonal farm equipment will be exempted from this
ordinance so long as it is located on the farm owners property
and reported as personal property for tax purposes to the Town
Office or excises taxes have been paid by owner.
5. The Selectmen shall take into consideration any and all local
ordinances in deciding whether to grant or deny a permit for any
automobile graveyard or junkyard and in attaching conditions of
approval to the granting of a permit.
SECTION 3756. PERMIT FEES.
The Selectmen shall collect, in advance from the applicant for a permit, a
fee in accordance with the following schedule. (The measurement should start
from the edge of the highway (right of way) limit and not from the center of the
highway):
A. More than 100 feet from highway. Fifty dollars for each permit for an
automobile graveyard or junkyard located more than 100 feet from any
highway, plus the cost of posting and publishing the notice under
section 3754.
B. Within 100 feet from highway. Two hundred dollars for each permit
for an automobile graveyard or junkyard located within 100 feet from
any highway, plus the cost of posting and publishing the notice under
section 3754.
SECTION 3757. PROVISIONS REGARDING NUISANCES UNAFFECTED.
This subsection shall not be construed as in any way repealing, invalidating or
abrogating Title 17, section 2802, or limiting the right of prosecutions under that
section. Violation of this subsection in the establishment, maintenance of
operation of any automobile graveyard or junkyard constitutes prima facie
evidence that the yard is a nuisance as defined in Title 17, section 2802.
SECTION 3758. VIOLATION.
1. ENFORCEMENT. Selectmen or their designee may enforce this subsection.
2. PENALTIES. Whoever violates this subsection or the rules of the
Department of Transportation adopted under setion3759 shall be penalized in
accordance with Title 30-A, section 4506. Each day that the violation
continues constitutes and separate offense.
3. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. Violation of any
condition, restriction or limitation inserted in a permit by the Selectmen is
cause for revocation or suspension of the permit by the same authority which
issued the permit. No permit may be revoked or suspended without a hearing
and notice to the owner or the operator of the automobile graveyard or
junkyard. Notice of hearing shall be sent to the owner or operator by
registered mail at least 7 but not more than 14 days before the hearing. The
notice must state the time and the place of hearing and contain a statement
describing the alleged violation of any conditions, restrictions or limitations
inserted in the permit.
SECTION 3759. RULES.
In the interest of uniformity and to establish guidelines for the Selectmen
in the matter of adequate screening, the Department of Transportation has adopted
rules establishing minimum standards for screening of automobile graveyards and
junkyards.
SECTION 3760. RELOCATION, REMOVAL, DISPOSAL, COMPENSATION
AND CONDEMNATION.
1. ACAUISITION OF LAND. If the Department of Transportation determines
that the topography of the land adjacent to any portion of a highway
incorporated in the Interstate or Primary Systems will not permit adequate
screening, as required in sections 3751 to 3760, or that adequate screening
would not be economically feasible, it may acquire by gift, purchase or
condemnation any interests in property that are necessary to secure the
relocation, removal or disposal of the automobile graveyards or junkyards.
2. COMPENSATION. In case of such acquisition, just compensation shall be
paid to the owner for the relocation, removal or disposal of the following
automobile graveyards and junkyards:
A. Those which were operating and in existence on May 11, 1966 and
located in areas adjacent to any portion of a highway incorporated in
the Interstate or Primary Systems, which exceed Federal restrictions
and for which Federal funds are available to defray the cost.
B. Those in operation along any highway made a part of the Interstate or
Primary Systems on or after May 11, 1966.
C. Those in operation and established on or after May 11, 1966.
3. PROCEDURES. The purchase, condemnation, negotiation, assessment of
damage and appeal procedures shall be in accordance with this ordinance and
Title 23, section 153 to 159 (State highway Laws).
4. USE OF FEDERAL FUNDS. This ordinance does not prevent the town from
participating with the owner when Federal or State funds are available to defray
costs of screening junkyards whenever it is determined to be more feasible to
screen rather than to be involved in the cost of impact of acquisition and
relocation.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
Board of Appeals Ordinance
1
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
ADOPTED AT ANNUAL TOWN MEETING ON MARCH 1, 1993
Revisions adopted at Annual Town Meeting on March 4, 2013
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Business of the Board shall be conducted in accord with Maine Statutes,
Town Ordinances and Roberts’ Rules of Order.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to become familiar with all the
duly enacted ordinances of the Town which it may be expected to act
upon as well as with the applicable state statutes.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Board to become familiar with the
community goals, desires and policies as expressed in a “Comprehensive
Plan”, if any, and grant the minimum relief which will insure that the
goals and policies of the plan are preserved and substantial justice is done.
II. APPOINTMENTS:
A. The Board shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the municipal
officers of the Town of Norridgewock for terms of five (5) years. The
initial appointments shall be as follows: to continue existing
appointments with existing terms.
B. Thereafter, all appointed members must be legal residents of the Town.
C. If State Law permits, the Municipal Officers may appoint up to three (3)
associate members to the Board. The Chairperson of the Board shall
designate which shall serve in place of the absent member.
D. Neither a Municipal Officer nor his or her spouse or immediate family
(grandfather, father, son, daughter, e.g.) may be a member or an associate
member of the Board.
E. Any member of the Board may be removed from the Board for cause, by
the Municipal Officers before expiration of his/her term, but only after
notice and an opportunity for a hearing at which the member in question
has an opportunity to refute specific charges against him/her. The term
“for cause” shall include failure to attend three (3) consecutive Board
meetings or hearings without sufficient justification, or voting when the
member has a “conflict of interest”.
F. When there is a permanent vacancy of either a full or associate member,
the Secretary shall immediately notify the Town Clerk. The Municipal
Officers shall within sixty (60) days appoint a person to serve for the
unexpired term.
III. OFFICERS AND DUTIES:
A. The officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Acting
Chairperson and Secretary, who shall be elected annually by a majority of
the Board.
2
B. CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson shall perform all duties required by
law and these by-laws and preside at all meetings of the Board. The
Chairperson shall rule on issues of evidence, order, and procedure, and
shall take such other actions as are necessary for the efficient and orderly
conduct of hearings, unless directed other wise by a majority of the
Board. The Chairperson shall appoint any committees found necessary to
carry out the business of the Board.
C. ACTING CHAIRPERSON. The Acting Chairperson shall serve in the
absence of the Chairperson and shall have all the powers of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence, disability or
disqualification.
D. SECRETARY. The Secretary, subject to the direction of the Board and
the Chairperson, shall keep minutes of all Board proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact. The Secretary shall also arrange proper and legal
notice of hearings; attend to correspondence of the Board; and to other
duties as are normally carried out by a secretary. The Secretary shall keep
a record of all resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings and
determinations of the Board, and shall prepare a complete record of each
hearing, including: date(s), time(s), place(s) of the hearing(s); subject of
the hearing; identification of each participant; any agreements made
between parties and the Board regarding procedures; the testimony
presented; findings of fact and conclusions; the decision of the Board;
and the date of issuance of the decision. All records are public and may
be inspected at reasonable times.
IV. CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
Any question of whether a particular issue involves a “conflict of interest”
sufficient to disqualify a member from voting, shall be decided by a majority
vote of the members, except the member whose potential conflict is under
consideration. The term “conflict of interest” shall be construed to mean
direct or indirect pecuniary interest, which shall include pecuniary benefit to
any member of the person’s immediate family (grandfather, father, wife, son,
grandson, e.g.) or to his employer or the employer of any member of the
person’s immediate family. A pecuniary interest is defined as doing 10% or
more of one’s business with the appellant.
Even if no legal conflict of interest exists, a board member would be well
advised to avoid even the appearance of a conflict in order to avoid the
appearance of impropriety and maintain the public’s confidence in the Board’s
work. Aldom vs. Roseland, 42 NJ Super.495, 127 A.2d. 190 (1956); 30-A
MRSA Subsec. 2605.
V. POWERS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. The Board shall have the following powers to be exercised only upon
receipt of a written appeal by an aggrieved party:
3
1. The Board may interpret the provisions of any applicable town
ordinance which is called into question.
2. The Board may approve the issuance of a special exception
permit or conditional use permit in strict compliance with any
applicable Town ordinance.
3. The Board may grant a variance only where strict application of
any applicable town ordinance, or a provision thereof, to the
petitioner and his property would cause undue hardship. The
words property would cause undue hardship. The words “undue
hardship” as used in the subsection mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
d. The hardship is not a result of action taken by the applicant or
prior owner.
4. The Board shall have the power to hear and determine all appeals
by any person or legal entity directly or indirectly affected by
any decision, action or failure to act with respect to any license,
permit, variance or other required approval, or any application
therefore, including, the grant, conditional grant, denial,
suspension, or revocation of any such license, permit, variance or
other approval (hereinafter a “Decision”):
a. Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board pursuant to Shoreland Zoning Ordinance;
b. Rendered by the Planning Board or the Selectmen pursuant to
the Subdivision Ordinance;
c. Rendered by the Selectmen pursuant to the Ordinance for the
Regulation and Issuance Special Amusement Permits or 28
MRSA subsection 702 (also relating thereto);
g. Rendered by the Selectmen or the Road Commissioner
pursuant to the Road and Entrance Design Standards
Ordinance;
h. Rendered by the Planning Board or the Codes Enforcement
Officer pursuant to the Floodplain Management Ordinance
i. Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board pursuant to the Site Plan Review Ordinance;
j. Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board pursuant to the Obscenity Ordinance;
k. Rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Selectmen
pursuant to the Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards
Ordinance;
4
l. Rendered by the Board of Commissioners or the Selectmen
pursuant to the Sewer Use Ordinance; and
m. Rendered by the Code Enforcement Office or Planning Board
pursuant to the Mobile Home Park Ordinance.
VI. MEETINGS
A. The regular meeting of the Board shall be held annually or as necessary.
B. The annual organization meeting of the Board shall be the first regular
meeting of the year.
C. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the Chairperson. At least
forty-eight (48) hours written notice of the time, place and business of the
meeting shall be given.
D. The Chairperson shall call a special meeting within the ten (10) days of
receipt of a written request from any three members of the Board which
request shall specify the matters to be considered at such special meeting.
E. The order of business at regular meetings of the Board shall be as follows:
(A) roll call; (B) reading and approval of the minutes of the preceding
meeting; (C) action on held cases; (D) public hearing (when scheduled);
(E) other business; (F) adjournment.
F. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, except executive
sessions. No votes may be taken by the Board except in public meeting.
The Board shall not hold executive sessions except for consultation
between the Board and its legal counsel concerning litigation or other
legal matters where premature general public knowledge would clearly
place the Town or Board at a substantial disadvantage.
VII. VOTING
A. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members of the Board.
B. No hearing or meeting of the Board shall be held, nor any action taken, in
the absence of a quorum; however, those members present shall be
entitled to request the Chairperson to call a special meeting for a
subsequent date.
C. All matters shall be decided by a roll call vote. Decisions on any matter
before the Board shall require affirmative vote of a majority of the entire
membership of the Board unless otherwise specified herein.
D. A tie vote or favorable vote by a lesser number that the required majority
shall be considered a rejection of the application under consideration.
E. If a member has a conflict of interest, said member shall not be counted
by the Board in establishing the quorum for such matter.
F. If the Board has associate members, the Chairperson shall appoint an
associate member to act for a regular member who is: disqualified from
voting, unable to attend the hearing, or absent from a substantial portion
of the hearing due to late arrival. The associate member will act for the
regular member until the case is decided.
G. If the Board has no associate members, no regular member shall vote on
the determination of any matter requiring public hearing unless he or she
5
has attended the public hearing thereon; however, where such a member
has familiarized himself with such matter by reading the record, he or she
shall be qualified to vote.
VIII. APPEAL PROCEDURE
A. Any person aggrieved by an action which comes under the jurisdiction of
the Board pursuant to Section V must file such application for appeal, in
writing, on forms provided, within thirty (30) days of the granting or
denial of a permit. The applicant shall file this appeal at the office of the
Town Clerk, setting forth the ground for his/her appeal. Upon receiving
the application for appeal, the Town Clerk shall stamp the date on the
original, make a copy, retain the originals and notify the Chairperson of
the Board.
B. The fee to accompany applications for appeal shall be established by the
Board of Selectmen. Checks are made payable to the Town of
Norridgewock. In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for the cost
of publishing two legal notices in a newspaper of general circulation in
the municipality and the cost of certified mailings to owners of property
abutting that for which the appeal is taken.
IX. HEARINGS
A. The Board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals applications
within thirty-five (35) days of the filing of a completed appeal
application.
B. The Board shall cause notice of the date, time and place of such hearing,
the location of the building or lot, and the general nature of the question
involved, to be given to the person making the application and to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, at
least two times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven days
prior to the hearing. The Board shall also cause notice of the hearing to
be given to the Municipal officers, the Planning Board, the Code
Enforcement Officer, and the owners of property abutting that for which
the appeal is taken at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. The Board shall provide as a matter of policy for exclusion of irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
D. The order of business at a public hearing shall be as follows:
1. The Chairperson calls the hearing to order.
2. The Chairperson determines whether there is a quorum.
3. The Chairperson gives a statement of the case and reads all
correspondence and reports received.
4. The Board determines whether it has jurisdiction over the appeal.
5. The Board decides whether the applicant has the right to appear
before the Board.
6. The Board determines which individuals attending the hearing
are “interested parties”. “Interested parties” are those persons
who request to offer testimony and evidence and to participate in
6
oral cross-examination. They would include abutting property
owners, expert witnesses, employees of parties involved and
those who might be adversely affected by the Board’s decision.
Parties may be required by the Board to consolidate or join their
appearances in part or in whole if their interests or contentions
are substantially similar and such consolidation would expedite
the hearing. Municipal Officers, the Planning Board and the
Code Enforcement Officer shall automatically be made parties to
the proceeding. Other persons attending the hearing and federal,
state, municipal, and other governmental agencies shall be
permitted to make oral or written statements and to submit oral
and written questions through the Chair.
7. The appellant is given the opportunity to present his or her case
without interruption.
8. The Board and interested parties may ask questions of the
appellant through the Chair.
9. The interested parties are given the opportunity to present the8ir
case. The Board may call its own witnesses, such as the Code
Enforcement Officer.
10. The appellant may ask questions of the interested parties and
Board witnesses directly.
11. All parties are given the opportunity to refute or rebut statements
made throughout the hearing.
12. The Board shall receive comments and questions from all
observers and interested citizens who wish to express their
views.
13. The hearing is closed after all parties have been heard. If
additional time is needed, the hearing may be continued to a later
date. All participants should be notified of the date, time and
place of the continued hearing at the initial hearing.
14. Written testimony may be accepted by the Board seven (7) days
after the close of the hearing.
15. The person(s) filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
E. The Board may waive any of the above rules if good cause is shown.
X. DECISIONS
A. Decisions by the Board shall be made not later than thirty (30) days from
the date of the final hearing.
B. The final decision on any matter before the Board shall be made by
written order signed by the Chairperson. The transcript of testimony, if
any, and exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the
proceedings, shall constitute the record. All decisions shall become a part
of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions, as
well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon all the material issues of fact,
law or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial
thereof.
7
C. The Board, in reaching said decision, shall be guided by the standards
specified in the applicable state laws, local ordinances, policies specified
in the Comprehensive Plan (if any) and by Findings of Fact by the Board
in each case.
D. In reviewing an application on any matter, the standards in any applicable
local ordinance or statute shall take precedence over the standards of these
rules whenever a conflict occurs. In all other instances, the more
restrictive rule shall apply.
E. The Board may reverse the decision, or failure to act, of the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board only upon a finding that the
decision, or failure to act, was contrary to specific provisions of this
ordinance or unsupported by substantial evidence in the record.
F. Notice of any decision shall be sent by certified or registered mail or hand
delivered to the applicant, his representative or agent, the Planning
Board, the Code Enforcement Office, and the Municipal Officers within
seven (7) days of the decision.
G. Decisions of the Board shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and shall be made public record. The date of filing of each
decision shall be entered in the official records and minutes of the Board.
H. Upon notification of the granting of an appeal or variance or the
interpretation of an ordinance by the Board of Appeals, the town official
or reviewing authority body shall promptly act in a manner consistent
with the Board’s decision, unless an appeal is taken therefrom to Superior
Court.
I. A copy of all variances effecting Shoreland Zoning granted by the Board
of Appeals shall be submitted to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection within fourteen (14) days of the decision.
XI. CONSIDERATIONS:
A. The Board may reconsider any decision. The Board must decide to
reconsider any decision, notify all interested parties and make any change
in its original decision within thirty (30) days of its prior decision. A
request for reconsideration must be filed within 21 days of the original
decision. A meeting to decide whether to reconsider shall be called by the
Chairperson in accordance with Article VI of these By-laws. The Board
may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony.
B. Reconsideration should be for one of the following reasons:
1. The record contains significant factual errors due to fraud or
mistake, regarding facts upon which the decision was based ; or
2. The Board misinterpreted the ordinance, followed improper
procedures, or acted beyond its jurisdiction.
XII. APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT:
A. The decision of the Board of Appeals may be taken, within forty-five (45)
days after the decision is rendered, by any aggrieved party who
8
participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals, and has standing to do so, to Superior Court in accordance with
Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
XIII. SEVERABILITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not be held
to invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
XIV. NEW APPEALS:
After a decision has been made by the Board of Appeals, a new appeal of
similar import shall not be submitted to, or entertained by, the Board until one
(1) year has elapsed from the date of the decision.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE
THE TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK ENACTS THE FOLLOWING CABLE
TELEVISION ORDINANCE IN COMPLIANCE WITH 30 MRSA SECTION 2158.
SIGNED THE 25TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 1988 BY THE MUNICIPAL OFFICERS.
THE TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK, acting by and through its municipal officers,
HEREBY ORDAINS the following Cable Television Ordinance:
Section 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for Town regulation and use of the
community antenna television system including its construction, operation and
maintenance in, along, upon, across, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and
public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto
in the Town of Norridgewock, including poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes, conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Town of Norridgewock, of the community antenna television system and to provide
conditions accompanying the grant of franchise or the renewal of a previously existing
franchise or agreement; and providing for the Town regulation of CATV operations.
Section 2. DEFINITIONS
a. “CATV” shall mean any community antenna television system or facility that, in
whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or
otherwise modifies signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more
television or radio stations, or originates its own signal or signals produced
through any of its community access channels and distributes such signals by wire
or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services, but such
facility that serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under
common ownership, control or management.
b. “Cable Television Company” shall mean any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling, operating, managing or leasing a CATV system within the Town of
Norridgewock, sometimes hereinafter referred to as “the company.”
c. “Town” shall mean the Town of Norridgewock, organized and existing under the
laws of the State of Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
Section 3. FRANCHISE REQUIRED
No person, firm or corporation shall install, maintain or operate within the Town on any
of its public ways or other public areas any equipment or facilities for the operation of a
CATV system unless a franchise authorizing the use of said public ways or areas has first
been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and unless said franchise is in
full force and effect.
Section 4. FRANCHISE CONTRACT
a. The Municipal Officers of the Town may contract on such terms, conditions and
fees as they deem in the best interests of the Town and its residents with one or
more Cable Television companies for the operation of a CATV system within the
Town, including the granting of a franchise or franchises for the operation thereof
for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and the renewal of a previously existing
franchise or agreement for a period not to exceed ten (10) years.
b. Applicants for a franchise or renewal shall pay a non-refundable filing fee to the
Town of $250 to defray the cost of public notice and advertising expenses relating
to such application. The application shall be files with the Town Clerk and shall
contain such information as the Town may require including, but not limited to, a
general description of the applicant’s proposed operation, a schedule of proposed
charges, a statement detailing its previous two fiscal years and estimated ten year
financial projection of its proposed system, its proposed annual Town franchise
fee, if any, or the basis for same, and a statement detailing the prior operational
experience of the applicant in both CATV and microwave service including that
of its officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed
operation.
c. Any franchise contract may be revoked by the Municipal Officers for good and
sufficient cause, after due notice to the company and a public hearing thereon,
with the right to appeal to the Superior Court under Rule 80B of the Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure.
Section 5. PUBLIC COMMENT PERIODS
a. Except in the case of a renewal of a previously existing franchise or agreement,
the Town shall issue a request for proposals, after holding a public hearing with
at least seven (7) days advance notice for the purpose of determining any special
local needs or interest regarding cable television. In the case of a renewal of a
previously existing franchise or agreement, the determination of any special local
needs may occur at the hearing described in Section 5.d.
b. Any proposal or application for a franchise or for renewal of a previously
existing franchise or agreement shall be filed in triplicate with the Town Clerk’s
office, shall be deemed a public record, shall be available for a period not less
than thirty (30) days, or ten (10) business days in the case of a renewal, prior to
the Town’s taking any formal action thereon, and public notice of the filing shall
be given.
c. Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise contract, the municipal
officers shall review the applicant’s character, financial and technical
qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its proposal to operate a CATV
system within the Town, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon with at least
seven (7) days advertised notice prior to said public hearing.
d. Before authorizing the renewal of a previously existing franchise or agreement,
the Municipal Officers shall review the application for renewal and shall conduct
a public hearing thereon with at least seven (7) days advertised notice prior to
said public hearing. In deciding whether or not to grant renewal, the Municipal
Officers shall consider (a) whether the operator has substantially complied with
the material terms of the existing franchise and applicable law, (b) the quality of
the operator’s service, (c) the operator’s financial, legal and technical ability, and
(d) whether the operator’s new proposal is reasonable to meet the future cablerelated
community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting
such needs and interests.
Section 6. PERFORMANCE BOND AND INSURANCE COVERAGE
Upon the execution of any such franchise contract or renewal of a previously existing
franchise or agreement, the Cable Television Company shall file a surety company
performance bond in an amount not less than $25000 conditioned upon the faithful
performance of said contract and full compliance with any laws, ordinances,
regulations governing said franchise, including cost of dismantling the system, and
also evidence of such public liability, copyright infringement and other insurance
coverage as the Municipal Officers may require. When the Cable Television
Company has completed its proposed system as set forth in its proposal, and in
compliance with its franchise agreement, the Municipal Officers shall permit the
company to cancel said bond except for an amount to cover cost of dismantling the
system.
ADOPTED by Board of Selectmen
November 15, 2017
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
BOSTON POST CANE POLICY
I. BACKGROUND & HISTORY
The Boston Post Cane tradition was established in 1909 by the Boston Post newspaper. A
special cane was presented to the Board of Selectmen in 700 towns throughout New
England, to be presented as an honor to each town’s oldest citizen. The recipient held the
honor as long as s/he lived and upon his or her death, the cane would be awarded to the
next oldest citizen.
The Cane belonged to the town and not the citizen who received it, in order to provide for
the preservation and public awareness of the tradition and to protect the cane from loss or
damage. The Cane is the property of the Town of Norridgewock. The original cane is
retained at the Norridgewock Town Office in a display case donated by Richard and
Jeanette Hilton.
II. SEARCH POLICIES
A. The Town of Norridgewock shall announce an open nomination period for the oldest
known, eligible citizen. Such announcement shall be posted at the Norridgewock
Town Office and be publicized in media normally seen by the public, including local
newspaper(s), Town of Norridgewock website, and social media. Advertisements for
nominees shall not incur expense to the Town.
B. The search may also include an informal survey, general public knowledge, and
inquiries to nursing homes, civic groups, and/or churches.
III. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
A. The holder of the Cane must be the oldest known Town of Norridgewock citizen.
B. Candidates must have been a resident of the Town of Norridgewock for a minimum
of 25 of the previous 40 years. Candidates currently living outside of the Town of
Norridgewock with family or in an assisted living/nursing facility must meet the
25/40 year eligibility criteria.
C. The Board of Selectmen may judge that a person’s contributions to the community
have been so extraordinary that the 25/40 criteria be waived.
IV. SELECTION
A. Recognizing that the Town has no formal means of identifying the eldest citizen,
selection of the honoree shall be by the Board of Selectmen, based upon nominations
and available data as to eligible citizens.
B. The Town of Norridgewock recognizes that the eldest citizen may not wish to receive
the title and therefore asserts that in such cases, the Cane will not be awarded until
another resident becomes eligible under the foregoing criteria.
ADOPTED by Board of Selectmen
November 15, 2017
V. PRESENTATION/AWARD
A. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall present Norridgewock’s oldest citizen
with a certificate to recognize the honor and shall cause the name of the honoree to be
inscribed on a plaque displayed along with the Boston Post Cane at the Norridgewock
Town Office.
B. The location of the presentation will be determined according to the circumstances of
the honoree.
C. The recipient will retain this honor as long as s/he lives.
D. The Town Clerk’s Office must be notified if the recipient of the Boston Post Cane
dies or otherwise refuses or returns the honor. No sooner than 30 days after the
honoree’s death, the Town Clerk will initiate the search/nomination/selection process
in order to identify the next recipient.
VI. EFFECTIVE
This policy is effective as of November 15, 2017, as authorized by the Norridgewock
Board of Selectmen.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
1
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK CEMETERY ORDINANCE
I. DEFINITIONS
Board of Selectmen: The elected Officers of the Town of Norridgewock.
Burial or Interment: The deposit of the remains and cremains of a human being into the
ground.
Cemetery Committee: A committee of five (5) residents of Norridgewock appointed by the
Board of Selectmen for three (3) year staggered terms. The Cemetery Committee is directly
responsible to the Cemetery Superintendent.
Cemetery Sexton: The Town employee hired by the Town Manager and approved by the Board
of Selectmen to oversee the operations of all Town owned cemeteries.
Cemetery Superintendent: The appointed official responsible for overseeing all aspects of
cemetery management within the Town of Norridgewock. If the Cemetery Superintendent is the
Town Manager, the Cemetery Superintendent shall be directly responsible to the Board of
Selectmen. If the Cemetery Superintendent is other than the Town Manager, the Cemetery
Superintendent shall be responsible to the Town Manager.
Flower Display: Any flower that is artificial whether in a container, bouquet or spray.
Flower Plants: Any of a variety of natural flowers with roots.
Half Lot: 10’ X 10’ Plot designed to hold the casketed remains of not more than three (3)
adults.
Liner: Approved concrete slabs so constructed and assembled as to prevent sags or hollows in
the gravesite. Must meet all laws, rules and regulations.
Lot: 10’ X 20’ Plot designed to hold the casketed remains of not more than six (6) adults.
Monument: Usually a block of granite or other stone, to commemorate a person, event, etc.,
and often bearing written tribute to the person, especially after their death. Monument and
headstone are considered to be the same thing.
Non-resident: A non-resident is defined to be a person not residing within the Town of
Norridgewock at the time of purchase of a cemetery lot.
Owner: Shall refer to burial rights and title to land.
Resident: A resident is defined to be a person residing within the Town of Norridgewock at the
time of the purchase of a cemetery lot.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
2
Single Grave: Plot designed to contain the casketed remains of one (1) adult human being; or
the casketed remains of two (2) children at the discretion of the Sexton; or the cremated remains
of six (6) human beings, provided such remains are members of the same family or anyone
approved for interment within said lot by the owner of said lot.
Town: Shall mean the Town of Norridgewock or its duly elected officers or appointed officials
including the Cemetery Committee.
Town Manager: The official hired by the Board of Selectmen to manage the business of the
Town.
Vault: Concrete box large enough to contain the casketed remains of the deceased.
II. GENERAL
1. No vehicle shall be operated in areas other than roadways provided, unless authorized by the
Town. Vehicles may not travel at more than five (5) miles per hour nor in such a manner as
to leave ruts.
2. No vehicle known as a motorcycle, snowmobile, motorbike, all-terrain vehicle, dune buggy
or any registered or unregistered off-highway motor vehicle shall be operated within the
cemetery at any time, except as authorized by the Town.
3. Vehicles must not stop so as to block or hinder the passage of other vehicles, except that no
auto may pass a grave when a burial ceremony is in progress.
4. The use or possession of firearms, except as part of a military burial, is prohibited.
5. Consumption of beer, wine, spirits, or other intoxicating beverages is prohibited. Use of
illegal drugs is also prohibited.
6. All Town cemeteries are smoke free.
7. Only leashed pets are allowed in Town cemeteries. Pet owners are responsible for cleaning
up all pet waste.
8. No shrubs or trees may be planted within the cemetery except by the Town.
9. The deposit of any refuse, unsightly flower displays, wreaths, or other grave decorations
must be made in receptacles provided for such purpose; otherwise such deposits will be
considered an act of littering, punishable per State of Maine statutes.
10. The owner of any lot is responsible for the removal of any unsightly flowers, wreaths,
decorations, etc. from any gravesite. If the owner fails to execute such removal, the Town
may do so.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
3
11. No one shall damage, injure, remove or harm any flowers, monument, marker, etc., except at
the direction of the Town.
12. All monuments must be placed on the westernmost portion of a lot. Any variation in
placement must be approved by the Cemetery Superintendent.
13. Mausoleums, columbarium, niche or other edifice intended for above-ground burials are
prohibited.
14. Repairs to headstones will be at the expense of the owner of the lot unless otherwise
arranged.
15. The Town will not be responsible for malicious or vexatious damage to a memorial,
monument, decorations, etc., or the theft thereof. The Town shall report such damage or
theft to the proper law enforcement authority and to the owner of such property or their
survivors, if known.
16. Cemeteries close one half hour after sunset and open one half hour prior to sunrise. A
person is guilty of criminal trespass if he/she enters or remains in a cemetery when the
cemetery is closed. (M.R.S.A., Title 17, Part 2, Chapter 17, Section 402)
17. All conduct in cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the Town of Norridgewock shall be
in compliance with all Federal, State and local law, rules, and regulations
18. A copy of this Ordinance shall be issued with each deed.
III. LOT PURCHASE AND OWNERSHIP
1. Residents of the Town of Norridgewock are eligible to purchase lots in Norridgewock
cemeteries.
2. A non-resident may be eligible to purchase a lot in a Norridgewock cemetery by
satisfying one (1) of the following three (3) requirements:
? A person born of parents who resided in the Town of Norridgewock.
? A person with blood relatives who are either residing in the Town of
Norridgewock or who were buried in a Town of Norridgewock cemetery.
? A person who owns and pays property taxes on real property in the Town of
Norridgewock at the time of the purchase of the cemetery lot.
Evidence of compliance must be submitted to the Town of Norridgewock. Substantive
exceptions may be considered by the Cemetery Superintendent.
3. Cemetery lots will be sold in consecutive order.
4. Within 30 days of the date of receipt of payment for a Lot or ½ Lot, the Town will issue a
Quit Claim deed to the Owner. The Quit Claim deed will be recorded by the Town at the
Somerset County Registry of Deeds.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
4
5. Grave lots may not be sold or bartered but may be willed as part of an estate. Any
change of ownership must be reported to the Town.
IV. BURIAL OR INTERMENT
1. All burials or interments will be made only on human remains. Animal burials are not
permitted.
2. No above-ground interments/burials shall be permitted.
3. Interments shall be on the eastern side of monument.
4. All burials or interments shall be made in a steel or concrete liner or urn.
5. Only the Town’s Cemetery Sexton may open and close graves for burials,
interments and disinterments. (For someone seeking an alternative to the Town’s
Cemetery Sexton for opening and closing graves, application may be made to the Town
Manager. Should the Town Manager grant an exception to the use of the Town’s
Cemetery Sexton, proper notification and documentation will be required to be submitted
to the Town in a timely manner.)
6. Undertakers and/or Funeral Directors shall be responsible to the Town for the payment
of all burial charges, fees, and burial permits.
V. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Board of Selectmen
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Cemetery Superintendent for a one year term.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Cemetery Committee consisting of five (5) voting
members and all voting members must be residents of Norridgewock. All members to be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen for three (3) year staggered terms. Three members will
make a quorum. The Town Sexton is automatically a non-voting member of the Cemetery
Committee.
The Board of Selectmen, considering the recommendations of the Cemetery Committee, shall
establish and publish all cemetery fees.
Cemetery Committee
The purpose of the Cemetery Committee is to oversee capital maintenance and special projects
of Town owned cemeteries and to annually review and make necessary recommendations to the
Board of Selectmen concerning the Cemetery Ordinance, Cemetery Fees, Cemetery Budget and
Cemetery Operations.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
5
The Cemetery Committee shall annually make recommendations in writing to the Town
Manager for inclusion in the Town Meeting Warrant. The Cemetery Committee shall submit an
annual report for inclusion in the Annual Town Report.
Committee to meet at least two (2) times each year or as needed.
Cemetery Sexton
In coordination with the Town Clerk, the Sexton shall prepare and keep updated plot maps of
each cemetery and assist with the maintenance of accurate records at the Town Office; supervise
all interments, including opening and closing of each grave site; supervise removal of bodies
from graves; prepare an accounting of all cemetery activities for inclusion in the annual Town
report; and complete any other relevant tasks assigned by the Cemetery Superintendent.
The Sexton shall be contracted by the Town of Norridgewock to complete any relevant work,
described herein. The contract shall stipulate conditions of compensation, duties,
expectations/performance, liability and any other mutually agreed upon terms.
Cemetery Superintendent
The Cemetery Superintendent shall appoint a Cemetery Sexton, subject to Board of Selectmen
approval, and shall be responsible for overseeing all aspects of cemetery management within the
Town of Norridgewock.
VI. FEES
With consideration of the recommendations of the Cemetery Committee, all fees for acquiring
grave lots, for the opening and closing of graves, and for the perpetual care of lots shall be
established by the Board of Selectmen.
The charge for perpetual care is a deposit in trust to be invested by the Inhabitants of the Town
of Norridgewock in accordance with law, the interest thereon only, received by the Inhabitants
will be expended annually for mowing and otherwise caring for the cemetery lot. All lots will be
sold with perpetual care.
? Fees are available at the Town Office and on the Town website.
? All fees will be paid directly to the Town of Norridgewock
? Fees are subject to change.
VII. ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS
1. This Ordinance shall become effective on passage at a regular Town Meeting.
2. This Ordinance may be amended in accordance with the general Provisions of the Town
governing all ordinances.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
6
3. Passage of this Ordinance shall supersede any and all other rules and regulations governing
cemeteries in the Town of Norridgewock.
4. The invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other part.
VIII. PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance commits a civil violation and may be
subject to punitive damages. In addition to punitive damages, any person who violates any
provision of this ordinance may also be liable for the Town’s costs of restoration or repair of any
property damage caused by the violation as well as for all of the Town’s reasonable attorney fees
and costs.
A True Attest Copy:
_____________________________ _____________________________
Sharon Dodge, Town Clerk Date
This Ordinance was adopted at open Annual Town Meeting on March 7, 2005 by a show
of hands being 38 for and 19 against, at Norridgewock, Maine
___________________________
Charlotte A. Curtis, Town Clerk
Norridgewock, Maine
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
DOG NUISANCE ORDAINACE
SECTION 1: DEFINITION:
Terms, as used int his Ordinance, shall have the following meaning, unless the context
indicates otherwise.
1. DOG shall be intended to mean both male and female canines.
2. OWNER shall mean any person or person, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
SECTION 2: DOG NUISANCE
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any dog in the Town of
Norridgewock to permit or allow such dog to engage in habitual, prolonged or repeated
loud howling, barking, whining, yelping, crying or other conduct sustained for one hour
or intermittently for three hours and can be heard at or beyond the boundary of the
property on which the dog is located so as to disturb the peace of any person other than
the owner or owners harboring such dog or dogs.
SECTION 3: ENFORCEMENT
Any person who observes a dog actng in violation of the ordinance may file a written
complaint with the Animal Control Officer or Local Law Enforcement (sheriff or State
Police) specifying the objectionable conduct of the dog, the date, and time thereof, a
description of the dog, and name and residence, if known, of the owner or other person
harboring said dog. Upon receipt of such complaint, the Animal Control Officer or Local
Law Enforcement shall issue a warning to said owner or other person harboring said dog
or dogs. In the event that another complaint of such nature is received within one (1)
month form the date of the initial complaint, the Animal Control Officer shall contact the
Local Law Enforcement who shall cause the complaint to be filed before the District
Court in the county where such owner or keeper resides. It shall be the duty of all
Animal control Officers to enforce the provisions of the Ordinance.
SECTION 4: PENALTY
Upon complaint before any District Court in the county where such owner or keeper
resides, any person found violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty
of civil violation and punishable by a fine of $50.00 for each first offense, $75.00 for a
second offense, and $100.00 for third and subsequent offenses. All fines so assessed
shall be recovered for the use of the Town of Norridgewock through the District Court.
The Defendant shall be responsible for all costs, including attorney fees.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK, MAINE
ENACTED: MARCH 4, 2013
Date
EFFECTIVE: MARCH 4, 2013
Date
CERTIFIED BY: ____________________
Signature
CERTIFIED BY: ____________________
Print Name
____________________
Title
Affix Seal
60.3(d)
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT 2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 5
VII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE 10
VIII. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS 10
IX. APPEALS AND VARIANCES 11
X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 13
XI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 13
XII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES 14
XIII. DEFINITIONS 14
XIV. ABROGATION 18
60.3 (d) Rev. 11/09
Prepared 12/28/2012 by MFMP/SB
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Norridgewock, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing
serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood
insurance as authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Norridgewock, Maine has chosen to become a participating community
in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Norridgewock, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of
flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special
flood hazards.
The Town of Norridgewock has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to
reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407,
and Title 38 MRSA, Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of
the Town of Norridgewock having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard
areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review
procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of
Norridgewock, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE, for the Town of Norridgewock, Somerset
County, Maine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled
“Flood Insurance Study – Town of Norridgewock, Maine” dated May 6, 1996 with
accompanying “Flood Insurance Rate Map - Town of Norridgewock, Maine" dated May 6, 1996,
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the
placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in
Article I, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Planning Board. This
permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and
ordinances of the Town of Norridgewock, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not
limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled,
and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Norridgewock, Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources
(such as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and VIII.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map prepared by a
Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a
significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a
line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement;
and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be
floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for
which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are
accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer
or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 03/09, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of
Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result
of the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development
standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee as set by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with MRSA
Title 30-A Subsection 4355 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the same
shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill
shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work
order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the
applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard
on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may
appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Planning Board shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements
of Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Norridgewock, Maine," as described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not
provided, the Planning Board shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIII.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined
in Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on
the maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies
from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and
submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of
the following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall
authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above
the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with
an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional
engineer or architect based on the Part I permit construction , “as built”, for verifying compliance
with the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part
II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures
that are new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being
elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application
for this permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is
not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the
Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this Ordinance, and
copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and
certifications of design standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VII of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated
portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction
occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure
located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.;
Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application
for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall include a record
of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.;
Article V.B; or Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located
within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is
at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls,
with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured
home, plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per
side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall
be capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.1.b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base
flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or
Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A and AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIII, located within
Zones AE and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VI.F. & G.
above, if all other requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met.
Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of
the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A, riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic
Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA
37/ January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones A and AE, riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the
regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the
adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the
normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of
any structure in Zones AE and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including
the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts,
columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation
requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher
than one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other
non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE and A
shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements
of this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously
on all structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment
wall located within:
1. Zones AE and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood
Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves,
piers, and docks are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and seaward of mean high
tide, if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop
or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is
constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is
issued by the Planning Board subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant
shall submit to the Planning Board, an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land
Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI,
paragraphs F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Planning Board that the development is
complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Planning Board shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance,
shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that
require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all
projects on 5 or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into
two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain,
floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood
Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document
transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including
but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate that the
municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that fact shall also be
included in the deed or any other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local
reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Norridgewock may, upon written application of an
aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent
with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public
expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or
local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which
in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not
to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose
such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of
Historic Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through E. shall be
notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of
Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of
insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in
the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of
its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Planning Board a report of all variance actions,
including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Planning
Board to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be
attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board
of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this
Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a
violation exists, may submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient
to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or
local law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a
citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the
prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this
Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same
meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and
the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and
not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited
in Article I of this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a
structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - A person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
exceptions in subsection 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all
applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws and ordinances.
Development - means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE or A, to have the top of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood
of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L..
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 03/09, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a
result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance,
grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The
term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal,
state, and local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Inspections-All inspections shall be done by the Codes Enforcement Officer and reported to the
Planning
Board.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally
not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data
is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements described in Article VI.L. of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured
home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than
50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve
structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves,
and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard
was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level
(MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after
the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)- means the national datum whose standard was
established in 1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) for all new Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum
used by other North American countries such as Canada and Mexico and was established to
replace NGVD because of constant movement of the earths crust, glacial rebound, and
subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including
slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be
the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half
the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of
the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or
modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the
community’s Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management
regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's
floodplain management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
Town Ordinances, Norridgewock, Maine
March 1, 1971
GENERAL ORDINANCES
Sec. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle on any street or highway or alley of the
town in such a manner that material, rubbish, refuse, junk or litter of any kind drips, sifts, leaks, drops or
otherwise escapes therefrom upon any street, highway or alley.
Sec. 2. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate any vehicle upon the runways of the
Norridgewock Airport. This ordinance shall not apply to ambulances, fire equipment, or any vehicle
required in case of emergency.
Sec. 3. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, cause to be thrown, deposit or leave on
the runways of the airport or lands adjacent thereto, any bottles, broken glass, refuse, tin cans or other
scrap of any kind.
Sec. 4. No demonstrations consisting of 3 or more persons or parades shall be allowed in the town
without first obtaining a permit from the Town Officials.
Sec. 5. No person shall ride a bicycle, vehicle, sno-mobile on any sidewalk in the business district. On
other sidewalks pedestrians have the right of way.
Sec. 6. No person shall drive any carriage, horse, or drive or lead any cow upon or over any sidewalk, or
foot path by the side of any street except for the purpose of crossing such sidewalks or foot paths as
nearly as many be at right angles and in order to go into or out of some adjoining yard or enclosure.
Sec. 7. It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of sixteen years of age to loiter about the street
of the town after 9:15 P.M., unless accompanied by parent or other guardian having legal authority or
control of such minor. The fire siren shall be blown fifteen minutes before the appointed time as a
warning which shall be called the curfew signal, after which all children under sixteen years of age shall
be required to be off the street, except those in company of a parent or adult guardian.
Sec. 8. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates:
(a) “Dog” – Shall be intended to mean both male and female dogs.
(b) “Owner” – Shall be intended to mean and include when used in this ordinance the parents or
guardian of a minor who owns, keeps or has in his possession a dog.
“Owner” – Shall be intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation,
owning, keeping harboring or in possession of, or having control of, a dog.
(c) “At Large” – Shall be intended to mean off the premises of the dog’s owner, and not under
control and restraint of the dog’s owner, or a member of his immediate family, either by leash,
cord, chain, “at Heel” or under command.
(d) “”Running At Large” – No owner shall cause or permit any dog owned or kept by him, or in his
possession or under his control, to run a large within the town. A dog, while in or on any public
way or place, except as hereinafter provided, shall be under restraint, within the meaning of this
ordinance, if it is controlled by a leash, cord , chain or “at heel” or under the control of a person
Town Ordinances, Norridgewock, Maine
and obedient to that person’s command, or on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the
streets or within the property limits of its owner or keeper. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
held to require the leashing or restraint of any dog while on its owner’s or keeper’s premises, or
in or on any premises used or occupied as a dwelling house. A leash, cord, or chain shall not be
more than eight feet (8’) long.
Sec. 9. Penalty: Whoever violates the above general ordinances shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine or nor more than twenty dollars.
PARKING ORDINANCE
Sec. 1. Local Stop Signs and No parking Signs. The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized and
directed to place stop signs at such intersections as they shall deem proper for the protection and
control of traffic; and every vehicle before passing such stop sign and entering such intersection shall
come to a full stop, unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer stations at such intersection.
Sec. 2. Parking. All vehicles shall stop, stand or park on the right hand of the street, and as closely as
practicable to the edge of the road or side of the road, and parallel with the side of the street, except
that in the business section, vehicles shall park at an angle with the curb, and between the parking lines
as laid out by the municipal officers.
Sec. 3. No person except in case of emergency, or when ordered by an authorized officer so to do, shall
stop, stand or park any vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct or impede the passage of other vehicles.
Sec. 4. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any of the following places:
(a) On any sidewalk.
(b) In front of any public or private driveway.
(c) Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) Upon any cross walk so designated by appropriate signs or markings.
(e) Within twenty feet of any street intersection.
(f) On either side of the street within seventy-five feet of the entrance to any fire station when
properly marked with “No Parking” signs.
(g) On the roadway side of any other vehicle which is stopped or parked at the curb or at the
edge of the street and commonly called double parking.
(h) It shall be unlawful to park or stand a motor vehicle within the confines of any street in the
built up portion of the Town of Norridgewock as defined by law between the hours of
twelve o’clock midnight and six o’clock the following morning during the months of
November, December, January, February and March except in the case of emergency.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to remain backed up to the curb except when actually
loading or unloading and only for a reasonable time.
Sec. 5. Penalty: Whoever violates the above parking ordinances shall be upon conviction, punished by
the fine of not more than twenty-five dollars.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
LOCAL FOOD AND COMMUNITY
SELF-GOVERNANCE ORDINANCE
Adopted June 11, 2019
LOCAL FOOD AND COMMUNITY SELF-GOVERNANCE ORDINANCE
1. TITLE
This ordinance, adopted by the town of Norridgewock (hereinafter “the Town”), shall be known
and may be cited as the “Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance.”
Preamble
We, the People of the Town have the right to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume local
foods thus promoting self-reliance, the preservation of family farms, and local food traditions.
We recognize that family farms; sustainable agricultural practices; and food processing by
individuals, families, and non-corporate entities offer stability to our rural way of life by
enhancing the economic, environmental, and social wealth of our community. We recognize the
authority to protect that right as belonging to the Town.
We have faith in our citizens’ ability to educate themselves and make informed decisions. We
hold that certain federal and state regulations unnecessarily impede local food production and
constitute a usurpation of our citizens’ right to foods of their choice. We support food that
fundamentally respects human dignity and health; nourishes individuals and the community; and
sustains producers, processors, and the environment. We are therefore duty bound under the
Constitution of the State of Maine to protect and promote reasonably unimpeded access to local
foods.
All individuals have a natural, inherent, and unalienable right to acquire, produce, process,
prepare, preserve, and consume the food of their own choosing for their own nourishment and
sustenance. Furthermore, all individuals have a right to barter, trade, and purchase food and to
save and exchange seed from the sources of their own choosing for their own physical health and
well-being. Every individual is fully responsible for the exercise of these rights, which may not
be infringed.
2. PURPOSE
It is the policy of this State to encourage food self-sufficiency for its citizens. The purpose of the
Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance is to:
A. Through local control, preserve the ability of individuals and communities to save and
exchange seed, to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume locally produced foods;
B. Ensure the preservation of family farms and traditional food ways through small-scale
farming, food production.
C. Improve the health and well-being of citizens of this State by reducing hunger and
increasing food security through unimpeded access to wholesome, nutritious foods by
encouraging ecological farming;
D. Promote self-reliance and personal responsibility by ensuring the ability of individuals,
families and other entities to prepare, process, advertise, and sell foods directly to
customers intended solely for consumption by the customers or their families;
-1-
E. Enhance rural economic development and the environmental and social wealth of rural
communities; and
F. Protect access to local food through direct producer-to-consumer transactions.
3. DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the
meanings stated below:
A. DIRECT PRODUCER-TO-CONSUMER TRANSACTION: An exchange of local food
between a producer or processor and a patron by barter, trade, or purchase on the
property or premises owned, leased or rented by the producer or processor of the local
food.
B. LOCAL FOOD: Any food or food product that is grown, produced, processed, or
prepared by individuals who exchange that food directly with patrons.
C. PATRON: An informed individual who acquires local food directly from a processor or
producer.
D. PROCESSOR: An individual who processes or prepares products of the soil or animals
for food or drink.
E. PRODUCER: A farmer or gardener who grows or raises any plant or animal for food or
drink.
4. AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted and enacted pursuant to the inherent, inalienable, and fundamental
right of the citizens of the Town to self-government, and under the authority recognized as
belonging to the people of the Town by all relevant state and federal laws including, but not
limited to the following:
§1-A of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes, which states inter alia: “The survival of
the family farm is of special concern to the people of the State, and the ability of the
family farm to prosper, while producing an abundance of high quality food and fiber,
deserves a place of high priority in the determination of public policy. For this purpose
there is established the Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Conservation”
§1-B of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes, which states inter alia: The [...]
preservation of rural life and values in the State [is] to be the joint responsibility of all
public agencies, local, state and federal, whose policies and programs substantially
impact the economy and general welfare of people who reside in rural Maine, such as the
development and implementation of programs that assist in the maintenance of family
farms [...] and improve health and nutrition.
-2-
§284 of Title 7, Chapter 8-F, Maine Food Sovereignty Act, which states inter alia: “a
municipality may adopt ordinances regarding direct producer-to-consumer transactions
and the State shall recognize such ordinances by not enforcing those state food laws with
respect to those direct producer-to-consumer transactions that are governed by the
ordinance.”
§3001 of Title 30-A of the Maine Revised Statutes, which implements Home Rule and
grants municipalities all powers necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the Town where those powers have been conferred on the towns by the
Legislature or not otherwise limited.
5. STATEMENTS OF LAW
A. Right to Self-Governance. Citizens of the Town have the right to a form of governance
which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that all free governments are
founded on the people’s authority and consent.
B. Right to Acquire and Produce Food. Citizens of the Town possess the right to save and
exchange seed and to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume local foods of their
choosing.
C. Exemption from Licensure and Inspection. The producers and processors of local food
intended for direct producer-to-consumer transactions in the Town governed by this
ordinance shall be exempt from state licensure and inspection. In accordance with
Section 284 of the Maine Food Sovereignty Act, the State of Maine shall not enforce
those state food laws, rules, or regulations with respect to those transactions as defined in
Section 4. The transactions enumerated in Section 4 are governed by this ordinance and
provide the context otherwise indicated as stated in Section 282 of the Maine Food
Sovereignty Act.
D. Meat and Poultry. This ordinance is not applicable to any meat or poultry products that
are required to be produced or processed in compliance with the Maine Meat and Poultry
Inspection Program.
E. Liability Protection. Producers and processors of local food may enter into private
agreements with patrons to waive any liability for the consumption of local food.
6. CIVIL ENFORCEMENT
Any individual citizen of the Town shall have standing to enforce any rights secured by this
ordinance which have been threatened or contested by any person, whether natural or juridical,
and may seek relief both in the form of injunctive and compensatory relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
7. EFFECT
This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its enactment.
-3-
8. SEVERABILITY
To the extent any provision of this ordinance is deemed invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such provision will be removed and the balance of the ordinance shall remain valid.
9. REPEAL
All inconsistent provisions of prior ordinances adopted by the Town are hereby repealed, but
only to the extent necessary to remedy the inconsistency.
10. HUMAN RIGHTS AND CONSTITUTIONALITY
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as authorizing any activities or actions that violate
human rights protected by the U.S. Constitution or the Constitution of the State of Maine.
True Attest Copy
Richard A. LaBelle
Town Clerk
-4-
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
ENACTED MARCH 2, 1992
SECTION 1. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Manufactured Housing Park Ordinance
of the Town of Norridgewock, Maine and will be referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
A. These regulations are adopted pursuant to and are consistent with the enabling
provisions of Article V111-A of the Maine Constitution, the provisions of Title
30-A, MRSA, Section 3001, and the State’s growth management law, Title 30-A,
MRSA, Sections 4311 et. seq.
B. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all proposed Manufactured
Housing Parks, as defined; and, any and all alterations, expansions or
reconstructions of existing Manufactured Housing Parks, as defined.
SECTION 3. PURPOSE
This purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents of the community; regulate Manufactured Housing Parks; establish minimum
standards for the design, construction, and maintenance of Manufactured Housing Parks;
to make them safe, decent and sanitary; and to determine the minimum responsibilities
for owners and operators of Manufactured Housing Parks.
SECTION 4. APPLICABILITY
The Provisions of this Ordinance shall govern all Manufactured Housing Parks, whether
an expansion, alteration or reconstruction of an existing park, or the development of a
new park within the boundaries of the Town of Norridgewock.
SECTION 5. REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
A. Except as stipulated herein, all Manufactured Housing Parks, whether an
expansion, alteration or reconstruction of an existing park or the development f a
new park, shall meet the requirements for a residential subdivision, and shall
conform to all applicable State laws and local ordinances or regulations. Where
the provisions of this ordinance conflict with specific provisions of the
Norridgewock Subdivision Regulation, the provisions of this ordinance shall
prevail.
B. All Manufactures Housing Parks shall obtain a valid license to operate the park
from the Maine Department of Professional and Financial Regulation,
Manufactured Board.
SECTION 6. PERMIT-METHOD OF APPLICATION AND REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the requirements of other ordinances and regulations of the Town of
Norridgewock, the applicant shall apply to the Norridgewock Planning Board for a
permit to expand, alter or reconstruct an existing Manufactures Housing Park or develop
a new park. Seven copies of the application and accompanying information shall be
submitted to the Planning Board at least one week preceding the regularly scheduled
meeting. All applications shall be in writing, signed by the applicant who shall submit
with the application, proof of right, title or interest in the propert together with a complete
set of plans drawn to an appropriate scale, showing the location of the proposed park, and
which shall, at a minimum, include:
A. Boundary Survey certified by a registered Maine Land Surveyor;
B. Topographical survey with contour intervals a minimum of five, unless specified
otherwise by the Board;
C. Maximum number, location, and size of all manufactured home spaces;
D. Location of existing and any proposed structures;
E. Location and width of all roadways, plan, profiles and cross sections;
F. Location and size of all utilities;
G. Location and intensity of lighting;
H. Landscape plan;
I. Erosion and sedimentation control plan;
J. Stormwater management plan;
K. Phasing plan;
L. Construction schedule; and
M. Additional information as may be required by the Planning Board.
SECTION 7. FEES
The Municipal Officers shall annually set the amount of all fees required by this
Ordinance. The fee structure shall take into account the cost of hiring independent
consultants to assist the Planning Board in technical review of the application.
SECTION 8. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
The following design requirements are applicable to all expansions, reconstructions and
development of new Manufactured Housing Parks.
A. WATER: Public water is required for all Manufactured Housing Parks unless it
can be demonstrated that public water is unobtainable and the on-site water supply can
supply sufficient quantities of potable water to the development. The design,
construction and operation of the water distribution system shall conform to the standards
of “Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water”.
The design of the Water Distribution System shall be prepared by a Professional
Engineer registered in the State of Maine.
B. SEWER: Adequate on-site sewage disposal is required.
1. The applicant shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface sewage
disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. In addition,
on lots where the limiting factor is identified as being within 24 inches of the surface, a
second site with suitable soils shall be reserved for future replacement of the primary
disposal area. The reserve area shall be shown on the plan and restricted so as not to be
built upon.
2. In no instance shall a disposal area be permitted on soils or on a lot which
requires a new system variance from the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
3. The location of sewage disposal facilities in areas of significant sand and
gravel aquifers and primary and secondary aquifer recharge areas as identified on Map
#31, “Hydrogeological Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers”, published by the
Maine Geological Survey, as amended, shall require the submission of written
certification from a licensed Site Evaluator or Registered Maine Geologist, that the
cumulative impact of on-site disposal system(s) will not adversely affect ground water
quality.
C. BUFFER STRIPS:
1. A 50 foot wide buffer strip shall be provided along all property boundaries
that abut residential land which has a gross density of less than half of that
proposed in the park. No structures, streets, parking or utilities may be
placed in the buffer strip except as required to cross the buffer strip to
provide services to the park.
2. Within 25 feet of any property boundary, and within the buffer strip, a
visual screen shall be provided. The screen shall effectively screen at least
eighty percent (80%) of the park as viewed from adjacent property and
shall be adequately maintained throughout the life of the project so as to
maintain the visual screen. Visual screening may consist of:
a. Fences-Minimum height of 6 feet
b. Earth berms
c. Landscaping
d. Natural existing vegetation.
3. Land area required for buffer strips shall be in addition to that required to
meet individual lot size, open space, road right-of-way or shoreland
zoning requirements.
D. LOT SIZE, WIDTH AND DENSITY:
1. Lots served by public sewer and water:
a. Minimum lot area-6500 square feet
b. Minimum lot width-75 feet.
2. Lots served by individual subsurface sewage disposal system and
individual water supply:
a. Minimum Lot Area-20000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width-150 feet
3. Lots served by individual subsurface sewage disposal system and public
water supply:
a. Minimum lot area-20000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width-100 feet
4. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater sewage disposal system
and public water supply:
a. Minimum lot area-12000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width-100 feet
c. Minimum density-One unit per 20000 square feet of total park
area
5. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater sewage disposal system
and individual water supply:
a. Minimum lot area-12000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width-150 feet
c. Minimum density-One unit per 20000 square feet of total park
area
6. Lots within a shoreland zoning district shall meet al lot area, lot width,
setback and frontage requirements for that district.
7. The minimum overall density of the manufactured housing park shall be
the combined area of:
a. The area required for manufactured home lots;
b. The area required for road rights-of-way;
c. The area required for buffer strips;
d. For parks served by public sewer, an open space area for storage
and recreation equal to 10% of the combined area of the
individual lots; and
e. The area within the required shoreland zone setback.
E. LOT SETBACKS
1. The following lot setbacks shall apply to all manufactured housing
structures excluding accessory structures located on an individual mobile
home site:
a. Frontyard setback (Private road)-20 feet
b. Sideyard setback-20 feet
c. Rearyard setback-10 feet
Structures located within a Shoreland Zoning District shall meet the
setback requirements for that district.
2. So as to avoid monotony and provide for creative design, the Planning
Board may allow the frontyard setback, on a private road within the park,
to be varied provided that no home may be closer than ten feet (10’) from
the right-of-way and the average distance is at least twenty feet (20”) for
all units.
3. For the purpose of providing more useable sideyard space on one side of a
unit, the Planning Board may allow sideyard setbacks to be reduced to five
feet (5’) provided the distance between units be a minimum of twenty feet
(20’).
4. Accessory Structures located on an individual mobile home site shall not
be located closer than 20 feet from the street right-of-way; nor less than 5
feet from the side lot line.
F. UNIT SEPARATION:
A minimum of twenty feet (20’) shall be maintained between all units in all
directions.
G. LOT COVERAGE
All structures on the lot, including accessory buildings and structures shall not
cover more than 50% of the lot area.
H. FOUNDATION SYSTEM:
All units shall be provided with a means to adequately support the structure.
This construction constitutes a foundation constructed in accordance wither with
the foundation system included in the manufacturer’s installation instructions, or
requirements of this section. The manufacturer or owner may design for and
specify installation of any foundation system which meets the requirements of
this section.
1. Manufactured homes with manufacturer’s installation instructions shall
include a typical foundation system designed by a registered professional
engineer or architect to support anticipated loads specified in the
manufacturer’s installation instructions for this area and meet the
requirements of Chapter 3, Manufactured Home Foundation Systems, of
NFPA-501A.
2. Manufactured homes without manufacturer’s installation instructions shall
have a foundation system designed and calculated by a registered
professional engineer or architect sufficient to support the loads imposed
by the support the loads impose by the support system of the manufactured
home placed thereon which meets the requirement of Chapter 3,
Manufactured Home Foundation Systems, of NFPA-501-A.
3. Manufactured homes shall be provided with the appropriate anchoring
system to be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 3, Section 3-2.7, NFPA-501-A.
I. SKIRTING: Skirting shall be provided, where applicable, and installed on each
manufactured housing unit in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation
instructions. It shall be secured, as necessary, to assure stability, to minimize
vibrations, to minimize susceptibility to wind damage, and to minimize possible
frost heave. Access opening(s) not less than 18 inches in any dimension and not
less than 3 square feet in area shall be provided and shall be located so that any
water supply and sewer drain connections located under the manufactured
housing unit are accessible for inspection. Such access panel(s) or door(s) shall
not be fastened in a manner requiring the use of a special tool to remove or open
same. On-site fabrication of skirting shall meet the objectives cited herein.
J OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
1. Parks served by a public sewer shall have a minimum of 10% of the total park
area reserved for open space and/or recreation. Such open space shall be
accessible and useable by all residents of the park.
2 Parks served by a central subsurface waste disposal system shall reserve the
land not utilized for lots (Section 8,D,4&5), less the area reserved for road
right-of-way, as open space which shall be accessible and useable by all
residents of the park.
3. Open Space Suitability-At least 50% of the required open space shall consist
of land that is suitable for recreation.
4 Developed Open Space-All developed open space shall be designed and
landscaped for the use of the park residents and shall be maintained for their
long term use. Plans for these areas shall be submitted by the applicant.
5 Undeveloped Open Space-Undeveloped open space shall remain in its natural
state where possible. Improvements for passive recreation, such as trails for
walking and jogging or picnic areas, are permitted and encouraged.
6 Open Space Ownership-The applicant shall submit a copy of the park rules
and a plan which specifies how the open space will be used and maintained,
any conditions of use, maintenance plan, and areas dedicated to open space
within the park.
K TRAFFIC
1. Manufactured Housing Parks which generate more than 300 average vehicle
trip ends per day (as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers)
shall be required to submit a traffic impact analysis prepared by a
Professional Engineer experienced in traffic impact analysis.
2. In the case where the Planning Board determines it is in the interest of public
safety the applicant shall be required to submit a traffic impact analysis
prepared by a Professional Engineer.
3. Manufactured Housing Parks which generate more than 200 average vehicle
trip ends per day (as defined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers)
shall provide a minimum of two means of access and egress from a public
street(s).
4. No manufactured home lot shall have vehicular access directly onto a state
highway.
L ROADS
1. Roads within the manufactured housing park shall be designed by a
Professional Engineer, registered in the State of Maine, and shall be built and
maintained according to accepted engineering standards and as promulgated by
the Maine Manufactured Housing Board. Road design submission shall
include: a plan, profiles, and cross-sections at a scale of 1”=40” horizontal and
1”=4’ vertical scales.
2. Roads within the manufactured housing park which are to be offered for
acceptance to the town shall meet the minimum road construction standards of
the subdivision regulations and/or Town Road Ordinance.
3. No dead end street within the park shall be more than 800 feet in length.
4. On-street parking shall be prohibited unless an eight foot parking lane is
provided on the side of the road.
5. Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum radius of 50 feet at he outer edge of the
travelway.
6. Two-way park roads have a minimum right-of-way of 23 feet and a minimum
travel surface of 14 feet. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
7. One-way streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 18 feet and a minimum
travel surface of 14 feet. On-street parking shall be prohibited.
8. Street grades shall be no greater than 8 percent with short runs of no more than
12 percent provided traffic safety is assured.
9. Roads which intersect with public roads shall meet the following standards:
a. Angle of intersection-The desired angle of intersection shall be 90
degrees. The minimum angle of intersection shall be 75 degrees.
b. Grade-The maximum grade within 75 feet of the intersection shall be 2
percent.
c. Sight Distance-The minimum sight distance shall be 10 times the posted
speed limit on the existing public road. Sight distances shall be
measured from the drivers’ seat of a vehicle that is 10 feet behind the
curb or edge of shoulder line wit the height of the eye 3 ½ feet above
the pavement and the height of the object 4 ¼ feet.
d. Distance from Other Intersections- The centerline of any street within a
manufactured housing park intersecting with an existing public street
shall be at least 125 feet from the centerline of any other street
intersection that public street.
M. DRIVEWAYS: Driveways shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and shall have a
5 foot radius or shall flare to a 14 foot width at street entrance.
N. PARKING: Each manufactured home lot shall be provided with at least two (2)
off-street parking spaces. Each parking space shall contain a minimum area of 200
square feet with minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 20 feet. The Planning Board
may waive this requirement if an equivalent number of spaces are provided by an
on-street parking lane.
In addition, one off-street guest or services parking shall b e provided within the
boundaries of the park at a ratio of one space for each four manufactured housing
lots. The Planning Board may waive this requirement if an equivalent number of
spaces are provided by on-street parking lane.
O. UTILITIES: All utilities shall be designed and installed in accordance with
applicable state rules and regulations. A Utility Plan shall be submitted indicating
location of existing utilities and location, size and type of all new utilities.
P. FIRE PROTECTION: Water supplies for fire department operations shall be
provided for each manufactured housing park. Hydrants shall be located along the
community streets or public ways readily accessible for fire department use and
located within 500 feet of all homes and structures. Hydrants shall have a minimum
yield of 1000 gpm, with 25 psi residual pressure. Where a community water supply
is not available, the manufactured housing park shall provide a reservoir or water
supply with a source of not less than 3000 gallons accessible for fire department
drafting operations. All fire protection measures shall be reviewed and approved by
the Norridgewock Fire Chief and the Maine Forest Service (when applicable). Their
written comments shall be furnished to the Norridgewock Planning Board.
Q. SIGNS: Signs and advertising devices shall be prohibited in a manufactured housing
parks except :
1. One (1) identifying sign at each entrance of the manufactured housing park, to a
public street, no larger than 24 square feet which may be indirectly lit, but not
flashing.
2. Directional and informational signs for the convenience of the tenants and the
public, relative to parking, office, safety, home address, etc.
3. Manufactured home “for sale” signs, provided such signs that face a public road
will be no more than 8 square feet and unlighted.
R. STORM WATER DRAINAGE: All new manufactured housing parks or expansions
to existing parks, whether or not served by an existing storm water collection system,
shall be designed to control and manage storm water in accordance with the
following guidelines:
1. A storm water management system shall be designed to infiltrate, detain or retain
water falling on the site during a design storm such that the post-development
peak discharge and runoff will not exceed the peak discharge and runoff from the
site prior to any development activities;
2. Storm water transportation systems shall be designed to pass the peak discharge
of a twenty-four hour (24-hour), twenty-five year (25-year) storm frequency.
Open channel systems will be designed to contain the design storm. In addition,
areas expected to be flooded by the design storm will be indicated on the plans
and be considered part of the drainage and storm water management system;
3. The storm water management system shall take into consideration the upstream
discharge and runoff which must pass over or through the development site and
will include a surplus design capacity factor of twenty-five percent (25%) for
potential increases in upstream runoff;
4. Downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine the effect of the
proposed storm water management system discharge off-site. The storm water
management will not overload existing or future planned storm drainage systems
downstream of the development nor will post-development peak discharge and
runoff exceed pre-development peak discharge and runoff;
5. The proposed storm water management system shall be designed by a
Professional Engineer experienced in the design of storm water systems. The
designer of the system will develop and submit for review, the method of
calculation and the hydraulic calculations. These calculations will be based on
accepted engineering practices and demonstrate that the requirements of this
section will be met;
6. Rights-of-way or easements will be designated for all components of the storm
water management system lying outside the established public street lines;
7. The applicant shall certify in writing that all components of the storm water
management system will b e maintained until the system is placed under the
jurisdiction of a legally created association or formally accept by the town, which
will then be responsible for the maintenance of the system; and
8. When construction of the development is to occur in phases, the planning of the
storm water management system shall encompass the entire site which may
ultimately be developed, and shall not be limited to an initial or limited phase of
the development.
S. LANDSCAPE PLAN: A manufactured housing park shall have a Landscape Plan
which takes into consideration the relationship of individual sites to one another, the
proposed use of open space, the relationship of the Park to surrounding property, and
a specific planting scheme. The planting scheme must include, at a minimum, plant
species, size of plants at installation, and existing vegetation to be retained. The
Landscape Plan must also include a permanent landscape maintenance program.
1. Where possible, existing trees shall be preserved, and mobile home stands shall
be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography,
and natural drainage areas.
2. Lawn and other ground cover shall be installed on all areas except those covered
by structures, paved or surfaced areas, landscaped areas, and undisturbed areas
such as woods and drainage areas which are to be preserved in their natural state.
3. In addition to required buffers and screening, other planting shall be adequate in
size, quantity and character to provide an attractive setting for the mobile homes
and other improvements, to provide adequate privacy and pleasant outlooks for
living units, to minimize reflected glare and to afford summer shade.
T. SOLID WASTE: The storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in the park
shall not create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident
hazards, or air pollution. All solid waste shall be stored in watertight containers
which shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to prevent solid waste
from overflowing.
U. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL: Adequate measures shall be
provided to control erosion and sedimentation during the construction phase and after
the completion of the project. These should include but are not limited to the
following:
1. Description and location of the limits of all proposed earth movement;
2. Description and location of all existing and proposed drainage features including
the size of any culverts and cross-section of drainage ditches;
3. Description, location, and details of all temporary erosion and sedimentation
control measures;
4. Description, location, and details of all permanent erosion and sedimentation
control measures, including:
a. Areas to be riprapped;
b. Areas to be seeded, with specifications for seed mixture (%), type of
fertilizer, and application rates of lime, fertilizer and seed (lb/1000 sq.ft);
c. Areas to be mulched, including type of mulch and application rate;
d. Sedimentation ponds with engineering design data;
e. Timing and sequence of the above erosion and sedimentation control
measures; and
f. Provisions for maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control
facilities which will remain after the project is completed, including
designation of responsible parties.
V ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: The following requirements shall apply to any
accessory structures located on a manufactured home site and accessory to the
manufactured unit. The accessory structure shall:
1. Not exceed a width of 24 feet or length of 26 feet;
2. Not exceed a wall height of 10 feet nor have a roof pitch exceeding 5 inches per
foot; and
3. Not obstruct required openings for light and ventilation of the manufactured
housing unit equipment or utility connection.
4. Meet all setback requirements of Section.E.4.
X ATTACHED STRUCTURES: The following requirements shall apply to any
extensions of manufactured homes such as porches, decks, and porticos. Such
attached structures shall:
1. Not be used for the storage of motor vehicles; and
2. Meet all setback requirements of Section.E.1.
Y. STORAGE: At least 300 cubic feet of enclosed tenant storage facilities shall be
conveniently provided on or near each mobile home lot for storage of materials and
equipment.
SECTION 9. MANUFACTURED HOME SAFETY STANDARDS
These standards shall apply to all manufactured housing units built before June 15, 1976,
or not built according to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Chapter 70, to be located in a
manufactured housing in the Town of Norridgewock.
A. EXIT FACILITIES-EXTERIOR DOOR
1. Required egress doors shall not be located where a lockable exterior door must be
used in order to exit.
2 Homes shall have a minimum of two exterior doors not less than 12 feet from
each other as measured in any straight line direction regardless of the length or
the travel between doors. One of the required exit doors shall be accessible from
the doorway of each bedroom without traveling more than 35 feet.
3. All exterior swinging doors shall provide a minimum 28 inches wide by 74
inches high clear opening. All exterior sliding glass doors shall provide a
minimum 38 inches wide by 72 inches high clear opening. Locks shall not
require the use of a key for operation from the inside.
B. EXIT FACILITIES-EGRESS WINDOWS AND DEVICES
1. Every room designed expressly for sleeping purposes, unless it has an exit door,
shall have at least one outside window or approved exit device. If an exit
window or device is installed, it shall be listed in accordance with procedures and
requirements of AAA 1704-1985.
2. The bottom of the window opening shall not be more than 36 inches above the
floor.
3 Locks, latches, opening hand les, tabs and any other window, screen, or storm
window devices, which need to be operated in order to permit exiting, shall not
be located in excess of 54 inches from the finished floor.
C. INTERIOR DOORS: Each interior door, when provided with a privacy lock, shall
have a privacy lock that has an emergency release on the outside to permit entry
when the lock has been locked by a locking knob, lever, button, or other locking
devices on the inside.
D. FIRE DETECTION EQUIPMENT: At least one smoke detector (which may be a
single station alarm) shall be installed in the home in the following locations:
1. On any wall in the hallway or spacing communicating with each bedroom area
between the living area and the first bedroom door unless a door separates the
living area from that bedroom area, in which case the detector shall be installed
on the living area side as close to the door as practical. Homes having bedroom
areas separated by any one or combination of living, or family room (but not a
bathroom or utility room) shall have at least one detector protecting each
bedroom area.
2. When located in hallways, the detector shall be between the return air intake
(where applicable) and the living area.
3 The smoke detector shall not be placed in a location which impairs its
effectiveness.
4 Smoke detectors shall be labeled as conforming with the requirements of
Underwriters Laboratory Standards No. 217, Third Edition, 1985, as amended
through October 8, 1985, for single and multiple station smoke detectors.
5 Each smoke detector shall be installed in accordance with its listing. The top of
the detector shall be located on a wall 4 inches to 12 inches below the ceiling.
However, when a detector is mounted on an interior wall below a sloping
ceiling, it shall be located 4 inches to 12 inches below the intersection on the
connecting exterior wall and the sloping ceiling. The required detector(s) shall
be attached to an electrical outlet box and the detector connected by permanent
wiring method into the general electrical circuit. There shall be no switches in
the circuit to the detector between the overcurrent protecting device protecting
the branch circuit and the detector. The smoke detector shall not be placed on
the same branch circuit or any circuit protected by a ground fault interrupter.
E. FLAME SPREAD
1. Ceiling interior finish shall not have a flame spread rating exceeding 75;
2. Walls and ceilings adjacent to or enclosing a furnace or water heater shall
have an interior finish with a flame spread rating not exceeding 25. Sealants
and other trim material 2 inches wide or less in width used to finish adjacent
surfaces within this space are exempt if supported by framing members or by
materials having flame spread rating not exceeding 25;
3. Exposed interior finishes adjacent to the cooking range shall have a flame
spread rating not exceeding 50;
4 Kitchen cabinet doors, counter tops, back splashes, exposed bottoms, and end
panels shall have a flame spread rating not to exceed 200: and
5 Finish surfaces of plastic bathtubs, shower units, and tub or shower doors
shall not exceed a flame spread of 200; and
6. No burner of a surface cooking unit shall be closer than 12 horizontal inches
to a window or an exterior door.
F. KITCHEN CABINET PROTRCTORS
1. The bottom and sides of combustible kitchen cabinets over cooking ranges to
a horizontal distance of 6 inches from the outside edge of the cooking range
shall be protected with at least 5/16 inch thick gypsum board or equivalent
limited combustible material. One-inch nominal framing members and trim
are exempted from this requirement. The cabinet area over the cooking range
or cooktops shall be protected by a metal hood with not less than a 3-inch
eyebrow projecting horizontally from the front cabinet face. The 5/16 inch
thick gypsum board or equivalent material which is above the top of the hood
maybe supported by the hood. A 3/8 inch enclosed air space shall be
provided between the bottom surface of the cabinet and the gypsum board or
equivalent material. The hood shall be at least as wide as the cooking range.
2. The metal hood will not be required if there is an oven installed between the
cabinet and the range.
3 Ranges shall have a vertical clearance above the cooking top of not less than
24 inches to the bottom of combustible cabinets.
G. CARPETING: Carpeting shall not be used in a space or compartment designed to
contain only a furnace and/or water heater. Carpeting may be installed in other
areas where a furnace or water heater is installed provided that it is not located
under the furnace or water heater.
H ROOF LOADS: All homes with roofs added after construction will require a
professional engineer to inspect the roof to determine that he roof and home can
withstand the rigors of a State of Maine winter or wind uplifts that may occur.
I. HEATING AND FUEL BURNING SYSTEM: A person holding a master license
issued by the State of Maine Oil and Solid Fuel Examining Board shall inspect and
certify that the hearing and fuel system meets the requirements of NFPA-31-
Installation of Oil Burning Examining as adopted by that Board, or other
applicable standards.
J. ELECTRICAL SYSTEM: A person holding a master license issued by the State
of Maine Electricians Examining Board shall inspect and certify that the electrical
system is safe and meets the National Electrical code in effect at the time the home
was constructed.
SECTION 10 PARK ADMINISTRATION
A. The owner or operator of a manufactured housing park shall be responsible for
operating the park in compliance with this Ordinance and shall be responsible for
ensuring the maintenance of all park-owned structures, facilities, equipment, and
grounds.
SECTION 11. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONVERSION OF PARK
A. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP: In the event a person possessing a permit issued
pursuant to this Ordinance transfers the ownership of the park, without transfer of
the permit being approved by the Norridgewock Planning Board, the permit
granted by the Board shall continue to authorize construction and operation of the
manufactured housing park within the limits of this Ordinance and subject to the
terms and conditions stated in the permit, provided that the parties to the transfer
shall be jointly and severally liable for any violation of the permit until such time
as the Board approves the transfer or issuance of a new permit to the new owner.
The Planning Board may, in their discretion, require the new owner apply for a
new permit, or may approve the transfer of the existing permit upon satisfactory
showing that the new owner can abide its terms and conditions and will be able to
comply with the provisions of this ordinance,
B. CONVERSION OF PARK: No development or subdivision which is approved
under the provisions of this ordinance as a manufactured housing park may be
converted to another use without the approval of the Norridgewock Planning
Board, and meeting the appropriate lot size, lot width, setback and other
requirements. The plan to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds and filed with the
municipality shall include the following restrictions as well as any other notes or
conditions of approval:
1. The land within the manufactured housing park shall remain in a unified
ownership and the fee to lots or portions of lots shall not be transferred; and
2. No dwelling unit other than a manufactured housing unit shall be located within
the park.
SECTION 11 MISCELLANEOUS
A. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES: Whenever a provision of this
Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
Ordinance or any other Ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive
provision shall control.
B. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY: Should any section or provision of this
Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
C EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this Ordinance shall be March 2, 1992.
D AMENDMENTS: This Ordinance may be amended by the majority vote of the
Legislative body.
E PLAN REVISIONS AFTER APPROVAL: No changes, erasures, modifications,
or revisions shall be made in the manufactured housing park plan after approval
has been given by the Planning Board and the plan signed, unless the plan is first
re-submitted and the Planning Board approves any modifications. In the event,
that the manufactured housing park is recorded without complying with this
requirement, the plan shall be considered null and void.
F. WAIVERS: Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and undue
hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, or where there
are any special circumstances or a particular plan, it may waive any of these
regulations provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the
purpose of this Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, the Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance, or any other ordinance.
SECTION 12 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. ADMINISTRATION: The Planning Board of the Town of Norridgewock shall
administer this Ordinance.
B. PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING PERMITS: Within 30 days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board shall notify the applicant in
writing either that the application is a complete application, or, if the application is
incomplete, the specific additional material needed to make the application
complete. After determining a complete application has been filed, the Planning
Board shall notify the applicant and begin its full evaluation of the proposed
Manufactured Housing Park. In addition, the Planning Board shall notify by mail
all abutting property owners of the proposed Manufactured Housing Park,
specifying the location and a general description of the proposed Manufactured
Housing Park.
In the event the Planning Board determines to hold a public hearing on the
application, it shall hold such hearing within 30 days of receipt of the completed
application, and shall cause notice of date, time, and place of such hearing be
provided the applicant, abutters, and be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality in which the proposed Manufactured Housing Park
is to be located, at least 2 times, the date of the first publication to be at least 7
days prior to the hearing.
The burden of proof that a proposed, enlargement or alteration of a Manufactured
Housing Park is in conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance
shall lie with the applicant.
C. EXPIRATION OF PERMIT: Following the issuance of a permit, if no substantial
start is made in construction within one year of the date of the permit or if work is
not substantially completed within two years of the date of the permit, the permit
shall lapse and become void.
The Planning Board may grant an extension when it finds the applicant has
diligently pursued his obligations under this Ordinance and that an extension is
justified by adverse weather, delay in material delivery due to no fault of the
applicant, or by other valid reason.
D ENFORCEMENT: It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to
enforce the provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance
of illegal use of land, or work being done, and abatement of nuisance conditions.
A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be
maintained as a permanent record.
The Codes Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections and insure
compliance with this Ordinance and conditions attached to permit approvals. The
Codes Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of alleged
violations of this Ordinance.
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the
Codes Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions
and proceedings, wither legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of
violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the municipality. The
Municipal Officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recording fines without Court action.
E PENALTIES: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a
landowner’s agent or contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation
of this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, MRSA,
Section 4452.
SECTION 13 APPEALS
An administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals, within thirty (30) days
from the Planning Board’s decision on the application for a Manufactured Housing
Park, where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by the Planning Board in the Administration of
this Ordinance. When errors of administrative procedure or interpretation are found,
the case shall be remanded to the Planning Board for correction.
The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
A decision of the Board of Appeals or the Planning Board may be appealed to court as
provided for by State Law.
SECTION 14 DEFINITIONS
ABUTTER: Any persons, corporation, or other entity legally entitled to hold
ownership in land which abuts or is within 1000 feet of the proposed
project property lines.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure which is in
addition to or supplements the facilities provided by a habitable building or structure.
BOARD OR PLANNING BOARD: Board or Planning Board shall mean the Town of
Norridgewock Planning Board.
BUFFER STRIP: A space which may be occupied only by a fence, landscaping, or
natural vegetation.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured between the average finished
grade of the ground at the front of the building and the highest point of the roof, not
including chimneys or similar accessory structures.
FOUNDATION: Means all of the following: A full, poured concrete or masonry
foundation; a poured concrete frost wall or a mortared masonry frost wall, with or
without a concrete floor; a reinforced, floating concrete pad for which a registered
professional engineer’s or architect’s certification is provided; or any foundation which
a registered professional engineer or architect certifies is suitable for placement
on soil with high frost susceptibility.
FRONTAGE: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the
intersections of the side lot lines with the front lot line.
LANDSCAPING: Landscaping includes, but not limited to grass, shrubs, trees, or
other comparable cover and any existing vegetative cover.
LOT COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: Means a structural unit or units designed for
occupancy, and constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use
of its own chassis, or placed on an independent chassis, to a building site. The term
includes any type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing facility and then
transported to a building site where it is utilized for housing and may be purchased or
sold by a dealer in the interim. For the purposes of this ordinance two types of
manufactured housing are included.
1. Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called “new mobile
homes”, which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development standards,
meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling
mode, are 14 body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square feet, and
which are built on permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with
or without utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein; except that the term shall include any
structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph, except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et seq.
2. Those units commonly called “modular homes,” which the manufacturer certifies
are constructed in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 957, and rules adopted
under that chapter, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections,
which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as
dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including
plumbing, heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained therein.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK: A parcel of land under unified ownership
approved by the municipality for the placement of three or more manufactured housing
units.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT: The area of land on which an individual
manufactured home is situated within a manufactured housing park and which is reserved
for use by the occupants of the dwelling unit.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING SUBDIVISION: A parcel of land approved by the
municipal reviewing authority under subdivision review for the placement
of manufactured housing units on individually-owned lots.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT STAND: Area a manufactured home lot which
has been reserved for the placement of a manufactured housing unit.
MINIMUM LOT SIZE: The land area of a parcel not including the area of any land
which is: part of a right-of-way for a thoroughfare or easement, such as but not limited
to, surface drainage easements or traveled rights-of-way (but not including utility
easements servicing that lot); or which is wetlands.
OPEN SPACE USE: A use not involving a structure, earth moving activity, or the
removal or destruction of vegetative cover, spawning grounds, or fish, aquatic life, bird
or other wildlife habitat.
PARKING SPACE: An area of (200) two hundred square feet (10 feet wide by 20 feet
long) exclusive of drives or aisles for the parking of vehicles.
PERSON: Person shall mean any individual, group of individuals, firm, corporation,
association, partnership, or private or public entity, including a district, county, city, town
or other governmental unit or agent thereof; and, in the case of a corporation, any
individual having active and general supervision of the properties of such corporation.
PITCHED, SHINGLED ROOF: A roof with a pitch of 2 or more vertical units for every
12 horizontal units of measurement and which is covered with asphalt or fiberglass
composition shingles or other materials, but specifically excludes corrugated metal
roofing material.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure.
SKIRTING: Weather-resistant material used to enclose the space from the bottom of the
manufactured housing unit to grade.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed
location on or in the ground, or an attachment to something having a fixed location on the
ground, including buildings , car ports, decks and other building features, but not
including signs, sidewalks, fences, patios, driveways, and parking lots.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: Seventy-five percent (75%) of the permitted project
is constructed.
SUBSTANTIAL START: Completion of 30% of permitted structure or use as a
percentage of estimated total cost.
UNDUE HARDSHIP:
1. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a waiver is
granted;
2. That the need for a waiver is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
3. That the granting of a waiver will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
4. That the undue hardship is no the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
UNUSABLE LAND: An environmentally sensitive area which if disturbed or destroyed
can adversely affect unique ecological balances in the environment. Although specific
areas require a case-by-case analysis, the following factors may be included in the
determination of unusable land:
1. Areas with slopes in excess of 25%;
2. Areas of very poorly drained soils as identified by a registered Maine Soil
Scientist or by the most current edition of the “Soil Survey, Somerset County,
Maine”, Soil Conservation Service;
3. Any area identified as a wetland area as defined by the State of Maine;
4. Any area within the 100 year flood zone as delineated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency; and
5. Unique wildlife areas as identified during the Review Process.
YARD: The area between a structure and the property boundary.
YARD, FRONT: An open space extending the width of a lot from sideline to sideline,
between the front lot line, and the nearest part of the dwelling unit on the lot.
YARD, REAR: An open space extending the width of a lot from sideline to sideline,
between the rear lot line, or the corner of a triangular lot farthest from the front line, and
the nearest part of a building on the lot. A corner lot has no rear yard.
YARD, SIDE: An open space extending along a side line of a lot from the front yard to
the rear yard between the sideline and the nearest part of a building on the lot.
Approved by Legislative Body
March 6, 2017
Ordinance Prohibiting Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail
Marijuana Social Clubs in the Town of Norridgewock
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417; and
Municipal Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
Section 2. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores,
retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and retail
marijuana testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs are defined as set forth in 7
M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs.
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation
facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing
facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in this municipality.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that engages in retail or wholesale
sales of a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant
to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative body
unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee. Violations of this
ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A True Attest Copy:
_____________________________ _____________________________
Sharon Dodge, Town Clerk Date
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 1
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE
(REVISION ADOPTED MARCH 7, 2016)
ARTICLE I - TITLE, AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Sections 101- 402
Section 101. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the Mass Gathering Ordinance of the Town of
Norridgewock.
Section 102. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Authority granted to the Town of
Norridgewock in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
Section 103. ADMINISTRATION
1) The Planning Board of the Town of Norridgewock shall be the Review and Permitting Authority of this
Mass Gathering Ordinance;
2) The Board of Selectmen shall be the Enforcement Authority for this Mass Gathering Ordinance.
Section 104. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The Town of Norridgewock recognizes that unregulated mass gathering events pose a potential threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the Norridgewock community. The specific purposes of this Ordinance are as
follows:
1) To ensure that large numbers of patrons as defined by this Ordinance do not Overtax the
municipal roadways leading to the location where the mass gathering event shall be held;
2) To allow the safe passage of emergency vehicles, to reduce the incidence of delays of private
individuals using the public roadway system throughout Town, and to prevent the obstruction of
entrances to private homes and businesses so as to allow access to the same by the general public;
3) To ensure for the provision of adequate lodging, camping, parking, food, water, medical
services, and sanitary facilities for those in attendance at any mass gathering event;
4) To prevent trespass and damage to private properties near and around the mass gathering
event;
5) To provide for sufficient security forces to cope with large crowds expected that such events and to
prevent the violation of any breach of the peace, including but not limited to the illegal consumption
of alcohol and drugs.
6) To maintain and secure the use and peaceful enjoyment of property owners and their private
homes, and to regulate the unwanted creation of noise, dust, glare, odor, congestion or
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 2
otherwise that negatively impacts said peaceful use of personal properties caused by unauthorized
intrusions;
7) To eliminate the possibility of the creation of hazards to the health, safety and welfare of both private
citizens and patrons of the mass gathering event; and
8) To provide a balance between the right of assembly under the Constitution and the legitimate rights
of privacy of residents of Norridgewock.
9) To ensure that the Town is held harmless from any and all liability issues pertaining to
financial and legal burdens based on the potential negative impact on municipal services,
infrastructure and resources.
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS
Terms used in this Ordinance are defined as follows:
Any term not defined shall have its common, ordinary meaning.
Section 201. Abutter
"Abutter" means any person whose property adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land that
will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration.
Section 202. Board of Selectmen
“Board of Selectmen” means the duly elected Board of Selectmen of the Town of Norridgewock. The Board of
Selectmen shall be the enforcement authority under this Ordinance.
Section 203. DHS
"DHS" means the State of Maine Department of Human Services.
Section 204. Evidence
"Evidence" when used in this Ordinance shall mean written documentation.
Section 205. Mass Gathering Area
"Mass gathering area" means a place, public or private, maintained, operated or used for or in connection with a
mass outdoor gathering.
"Mass gathering area" also includes all camping areas used primarily or exclusively in connection with the mass
gathering and those camping areas need not be contiguous.
Section 206. Mass Outdoor Gathering
"Mass Outdoor Gathering" means an actual or anticipated assembly of more than 1,000 people occurring mostly
outdoors but includes a temporary site and whose assembly at the mass gathering area continues or is
reasonably expected to continue for more than eight consecutive hours. A mass outdoor gathering includes all
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 3
congregations and assemblies organized or held for any purpose, but do not include assemblies at permanent
sites designed or intended for use by a large number of people. Mass gathering area also includes all
camping areas used primarily or exclusively in the connection with the mass gathering and those camping
areas need not be contiguous with the event site. A "permanent site" means a stadium, an arena, an
auditorium, a coliseum, a fairground or other established sites for assemblies with sufficient permanent water
and sanitary facilities as described in Section 501-G (Water Supply) and Section 501-H (Sanitary
Facilities) of Article V. To determine whether a mass outdoor gathering extends for more than eight
consecutive hours, the 8-hour period begins when people are first permitted at the mass gathering area and
ends when people in attendance are expected to depart.
Section 207. M.R.S.A.
"M.R.S.A." means the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
Section 208. Nuisance
The following shall be defined as nuisances:
(a) Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
(b) Any attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;
(c) Any condition that violates federal, state or local health or environmental laws or regulations.
Section 209. Operator
"Operator" means a person who holds, stages, sponsors or promotes an outdoor mass gathering. The operator
also means the person responsible for the managing of the mass outdoor gathering area and, if no person is
responsible, the operator means the owner, lessee or possessor of the real property upon which the mass outdoor
gathering takes place.
Section 210. Permanent Site
"Permanent Site" means a stadium, an arena, an auditorium, a coliseum, a fairground or other established sites for
assemblies with sufficient permanent water and sanitary facilities.
Section 211. Planning Board
"Planning Board" means the duly elected Planning Board of the Town of Norridgewock. The Planning Board
shall be the Review and Permitting Authority under this Ordinance.
Section 212. Refuse
"Refuse" means all combustible or non-combustible putrescible or non-putrescible solid or liquid waste.
Section 213. Sanitary Facilities
"Sanitary Facilities" means toilets, vault privies, lavatories, urinals, drinking fountains, and service buildings
or rooms provided for installation and use of these units.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 4
Section 214. Temporary Site
"Temporary Site" means a site erected or located for temporary or nonpermanent use.
Section 215. Ticket
A "Ticket" means any receipt, stamp, or token of eligibility to attend the Mass Gathering whether or not a
piece of paper or other physical evidence of payment is issued to the patron.
Section 216. Town
"Town" means the Town of Norridgewock, Maine.
Section 217. Variance
"Variance" is the relaxation of the strict requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 218. Water District
"Water District" means the Norridgewock Water District.
ARTICLE III - PERMITS REQUIRED
Section 301.
No person, corporation, partnership, association, or entity of any kind shall sponsor, promote, or conduct a
Mass Gathering until all necessary permits have been obtained, when applicable. The necessary permits are:
(a) A permit from the Town, pursuant to this Ordinance.
(b) A permit from the Maine State Department of Human Services, pursuant to Title 22 M.R.S.A.,
Chapter 1601-1602 and regulations promulgated there under.
(c) A “B.Y.O.B.” or other appropriate permit pursuant to Title 28-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 163, is required if
the Mass Gathering allows the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
(d) A permit for a campground from the Maine Department of Human Services, pursuant to Title 22,
M.R.S.A., Section 2491 to 2501, and regulations, promulgated there under.
(e) All other permits required by state law, rules promulgated under state law and other permits
required by this Ordinance.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 5
ARTICLE IV - TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK PERMIT PROCESS
Section 401. Written Application (Revised February 20. 2003)
An application for a permit to hold a Mass Gathering shall be filed with the Planning Board of the Town of
Norridgewock not less than One Hundred and Twenty (120) days before the date of the Mass Gathering, in
order for the Planning Board to deem it complete within 90 days. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
check or money order made payable to the "Town of Norridgewock", according to the following:
The applicant must pay a non-refundable one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fee. In addition to the nonrefundable
application fee, the applicant shall also pay such other costs as advertising, public hearings, land
abutter notices, technical and professional costs to review the application and time, and staff time, as deemed
necessary by the Town of Norridgewock. Only the application fee may be waived at the discretion of the
Planning Board if said fee is for a non-profit organization for the Town of Norridgewock.
For each event planned in a "multi-event" proposal, multiple applications may be filed with the Town at the
same time, but each request shall require a separate application and a separate filing fee for each event planned.
Section 402. Public Hearing
Within thirty (30) days of the filing of a complete application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to
consider the issuance of the permit. Upon receipt of the application, the Planning Board may also send a copy
of the application to the Department of Human Services, the County Sherriff, and State Police and request
their presence at the public hearing. Based upon a list of abutters determined by the Town, the
applicant shall notify all abutters in writing of the Public Hearing by certified mail, return receipt. Notice of
the Public Hearing shall also be given by the applicant by posting the same in at least two public places in the
Town of Norridgewock, and publishing the same at least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the
Town of Norridgewock, at least seven (7) days before the date of the Public Hearing and on the day of the
Public Hearing. This notice of the Public Hearing shall contain the date, location, number of expected
attendees, and a general description of the event, as well as the date and location of the Public Hearing. A
copy of the notice shall also be mailed to or served upon the operator.
Section 403. Issuance of Permit
Within fourteen (14) days of the conclusion of the public hearing the planning board will make a decision on the
permit. This timeline can be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and planning board. If the permit is
granted, all assurances made and obligations assumed by the operator shall become conditions of the permit.
In issuing the permit, the planning board may impose such additional conditions as may be necessary to assure
compliance with this ordinance. If the permit is denied, the planning board shall issue written reasons for the
denial within seven days of the public hearing.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 6
Section 404. Plans; Cooperation
In its review of applications for permits for the holding or promoting of Mass Gatherings, the Planning Board
shall require such plans, specifications, and reports as it shall deem necessary for a proper review. In its review
of such applications, (Article V), as well as carrying out its other duties and functions in connection with such
a gathering, the Planning Board may require such cooperation and assistance as may be deemed necessary
and proper from all public officers, departments and agencies of the Town of Norridgewock. The Planning
Board shall work with the Department of Human Services, the Maine State Police, the Somerset County
Sheriff's Office, the Bureau of Liquor Enforcement, the Regional Fire Warden, the Department of
Transportation and any other local, state or federal officials to insure that Town concerns regarding fire
protection, police protection, traffic control, and any other matters as may affect the security of the public
health and safety are adequately addressed.
Section 405. Variance
In any case in which strict compliance with the terms of this ordinance will cause the applicant to suffer undue
hardship and the Planning Board have reasonably determined that waiving strict compliance with the terms of
this ordinance will not compromise its enforcement or the accomplishment of its purposes, they shall issue a
variance specifying in writing its terms and the reasons why it has been granted.
Section 406. Permit Denied: Appeal
An applicant who has been aggrieved by the Town of Norridgewock's decision to deny a permit under this
Ordinance may appeal to the Town of Norridgewock Board of Appeals. The appeal must be filed with the
Board of Appeals no later than thirty days from receipt of the written reasons for the denial of the permit.
ARTICLE V - PERMIT APPLICATION
A - PERMIT STANDARDS
Section 501-A. Contents of Application
The permit application submitted pursuant to Section 401, Article IV, shall be on the application form
prescribed by the Planning Board and shall include no less than all of the information required under 501-B to
be considered a completed application.
Section 501-B. Description
The application shall include a description of the proposed event. A statement of the number of persons
expected to attend the event together with the maximum number of tickets that will be made available, if tickets
are issued. PERSONS NOT HOLDING VALID TICKETS FOR AN EVENT FOR WHICH TICKETS HAVE
BEEN ISSUED SHALL NOT BE PERMITTED TO ATTEND.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 7
The application shall also provide site map(s) of the area, at a scale of no more than 100 feet to the inch, showing
the following:
1. The location and number of all proposed toilets.
2. The 1ocation and number of all lavatory and bathing facilities.
3. The location and number of water supply sources.
4. The location and size of the assemblage area(s).
5. The location of the food service area(s).
6. The location and size of the camping areas, and number of campsites.
7. The onsite ingress and egress of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (See Section 50 I-C)
8. The offsite ingress and egress roads. (This map may be a Maine Gazetteer or USGS Topographic Map)
9. The collection of refuse disposal facilities and collection facilities.
10. The location and size of the parking areas, including the number of parking spaces.
11. The location of all traffic control personnel.
12. The location of the first aid facilities.
All facilities required by this Ordinance shall comply with the regulations promulgated by the DHS
pertaining to Mass Gatherings. When offsite facilities are to be utilized in order to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance, there shall be a notarized affidavit from the property owners who are providing the facilities that is
submitted along with the application indicating that they have read the application and understand the scope
and nature of the Mass Gathering. The affidavit shall also state that permission is given to use such property.
Section 501-C. Access
Written documentation shall be provided to show that provisions for access for the ingress and egress of
pedestrians and vehicular traffic shall be maintained, and that all public roadways in the proximity of the Mass
Gathering will be adequately staffed with certified traffic control personnel to insure public safety for the
duration of the Mass Gathering.
A detailed plan for controlling traffic shall be submitted, in writing, which shall include:
1. A description of the routes which persons attending the event are likely to take.
2. The number, and assigned location of persons who will be present to direct traffic at the site both
before and after the event. UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES, SHALL PRIVATE CITIZENS BE
ASSIGNED THE DUTY OF DIRECTING TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC ROADS. Proof of certification
that an individual is certified to direct traffic shall be provided.
3. A written description of what means will be available to remove disabled vehicles from locations
where their presence will obstruct the free flow of traffic, including a written statement by any
private towing agencies that their towing services will be available.
4. A written description of parking shall be provided, specifying the location of all roads and parking lots.
a. Width of service roads shall be at least twelve (12) feet for one traffic lane, twenty-four (24) feet
for two traffic lanes, and seven (7) feet for parallel parking lanes.
b. There shall be at least one (1) parking space for every four (4) persons and the density shall not
exceed one hundred (100) passenger cars or thirty (30) buses per usable acre.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 8
c. Parking shall comply with Federal regulations regarding the Americans With Disabilities Act (28
CFR Part 36 Revised July 1994 Section 4.1.2(5)(a)(b)).
Section 501-D. Medical
The applicant shall demonstrate, in writing: How emergency medical services will be provided, and further
demonstrate coordination with the manager of the ambulance facility serving the Town of Norridgewock. All
necessary personnel shall be licensed by the State of Maine, as either Physician Assistant, Registered Nurse, or
Emergency Medical Technician. A First Aid building, tent, or ambulance, duly licensed by the State of Maine,
shall be available on site during the entire time of the Mass Gathering. Telephone and radio communications
shall be provided and kept available for emergency purposes. The operator of the Mass Gathering shall
contact area hospital(s), advise them that a Mass Gathering shall be held, and inform them of the expected
attendance of the event. A written acknowledgement from the area hospital(s) shall be submitted as part of the
application.
Section 501-E. Law Enforcement
Evidence shall be provided, in writing, that certified security personnel, licensed pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A.
Sections 9401 through 9417, shall be on duty near and within the assembly site area and that the Town
authorized officials have approved the same. A MINIMUM OF AT LEAST TWO (2) MAINE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE ACADEMY CERTIFIED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS, (NOT INCLUDING PERSONS
CONCERNED SOLELY WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL) SHALL BE ON SITE FOR EACH ONE THOUSAND
(1,000) PERSONS IN ATTENDANCE.
Should, for any reason, the Maine Criminal Justice Academy personnel be unavailable and/or cannot be
assigned by the appropriate enforcement agency, the Planning Board shall consider the assignment of two
(2) bonded security personnel to fulfill this requirement.
If deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, the Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to
require that additional law enforcement and/or security personnel be at the Mass Gathering and shall require the
permittee to allow reasonable inspections by law enforcement personnel to perform compliance checks.
Section 501-F. Fire Protection
Written documentation shall be provided that the Norridgewock Fire Chief has accepted Mass Gathering plans
as meeting fire protection concerns. If, in his judgment, the conditions that exist at the Mass Gathering area
constitute an unsafe environment, the Fire Chief shall recommend that the Planning Board deny the issuance
of a Mass Gathering permit. If the Fire Chief should so determine, fire prevention equipment shall be present at
the site of the Mass Gathering.
In addition, written documentation shall be provided that the Regional Forest Ranger has inspected the site
and assessed the forest fire hazard. IF CONDITIONS WARRANT, THE REGIONAL FOREST RANGER
SHALL HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE A BAN ON ANY AND ALL FIRES DURING THE MASS
GATHERING.
The Mass Gathering electrical system or electrical equipment shall comply with applicable State of Maine
Standards and Regulations pursuant to 32 M.R.S.A., Section 17.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 9
Section 50 I-G. Water Supply
Written documentation shall be provided from the operator concerning the source(s) of potable water. Where
water is distributed under pressure and flush toilets are used, the water system shall deliver water at normal
operating pressure (20 lbs. per square inch minimum to all fixtures at the rate of at least 30 gallons per person
per day).
Where water under pressure is not available, and non-water toilets are used, at least three (3) gallons of water
per person per day shall be provided for drinking and lavatory purposes.
If the Norridgewock Water District is to be utilized as a source of potable water, a written statement for the
directors of said water district shall be submitted to affirm that the district has the capacity to provide the
necessary quantity of water without adversely affecting the supply to their normal customers.
Transported water shall be obtained from an approved source, and stored and dispensed in an approved manner.
Approval as used in this paragraph means in compliance with standards adopted by the Division of Human
Services, Division of Health Engineering.
Section 501-H. Sanitary Facilities
1. A signed contract shall be submitted by the vendor demonstrating that the toilets shall be provided at the
rate of one (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) persons attending the Mass Gathering event, and will be
kept in a sanitary condition.
2. Sanitary facilities shall be conveniently accessible, well identified and well maintained.
3. Water points or drinking fountains shall be provided at a rate of one (1) per one hundred (100) persons
and shall be conveniently accessible, well identified and well maintained.
4. Sanitary facilities shall comply with the Federal Regulations regarding the Americans With Disabilities
Act (28 CFR Part 36 Revised July 1994 Section 4.1.2(6)).
Section 501-1. Refuse Disposal
The applicant shall provide, in writing, a description of the number, type, and location of refuse facilities
including a statement as to when and how the accumulated refuse will be picked up, by whom, and to what
facilities it will be taken. The operator shall provide written proof that refuse containers will be readily
accessible throughout the Mass Gathering area, and that at least one (1) fifty-gallon refuse container or
equivalent shall be provided for each one hundred (100) persons expected to attend the Mass Gathering. THE
OPERATOR SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL FEES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CLEANUP AND
DISPOSAL OF REFUSE RESULTING FROM THE MASS GATHERING.
1. All refuse shall be collected from the Mass Gathering area at least once every day of the Mass
Gathering and disposed of in an approved area.
2. The Mass Gathering area and immediate surrounding properties shall be cleaned of refuse within
twenty-four (24) hours following the Mass Gathering.
Areas where cars and Recreational Vehicles (RVs) or buses are parked shall have rubbish disposal facilities at
the rate of one (1) for every twenty-five (25) cars, RVs or buses.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 10
Section 501-J. Containment
The operator of the Mass Gathering shall have the means to discourage the presence of persons not holding tickets
from trespassing on private property in the vicinity of the event. In conformance with the State Department of
Human Services requirements, the operator shall provide provision for preventing people in excess of the
maximum permitted number from gaining access to the Mass Gathering area. These provisions shall include the
following:
1. A written statement that persons not holding valid tickets shall not be permitted to remain on property
under the operator’s control in the vicinity of the event.
2. Written authorization to police to arrest persons not holding valid tickets who are trespassing on
property owned or under the control of the operator in the vicinity of the event. Upon issuance of the
permit, the operator authorizes police officers to enter upon any property under the operator’s control in
order to enforce compliance of all laws.
3. A written description of the means that shall be used to publicize the fact that the event has been sold
out or is cancelled. If this occurs, and that persons not holding tickets are trespassing on private property
near the scene of the event shall be subject to arrest.
Section 501-K. Promotion
A detailed description, in writing, shall be provided of the methods being used to publicize the event.
Section 501- L. Compliance Check
The operator of any Mass Gathering with an expected attendance of more than one thousand (1,000) persons
shall have all facilities in place and subject to inspection by the Planning Board or their designated
inspection committee a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled commencement of the event.
Section 501-M. Grounds
1. The assembly area should be adequately lighted but not unreasonably reflect beyond the assembly area
boundaries unless adjacent properties are uninhabited.
2. Light level intensities should be at least five-foot candles.
3. There should be at least twenty (20) square feet per person at the site for daytime assemblage and
at least forty (40) square feet per person for overnight assemblage.
4. A written detailed description of location and light level intensities shall be provided.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 11
Section 501-N. Noise
The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular or frequent, or intermittent source
of sound produced by any activity for the purposes of this Ordinance shall be as follows:
9:00 AM to Midnight 70dB(a)
12:01 AM to 6:00 AM 30dB(a)
6:00AM to 9:00AM 45dB(a)
Sound pressure level limits using the sound equivalent level of one minute (leq) (measured in dB(a) scale).
Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, fast response. The meter shall meet
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI SI 4-1964) American Standards Specification for General
Purpose Sound Level Meters and be calibrated or certified. Sound pressure level measurements shall not
exceed the above limits when measured at the property of an abutter to the mass outdoor gathering as defined
in section 201, or another effected property owner not an abutter.
B - REVIEW STANDARDS
Section 502-A. Board’s Determination
In determining whether to grant or deny the permit, the Permitting Authority shall consider all of the criteria
included in but not limited to sections 501-B to 501-J, 501-M, 501-N
1. An adequate and satisfactory water supply and facilities.
2. Adequate refuse storage and disposal facilities.
3. Adequate sleeping areas and facilities.
4. Adequate medical supplies and care.
5. Adequate fire protection.
6. Adequate police protection.
7. Adequate traffic control.
8. Adequate liability insurance.
9. Adequate protection for public water supply, if deemed necessary by the Board of Directors
of the Norridgewock Water District.
10. Any additional matters as may affect the security of the public health or safety.
Section 502-B. Medical
The numbers and schedules of Emergency Medical Technician personnel and ambulance needed will be
determined by the manager of the ambulance facility serving the Town of Norridgewock.
Section 502-C. State and Local Requirements
The operator of the Mass Gathering must comply with all laws and regulations of the State of Maine and the
Town of Norridgewock, which pertain to the even in question as stipulated in Section 301. Copies of all such
licenses and permits shall be filed at the time of submittal of the completed application. The Permitting
Authority shall have the authority to issue requirements more stringent than the requirements of Title 22
M.R.S.A., Chapter 265.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 12
ARTICLE VI - LIABILITY INSURANCE AND PUBLIC COSTS
Section 601. Liability Insurance
At the time of submittal of the completed application, the operator shall furnish to the Permitting
Authority a written certificate of insurance issued by a licensed insurance company of the State of Maine,
providing liability coverage in the amount of at least four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00) with
respect to the injury or death of one or more persons in connection with the Mass Gathering. Such insurance
policy shall also provide coverage for property damage in the amount no less than a minimum amount of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). The insurance policy in question shall contain a provision
requiring that at least ten (10) days’ notice be given to the Permitting Authority prior to cancellation. If such
cancellation occurs prior to the event, the permit issued by the Permitting Authority is void.
Section 602. Security Bond for Town Costs
The operator of the Mass Gathering shall provide a cash deposit to the Town, which amount shall be determined
by the Board of Selectmen, but in no event shall be less than three thousand ($3,000) dollars. A permit shall not
be issued until receipt of said deposit.
Section 603. Liability for Town Costs
Town costs shall be those incurred by the Town in connection with the Mass Gathering which relates to any
adverse consequences due to the Mass Gathering, and which would not have been incurred by the Town if such
Mass Gathering were not held. Such costs shall include but not be restricted to: road signs, damage to Town
roads or ditches, or any other adverse consequences to any public facilities or works, such as the Municipal
Water Supply. Town costs shall also include the cost of hiring police personnel (including the County Sheriff)
and equipment to oversee the Town’s interests in ensuring the public safety and enforcing the conditions of this
Ordinance. Within thirty (30) days after the Mass Gathering, the Town costs shall be calculated, and the deposit
shall be refunded to the operator to the extent it exceeds the actual Town cost. If the actual Town costs exceed
the amount deposited, the operator shall pay the excess to the Town within ten (10) days after being so notified.
ARTICLE VII - INSPECTION
Section 701. Inspection
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an inspection committee that shall consist of the following: One
member from the Board of Selectmen, one member from the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer /Health Officer, and one citizen at large, who shall have the right to enter upon the Mass Gathering
Area at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled event for the purpose of ascertaining that all
facilities (water, toilet, parking spots, signs, etc.) are in place and that all conditions of the Mass Gathering
Permit have been met.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 13
ARTICLE VIII - REVOCATION OF PERMIT
Section 801. Revocation
The Board of Selectmen shall revoke the permit at any time prior to the date of the scheduled event if the
operator has failed to comply with any of the commitments made in the application, or the requirements of
this ordinance, or if the operator has failed to secure any other license or permit required by the Town of
Norridgewock or any government agency in order to hold the Mass Gathering on the proposed site.
Except in cases of an emergency, the Board of Selectmen shall revoke a permit only after giving notice to the
operator of the reasons for the proposed revocation and providing an opportunity to be heard with respect
thereto. Written notice of the reasons for the revocation shall be delivered to the operator or their agent,
personally or by expedited mail service.
ARTICLE IX - LIMITATIONS ON FREQUENCY OF EVENTS
Section 901. Limitations
No more than one (1) permit under this ordinance shall be issued to any single operator or group, within any 30-
day period, for an event for which more than one thousand (1,000) persons are reasonably expected to attend.
ARTICLE X - PENALTIES
Section 1001. Penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this
ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Title 30-A, section 4452 including, but not
limited to, injunctive relief, civil penalties, attorney’s fees and costs. The Board of Selectmen or its designated
agent shall enforce this ordinance.
ARTICLE XI - WAIVERS
Section 1101. Waivers
The Planning Board may grant a waiver of a provision, or provisions, of this ordinance as provided by
State law and local ordinances.
ARTICLE XII - SEVERABILITY
Section 1201. Severability
Each part of this Ordinance is severable and; if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision is declared to be
contrary to law, the validity of the remainder shall not be affected thereby unless the application of any
remaining portion of the Ordinance would result in action being taken which is inconsistent with the objective of
this Ordinance.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK MASS GATHERING ORDINANCE (ADOPTED MARCH 2016)
PAGE 14
ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS
Section 1301. Amendments
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote at the Town Meeting. Amendments may be initiated by a
majority vote of the Planning Board or by request of the Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board or on
petition of ten percent (10%) of the votes cast in the last gubernatorial election of the Town. The Planning
Board shall conduct a Public Hearing on any proposed amendment.
ARTICLE XIV - EFFECTIVE DATE
Section 1401. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption of the same by the Town of Norridgewock, dated
March 7, 2016.
True Attested Copy
Adopted at Town Meeting, March 7, 2016
____________________________________
Sharon M. Dodge, Town Clerk
NORRIDGEWOCK DOWNTOWN PARKING ORDINANCE
Section 1. Authority
This Norridgewock Downtown Parking Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the “Ordinance”) is adopted
pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3009.
Section 2. Purpose
This Ordinance is designed to protect public health and welfare by regulating the parking of motor
vehicles on certain public ways. Unrestricted parking on public ways creates traffic hazards and is
dangerous to pedestrians and motorists, and it is the purpose of the Ordinance to reduce this danger.
Section 3. Repeal of Prior Ordinances
Sections two (2) through four (4) of the Parking Ordinances as enacted at the 1971 annual town
meeting, to the extent said sections may apply to the Downtown Business District as described herein,
are hereby repealed, otherwise, to remain in full force and effect.
Section 4. Regulated Area
The Downtown Parking Ordinance shall apply to the area designated as the Norridgewock Downtown
Business District pursuant to that area of Main Street beginning at the intersection of Welch and Depot
Streets, and extending southeasterly a distance of 0.185 miles ending about 100 feet southeasterly of
the intersection of Route 139 and U.S. Route 2.
Section 5. Definitions
“Motor Vehicle” is any vehicle defined in 29 M.R.S.A. Section 1.
“Public Way” means any town way or public easement as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. Section 3021 and any
portion of any State or State-aid highway located within town. This term includes ways commonly
designated as streets, lanes, roads and avenues and includes paved or unpaved shoulders of such ways.
Section 6. Parking in the Downtown Business District.
All motor vehicles shall stop, stand or park on either side of the public way of Main Street, and as closely
as practicable to the edge of the road or side of the road, and with the side of the street, as laid out by
the municipal officers in the central business section, motor vehicles shall parallel park on both sides of
the public way along the curb, and between the parking lines as provided.
Section 7. Additional provisions.
No person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in any of the following places:
(a) On any sidewalk;
(b) In front of any public or private driveway and within ten (10) feet of any driveway, entrance
or approach to the highway;
(c) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(d) Upon or within twenty (20) feet of any crosswalk so designated by appropriate signs or
markings;
(e) Within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any public way as defined by the terminus
of the corner radius of any intersecting public way or road;
(f) On the north-side of the business district within fifty (50) feet of the entrance to the fire
station when properly marked with “No Parking” signs;
(g) On the roadway side of any other motor vehicle which is stopped or parked at the curb or at
the edge of the public way and commonly called double parking;
(h) In addition, it shall be unlawful to park or stand a motor vehicle within the confines of any
public way in the built-up portion of the Town of Norridgewock as defined by law between
the hours of twelve o’clock midnight and six o’clock the following morning during the
months of November, December, January, February and march except in the case of
emergency;
Section 8. Exceptions
This ordinance does not apply to motor vehicles parked in prohibited areas for the following reasons:
(a) Mechanical problems or breakdowns;
(b) Emergency situations;
(c) Maintenance, construction, repair or installation of utilities or the public way by any State or
municipal agency or utility company.
Section 9. Penalty
Any person found in violation of this Ordinance by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a
fine of not more than twenty-five (25) dollars nor less than ten (10) dollars. Persons charged with
violating this ordinance may waive court action by payment of a fee of five (5) dollars within seven (7)
calendar days after receiving notice of the violation. Any such waiver and payment of fees shall be
processed through the local Town Clerk.
Section 10. Declaration of an obstruction in the public way
Any motor vehicle parked upon the public way of Main Street in such a place or manner which is
prohibited by this Ordinance, or during any parking ban declared by the Municipal Officers or their
designee (provided that a notice of such ban has been given at least four (4) hours prior to the ban to
the public by notification to a representative of a radio station or television station serving the area), is
hereby declared to be an obstruction in the public way and a menace to the safety of the traveling
public.
Section 11. Authority to tow and impound motor vehicles
Any parked motor vehicle which constitutes an obstruction under Section 8 of this Ordinance may, at
the request and under the direction of the Municipal Officers or their designee, be towed to a suitable
garage or storage space and impounded therein until all towing and storage fees are paid. The towing
charge shall directly reimburse the actual cost of towing services and the storage fee shall be five (5)
dollars per day for each day the motor vehicle is impounded.
When any motor vehicle is towed pursuant to this Ordinance, the following procedure shall be followed:
1. Notice shall be sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle by regular first class mail,
postage prepaid, within twenty-four (24) hours following the tow; and
2. The Notice shall contain the following information – registration number and a brief description
of the motor vehicle; name and address of the person or company who performed the tow;
location where the vehicle is stored; the provision (s) of the Ordinance which were violated and
resulted in the tow; and the applicable towing fee and storage fee.
Section 12. Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Municipal Officers or their duly appointed designee. Violations
of this Ordinance shall be traffic infractions and shall be prosecuted, if necessary, in the Somerset
County District Court.
Section 13. Severability
In the event that any portion of this Ordinance is found by a Court to be in valid, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 14. Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective October 1, 1994
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
OBSCENITY ORDINANCE
Section 1 – Definitions.
1. As used in this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A. “Obscene” means material or a performance that:
(1) the average person, applying comtemporary community
standards, would find that taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest in sex;
(2) depicts or describes:
(a) patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including sexual intercourse, sodomy, and
sexual bestiality; or
(b) patently offensive representations or descriptions of
masturbation, excretory functions, sadism, masochism,
lewd exhibition of the genitals, the male or female genitals
in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state or a device designed
and marketed as useful primarily for stimulation of the
human genital organs; and
(3) Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
B. “Material” means anything tangible that is capable of being used or
adapted to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading,
observation, sound, or in any other manner, but does not include an actual
three-dimensional obscene device.
C. “Performance” means a play, motion picture, dance, or other exhibition
performed before an audience.
D. “Patently offensive” means so offensive on its face as to be intolerable to
the average person, applying contemporary community standards.
E. “Prurient interest in sex” means a shameful or morbid interest in sex..
F. “Promote” means to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate,
present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
G. “Wholesale promote” means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail,
deliver, transfer, transmit, publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to
offer or agree to do the same for purpose of resale.
H. “Obscene device” means a device including a dildo or artificial vagina,
designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human
genital organs.
2. If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this section
are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully included herein,
this declaration shall not invalidate this section as to other patently offensive
sexual conduct included herein.
Section 2 – Obscenity.
1. A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, he wholesale
promotes or possesses with intent to wholesale promote any obscene material or
obscene device.
2. An offense under Subsection 1. of this section is punishable by a penalty of not
less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day an offense under subsection 1.
continues shall be a separate offense










NORRIDGEWOCK PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS
ACCEPTED BY THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN 07/11/2002
SECTION I. ESTABLISHMENT
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Norridgewock is created and constituted
under the provisions of Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 3001 and a July1, 1976
Special Town Meeting by a favorable vote on Warrant Article 3.
SECTION II. NAME
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Norridgewock shall consist be named
identically the Norridgewock Planning Board and The Planning Board of the
Town of Norridgewock and will be hereinafter referred to as the Board.
SECTION III. MEMBERSHIP
A. Membership in the Planning Board shall consist of seven residents of the Town
elected by a vote at Town Meeting to serve staggered three-year terms.
B. Vacancies may occur due to resignation, death, or inability to serve. Vacancies
shall be referred to the Board of Selectmen for appointment of a successor for
the remainder of the term vacated.
SECTION IV. DUTIES
A. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided
by municipal ordinance and state statute, including but not limited to:
1. Flood Plain Management Ordinance.
2. Land Subdivisions Ordinance
3. Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
4. Site Plan Review Ordinance
5. Airport Zoning Ordinance
6. Road Ordinance
7. Manufactured Housing Ordinance
B. To that end, the Board may seek assistance of the Code Enforcement Officer
and Special Consultants when so empowered and funded by the application fees
or request the same from the Board of Selectmen.
C. The Board shall submit an annual report to the Town for incorporation into the
Town Report.
D. The Board may recommend to the Board of Selectmen such legislative or
administrative actions as it determines are desirable including adoption,
amendment, or repeal of municipal plans, policies and ordinances.
E. The Board shall prepare an annual budget and submit it in a timely manner to
the Town Manager and the Board of Selectmen for approval by the voters at the
Town Meeting.
F. The Board may develop new or revise previously enacted Ordinances as state
statutes dictate or need arises and submit to the Board of Selectmen for
inclusion in the Town Meeting Warrant.
G. The Board shall familiarize itself with the Municipal and State plans, policies,
regulations, and procedures which affect the Board’s activities.
H. The Board may act in an advisory capacity to other offices of the Municipality
on matters of community growth and development.
I. Duties of the Members, when so directed by the Chairman, shall consist of but
not be limited to the following:
1. Act as liaison between a regular administrative body or official committee,
commission, board, district, council, department or society of the Town or
Board.
2. Sit on a standing or temporary committee of the Planning Board.
3. Attend all meetings of the Board unless properly excused by the Chairman.
4. Promote the activities of the Board to establish effective dialogue with
residents of Norridgewock and other communities.
5. Attend other meetings as a representative of the Board.
6. Do fieldwork when so indicated by circumstances regarding a project or
activity that comes before the Board or a committee of the Boards site visits,
attending educational or informational meetings of State Planning or other
agencies.
SECTION V. OFFICERS
A. Officers shall consist of Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary. At the
Board’s first meeting after elections of each year, officers shall be nominated
by a Board Member and a voice vote or show of hands shall be taken for their
election unless a secret ballot is requested by any member. Election shall be by
a majority vote.
B. Duties of Officers
1. Chairman
a. The Chairman shall preside at all regular meetings, special meetings and
all workshop and executive sessions. Conduct of the meetings shall be
consistent with Robert’s Rules of Order, except when Robert’s Rules of
Order are in conflict with these rules and regulations.
b. The Chairman may vote on any order of business.
c. The Chairman may establish and appoint members to committees of the
Board.
d. The Chairman may appoint members to act as a liaison between a
regular administrative body or official committee, commission, board,
district, council, department or society of the Town and the Board.
e. The Chairman shall be an ex-officio member of all committees of the
Board.
f. The Chairman or designated agent shall determine the order of items on
the agenda for any regular meeting of the Board. No items shall be in
order for action at any meeting unless such items are filed in the office
of the Town Clerk on or before 10:00 AM on the Thursday prior to the
regular meeting. An item not on the agenda may be acted on at a regular
meeting only with the unanimous approval of the Board.
g. The Chairman shall prepare meeting agendas and issue same in due time
before the scheduled meeting.
h. The Chairman or designee shall, with approval by the Board, submit an
annual report to the Town for incorporation into the Town Report.
i. The Chairman or designee may review all plans, applications, and
supporting documents prior to scheduling an item for discussion at a
Board meeting. The Chairman shall have the authority to require
additional information of an applicant when such is required by a Town
Ordinance or the Planning Board’s Site Plan Review. The Chairman or
designee may make a preliminary determination that an application,
plan, etc. is substantially complete prior to submitting the same to the
full Board.
j. The Chairman may request the assistance of the Code Enforcement
Officer to review and research materials for Board meetings.
2. Vice Chairman
a. The Vice Chairman shall preside at all meetings in the absence of the
Chairman.
b. The Vice Chairman shall have the same duties and authority as the
Chairman in the Chairman’s absence.
3. Secretary
a. The Secretary may act as Chairman in the absence of both the
Chairman and Vice Chairman.
b. The Secretary shall keep accurate minutes of all meetings.
c. The approved minutes for all Board meetings shall be filed in the
Town Office.
d. An approved copy of the minutes shall be given to the Board of
Selectmen.
4. If a majority of Board Members attend a meeting in the absence of the
Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary, they may elect a chairman pro-tem.
SECTION VI. COMMITTEES
A. If the Chairman of the Planning Board does not designate a Chairman of
committees appointed, the committee may select its own chairman. The
committee chairman will report the actions and status of the committee at a
time directed by the Board Chairman. All standing committee chairmen will
make at least a once a month status report to the Board at their regular
meeting.
B. Suggested Standing Committees:
1. Budget Committee
2. Ordinance Committee
3. Map Committee
SECTION VII. MEETINGS
A. The Board shall meet once each month at the Municipal Building, the day and
time of the start and finish of each meeting to be established annually at the
first meeting of the Board after the Annual Town Meeting. When a regular
meeting falls on a holiday or Election Day, the Board, with seven (7) days
notice to the public, may select another date for the regular meeting, The date
of any regular meeting may be changed by a majority vote of the Board, as long
as there still will be a regular meeting in that particular month.
B The Chairman, or Acting Chairman, may cancel a meeting if the majority of the
members are unable to attend.
C Quorum. A quorum shall be defined as a simple majority of the Board
members elected.
D Special Meetings. A special meeting of the Board may be called by the
Chairman or Acting Chairman or majority of the Board with notice to the
public.
E Conflict of Interest. No member shall vote on any matter in which he/she has a
conflict as defined in State Statutes. Any question of whether a member shall
be disqualified from voting on a particular issue shall be decided by a majority
of the Board members present and voting, except the member being challenged.
The minutes shall show that the member abstained from voting on an issue.
F. Regular meetings may follow the following format:
1. Call to order by the Chairman.
2. Salute to the Flag.
3. Minutes of the previous meeting revised and/or accepted.
4. Review of Selectmen’s minutes.
5. Correspondence.
6. Reports
7. Unfinished business.
8. New business.
9. Announcements/Discussion
10. Adjourn.
G. All meetings shall be adjourned by 9:00 PM regardless of whether business is
completed. The Chairman may entertain a motion to continue for an additional
30 minutes.
SECTION VIII. RULES OF CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
A. Board business shall be conducted in accordance with Maine Statutes, Town
Ordinances, Robert’s Rules of Order, and the following rules of conduct of
meeting:
1. Scope of Rules. These rules govern the practice, procedure and conduct of
public hearings held by the Board. These rules shall be liberally construed
so as to enable the Board to accomplish its duties and responsibilities in a
just, speedy and expeditious manner. Where good cause appears, the Board
may permit deviation from these rules insofar as it may find compliance
therewith to be impracticable or unnecessary.
2. Notice of Public Hearings. Notice of all public hearings shall be published
in a local newspaper, the date of publication to be at least ten (10) days
before such hearing, and the notice shall be posted in at least three
prominent places at least seven (7) days before such hearing. The notice
shall set forth the subject of the hearing, the time, date and the place of the
hearing.
3. Presiding Officer. The presiding officer at all public hearings shall be the
Chairman, Vice Chairman, the Secretary, or in their absence, a member of
the Board who is selected by those members present at the hearing. The
presiding officer shall have the authority to:
a. Rule upon issues of evidence
b. Regulate the course of the hearing
c. Rule upon issues of procedure
d. Take such other actions as may be ordered by the Board or
that are necessary for the efficient and orderly conduct of the
hearing which are consistent with these rules and applicable
statutes.
e. Administer oaths or affirmations as necessary.
4. General Conduct of the Public Hearing
a. Opening Statement. The presiding officer shall open the
hearing by describing in general terms the purpose of the
hearing and the general procedures governing its conduct.
b. Record of Testimony. The Board shall make a record of the
hearing by an appropriate means. If a sound recording is
made, any person shall have the opportunity to listen to the
recording at such reasonable times and at such a place as may
be designated by the Board.
c. Witnesses. Witnesses shall be required to state for the record
their name, residence address, business address, business or
professional affiliation, the nature of their interest in the
hearing, and whom they represent.
d. Continuances. All hearings conducted pursuant to these rules
may be continued for reasonable cause and reconvened from
time to time and from place to place as may be determined by
a majority of the Planning Board members present.
Continuances may be granted at the request of any person
participating in such hearing or if it is determined that a
continuance is necessary. This provision shall not be
interpreted in such a fashion as to cause unreasonable or
needless delay in any hearing.
e. Reconvened Meeting. All orders for continuances shall
specify the time and place at which such hearing will be
reconvened. The Board or the presiding officer shall notify
interested persons in such manner as is appropriate to insure
that reasonable notice will be given of the time and place of
such reconvened hearing. Notice to the public continuance
shall be the same as for the public hearing.
f. Regulation of Certain Devices. The placement of television
cameras, still cameras, motion picture cameras, microphones
at Board hearings, or other audio-visual device used for the
purpose of recording the proceedings thereof, may be
regulated by the Chairman or the presiding officer so as to
avoid interference with the orderly conduct of the hearing.
5. Evidence
a. Evidence which is relevant and material to the subject matter of
the hearing of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent individuals in the conduct of their affairs shall be
admissible. Evidence which is irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious shall be excluded.
b. Official Notice. The Board may, at any time, take notice of
judicially cognizable fact, generally recognized facts of
common knowledge to the general public, and physical,
technical, or scientific facts within the specialized knowledge
of the Board.
c. Documentary and Real Evidence. All documents, materials,
and objects offered as evidence shall, if accepted, be numbered
or otherwise identified. Documentary evidence may be
received in the form of copies or excerpts if the original is not
readily available. The Board or presiding officer may require,
after prior oral or written reasonable notice, that any party
offering any documentary or photographic evidence shall
provide the Board with an appropriate number of copies of
such documents or photographs, unless such documents or
photographs are determined to be of such form, size, or
character as not to be reasonably susceptible of reproduction.
shall be made available during the course of the hearing for
public examination and explanation. All such evidence shall
also be available for public examination at a place designated
by the Board during normal business hours.
d. Objections. All objections to rulings of the presiding officer
regarding evidence or procedure shall be timely made during
the course of the hearing. If, after the close of the hearing and
during its deliberations, the Board determines that any ruling of
the presiding officer was in error, it may reopen the hearing or
take such other action as it deems appropriate to correct such
error.
6. Testimony, Questions, Rebuttal and Submissions
a. The applicant shall testify first, and may introduce
documentary, photographic, and real evidence, including
studies, reports, analyses, and other information theretofore
compiled by the staff or consultants for the purpose of the
hearing.
b. The Board members, staff, and consultants may then present
their testimony and evidence.
c. Federal, State, and other governmental agencies and
representatives may testify and present evidence at the
conclusion of all Board testimony.
d. Anyone else present may then testify in turn.
e. Any person intending to participate in the hearing will be
given preference in the order of presentation within subparagraph
d above by informing the Board before the day of
the hearing of the desire to testify.
7. Questioning of Witnesses.
a. Board members, staff, consultants, and counsel may ask
questions of witnesses at any time. At the conclusion of the
testimony of each witness, all persons shall have the
opportunity to question such witnesses through the presiding
officer or directly, as may be determined by the presiding
officer. Such questioning shall be conducted in the following
order:
i.Board members, staff, and consultants.
ii.Federal, State, and other governmental representatives
beginning in the order of appearance of those giving
testimony.
iii.All others, beginning in the order of appearance of those
giving direct testimony.
b. The presiding officer may refuse to permit irrelevant,
immaterial or repetitious questions, or other questions which
do not advance or serve the purpose of the hearing and shall
state the basis for such refusal on the record when requested
to do so by the party asking the question.
c. The presiding officer may require that such questioning be
conducted at the conclusion of the testimony of each category
of witness rather than at the conclusion of the testimony of
each category of witness rather than at the conclusion of the
testimony of each witness. The presiding officer may impose
reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses to be heard
and on the nature and length of their testimony and
questioning.
8. Rebuttal Testimony. At the conclusion of all direct testimony and
questioning of each witness or category of witnesses as determined by
the presiding officer, all persons participating in such hearing shall have
the opportunity to submit rebuttal testimony in the order provided
above. Rebuttal testimony shall be limited to those matters which were
the subject of direct testimony, and no new subject matter may be
introduced into such a hearing by way of rebuttal.
9. Varying Order of Appearance. When circumstances warrant, the
Chairman or presiding officer may vary the order in which testimony is
given or witnesses questioned.
10. Conclusion of Hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, no further
evidence or testimony will be allowed into the record except as
provided in Paragraph 11 below.
11. Leaving the Record Open. Upon such request made prior to or during
the course of the hearing, the presiding officer may permit persons
participating in any hearing pursuant to these regulations to file
proposed findings, determinations, or other written statements with the
Board for inclusion in the record after the conclusion of the hearing
within such time and upon such notification to the other participants as
the presiding officer may require. This section is in no way to be
interpreted so as to prevent the Board members, its staff, or consultants
from submitting proposals to the Board at any time.
12. Reopening of Hearing. At any time prior to final decision, the Board or
the Chairman may reopen the record for further proceedings consistent
with these rules, provided, however, that the Chairman shall give notice
of such further proceedings to the participants and the public in such
manner as is deemed appropriate.
13. Miscellaneous.
a. Record. The record of the hearing shall consist of the
Planning Board’s recording of the hearing, all exhibits, all
briefs, proposed findings and rulings thereon, any proposed
findings of fact, and conclusions of the presiding officer. Such
record shall be reported to the Planning Board for its decision.
b. Copies of Record. Any participant may obtain a copy of the
record from the Planning Board upon payment to the Town the
cost of transcription, reproduction and postage.
c. Forms. All motions, petitions, and briefs, and to the extent
practicable, written testimony, filed with the Planning Board,
except for documents not susceptible of reproduction in the
manner herein provided, or for other good cause shown, shall
be typewritten or printed on white opaque paper 8 ½” x 11” in
size, bound on the left margin. Typed matter shall be double
spaced. The first page of each document shall be headed by
“THE PLANNING BOARD OF THE TOWN OF
NORRIDGEWOCK” and shall have a caption with the title of
the hearing, the title of the document, the name of the person
or organization submitting the document, and the date upon
which document was compiled.
SECTION IX. FILING FEES TO COVER PUBLIC HEARING EXPENSES:
A. The fees charged for an application under the various review requirements are
expected to cover public hearing expenses.
SECTION X. AMENDMENTS TO RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A Amendments to the Rules and Regulations may be made at any time by the
vote of the majority of the elected members of the Planning and become
effective upon approval by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION XI. WHEN EFFECTIVE
A. These Rules and Regulations become effective immediately upon the vote of the
majority of the members of the Planning Board and the approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION XII. WAIVERS
A. Any portion of these Rules and Regulations may be waived on a case-by-case
basis by a unanimous vote of the Planning Board members present.
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK ORDINANCE
FOR
RESTRICTING VEHICLE WEIGHT ON POSTED TOWN ROADS
AND
TEMPORARY CLOSING OF TOWN ROADS
Section 1. Purpose and Authority
The purpose of this ordinance is to prevent damage to town roads and bridges in the
Town of Norridgewock which may be caused by vehicles or excessive weight, to lessen
safety hazards and the risk of injury to the traveling public, to extend the life expectancy
of town roads and bridges, and to reduce the public expense of their maintenance and
repair.
This ordinance e is adopted by the municipal officers pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
Subsection 3009 and 29-A M.R.S.A. Subsections 902 and 1011 after a public hearing.
Section 2. Definitions
The definitions contained in Title 29 M.R.S.A. shall govern the construction of words
contained in this ordinance. Any words not defined therein shall be given their common
and ordinary meaning.
Section 3. Restrictions and Notices
The municipal officers may temporarily close town roads and either permanently or
seasonally impose such restrictions on the gross registered weight of vehicles as may, in
their judgment, be necessary to protect the traveling public and prevent abuse of town
roads and designate the town roads and bridges to which the restrictions shall apply.
Whenever notice has been posted as provided herein, no person may thereafter operate
any vehicle with a gross registered weight in excess of the restriction during any
applicable time period on any road or bridge so posted unless otherwise exempt as
provided herein.
The notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: the name of the
road or bridge, the gross registered weight limit, the time period during which the
restriction applies, the date on which the notice was posted, and the signatures of the
municipal officers.
The notice shall be conspicuously posted at each end of the restricted portion of the
road or bridge in a location clearly visible from the travel way. Whenever a restriction
expires or is lifted, the notices shall be removed wherever posted. Whenever a restriction
is revised or extended, existing notices shall be removed and replaced with new notices.
No person may remove, obscure or otherwise tamper with any notice so posted except
as provided herein.
Section 4. Exemptions
The following vehicles are exempt from this ordinance:
(a) any two-axle vehicle while delivering home heating fuel;
(b) any vehicle while engaged in highway maintenance or repair under the direction
of the State or Town;
(c) any emergency vehicle (such as firefighting apparatus or ambulances) while
responding to an emergency;
(d) any school transportation vehicle while transporting students;
(e) any public utility vehicle while providing emergency services or repairs; and
(f) any vehicle whose owner or operator holds a valid permit from the municipal
officers as provided herein.
Section 5. Permits
The owner or operator of any vehicle not otherwise exempt as provided herein may
apply in writing to the municipal officers for a permit to operate on a temporarily closed
or posted road or bridge notwithstanding the restriction. The municipal officers may
issue a permit only upon all of the following findings:
(a) no other route is reasonably available to the applicant;
(b) it is a matter of economic necessity and not mere convenience that the applicant
use the road or bridge ; and
(c) the applicant has tendered cash, a bond or other suitable security running to the
town in an amount sufficient, in their judgment, to repair any damage to the road
or bridge which may reasonably result from the applicant’s use of same.
Even if the municipal officers make the foregoing findings, they need not issue a
permit if they determine the applicant’s use of the road or bridge could reasonably be
expected to create or aggravate a safety hazard or cause substantial damage. They may
also limit the number of permits issued or outstanding as may, in their judgment, be
necessary to preserve and protect the highways.
In determining whether to issue a permit, the municipal officers shall consider the
following factors:
(a) the gross registered weight of the vehicle;
(b) the current and anticipated condition of the way or bridge;
(c) the number and frequency of vehicle trips proposed;
(d) the cost and availability of materials and equipment for repairs;
(e) the extent of use by other exempt vehicles; and
(f) such other circumstances as may, in their judgment, may be relevant.
The municipal officers may issue permits subject to reasonable conditions, including
but not limited to restrictions on the actual load weight and the number or frequency of
vehicle trips, which shall be clearly noted on the permit.
Section 6. Administration and Enforcement
This ordinance shall be administered and may be enforced by the municipal officers or
the Road Commissioner.
Section 7. Penalties
Any violation of this ordinance shall be civil infraction subject to a fine of not less
than $250.00 nor more than $1000.00. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
In addition to any fine, the municipal officers may seek legal action restitution for the
cost of repairs to any damaged way or bridge and reasonable attorney fees and costs.
Prosecution shall be in the name of the Town and shall be brought in the Maine
District Court.
Section 8. Amendments
This ordinance may be amended by the municipal officers at any properly noticed
meeting.
Section 9. Severability; Effective Date
In the event any portion of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal officers
at any properly noticed meeting.
Town of Norridgewock
Board of Selectmen
June C Meres
Zane G Libby
John Doucette
David Lyman
Gloria J Frederick
Date of Enactment: June 16, 1993
Town of Norridgewock
ROAD OPENING ORDINANCE
June 10, 2014
5/21/14
Section 1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to require a permit prior to construction work which involves
excavating a public road and also to insure that such work is completed in conformance with
generally accepted road construction standards.
Section 2. Authority.
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to State law, Title 30-A Section 3001.
Section 3. Permit Required.
Any person, firm, contractor or utility must obtain a Road Opening Permit prior to excavation of
any town street and/or way by filling out a street opening application. This application will be
made available at the Town Office.
After the application for the permit is completed, the contractor will review the area to be
excavated with the Road Commissioner or his/her designee. The owner of the connecting
property, as well as his/her contractor, jointly and/or severally shall be the responsible party.
Permits shall only be issued from April 1st to October 30th. Emergency work during the winter
season (November 1st to March 31st) may be approved with a winter maintenance plan and fee.
Permits shall also be required for all new driveway entrances onto town roads. Please see the
Town of Norridgewock, Road and Entrance Design Standards Ordinance for details.
Town of Norridgewock Departments shall be exempt from this ordinance.
Section 4. Fees and Deposits.
The Norridgewock Board of Selectmen shall have the ability to adjust the fees listed below at
any time, as market conditions deem necessary, thus ensuring the appropriate level of protection
for the Town of Norridgewock’s public roads.
Fee
Before the permit is issued, a non-refundable administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be
paid to the Town of Norridgewock.
Deposit
For excavation and related construction work, the deposit fees shall be as follows:
Pavement Repair – 2.5” = $ 10 per Square Foot
3.0” = $ 12 per Square Foot
Town of Norridgewock
ROAD OPENING ORDINANCE
June 10, 2014
5/21/14
4.0” = $ 14 per Square Foot
Curb Replacement $ 10 per Linear Foot
Driveway entrance Same fee as State of Maine
**Large scale non-residential projects ~The contractor/owner can request that a portion of the
deposit fee be covered by providing a performance bond in the amount of the work and
establishing an escrow account in the amount, at minimum, of 10% of the work.
The deposit fees will be returned as provided for in Section 8 unless the contractor/owner
decides to have the Town provide the pavement in which case the entire deposit amount will be
retained.
An additional deposit shall be required for work completed during the winter season (November
1st to March 31st). This winter maintenance additional fee shall be $5.00 per sq. foot of
excavated area.
Quasi-municipal utilities: Norridgewock Water District shall be exempt from Deposit Fees but
are required to pay the permit fee and any costs associated with project inspections.
Section 5. Insurance
The contractor/owner shall provide proof that proper insurance coverage is in place prior to the
start of work. This would include but are not limited to General Liability, Property Damage,
Workers Compensation, Auto Insurance and Public Liability Insurance of not less than
$500,000. All policies shall name the Town of Norridgewock as additionally insured.
Section 6. Excavation and Backfilling Requirements.
The following requirements must be adhered to unless exceptions or additions are noted on the
permit:
(1) Contractor will provide proper traffic and safety control at all times. The Town of
Norridgewock may require a Traffic Control Plan.
(2) The Town may require the contractor to hire a law enforcement agency for traffic control
on certain town roads.
(3) Unless otherwise approved, one-way traffic will be maintained at all times. With
approval from the Road Commissioner, streets may be closed to all traffic for brief
periods of time. On those occasions, the contractor/owner shall notify the Somerset
County Communications Center, MSAD #54 Bus Garage if school is in session, and the
Fire Chief.
Town of Norridgewock
ROAD OPENING ORDINANCE
June 10, 2014
5/21/14
(4) If work cannot be completed in one day, the contractor/owner shall be required to install
and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for the safety of the general public.
The barriers and warning devices shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition
of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(5) Pavement will be excavated by saw cutting along all lines.
(6) Installation of any sewer lines shall be in accordance with the Town’s Sewer Use
Ordinance.
(7) All backfilling of trenches or excavated areas shall be under the supervision of the Road
Commissioner or their designee.
(8) Excavated material, if suitable, may be used as backfill if approved by the Road
Commissioner or designee.
(9) The remainder of backfill shall be of granular material having stones no larger than four
(4) inches in diameter and shall be compacted every twelve inch layer.
(10) No pavement will be placed without prior approval of the Road Commissioner or
designee, and shall match existing thickness or 3 ½” of existing pavement. Whichever is
greater.
(11) Any adjacent or adjoining pavement damaged by contractor will be cut out and replaced
as so directed by the Road Commissioner or designee.
(12) It shall be the contractors (contractor/owner) responsibility to comply with the latest
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards for all construction
work.
Section 7. Completion of Work
The contractor/owner will be required to execute and complete the work in a diligent
manner. The completion date to shall be determined before permit issued. Completion dates
may be extended, upon written request to the Road Commissioner due to inclement weather or
unforeseen circumstances.
Section 8. Acceptance.
(1) Except as noted in (2) below, upon review and acceptance by the Road Commissioner,
and after 90 days from the completion of the work, 90% of the deposit shall be refunded.
If any part of the work is found to be defective, the contractor/owner shall be given a 24
hour deadline to correct the problem(s). If the corrective work is not completed within
Town of Norridgewock
ROAD OPENING ORDINANCE
June 10, 2014
5/21/14
that time period, the deposit shall be forfeited and the town authorized to complete the
work.
(2) To ensure quality of work and warranty of placed materials. All non-residential work
meaning and intending work not for the benefit of a single private Norridgewock citizen
will be subject to performance bonds and/or retainage of 20% of the deposit for a length
of time equal to a minimum of 1 year from date of completion. Remaining 10% deposit
to be returned upon review and acceptance by the Road Commissioner after the 1 year
period.
Section 9. Exceptions.
Any emergency for street or road excavation shall not need an opening permit prior to
work providing that the Emergency event occurs after hours. The Road Commissioner or such
designee shall be notified as soon as possible, and the contractor/owner will secure an after-thefact
permit pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance.
Section 10. Penalty.
Any contractor/owner found in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not
more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), exclusive of the town’s costs and attorney’s fees
that shall be recoverable to the town. The Town of Norridgewock may, in addition to any civil
penalties, costs, and attorney’s fees, be paid all its resulting and compensatory damages, costs
and expenses related to any violation of this article.
Section 11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, clause, paragraph, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall
be deemed to be a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Whenever this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive
provision shall control. This Ordinance is designed to complement applicable State
laws and Town of Norridgewock Ordinances.
Section 12. Effective Date
This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Town of Norridgewock and may
be amended in accordance with the Town requirements for amending ordinances.
Effective Date: June 10, 2014
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
ROAD AND ENTRANCE DESIGN STANDARDS
ORDINANCE
SECTION 1: TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the Road Design Standards Ordinance of the Town
of Norridgewock, Maine and will be herein after referred to as “this Ordinance”.
SECTION 2: COVERAGES
Road
Major Private Road
Minor Private Road
Common Driveway
Driveway
Temporary Field/Woods Entrance
Permanent Field/Woods Entrance
SECTION 3: AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of MRSA Title 30-A, Section
3001.
SECTION 4: PURPOSE
A. To establish minimum specifications for the design and construction of public and
private roads and entrances.
B. To establish minimum requirements for a road to qualify for Town acceptance.
C. To ensure that safe and sufficient access is provided to all new development within
the Town.
SECTION 5: APPLICABILITY
A. This Ordinance shall apply to the design and construction of all public and private
roads and entrances.
B. Nothing shall prohibit a person from designing and building an access way to meet
a category in excess of the current anticipated use.
C. The Town of Norridgewock will be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance
when the Town undertakes reconstruction of existing Town roads.
SECTION 6: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance supercedes the existing Road Ordinance of the Town of Norridgewock
(adopted by voters on 03/02/1992) takes effect upon enactment by the Town meeting.
March 5, 2007 date of Town Meeting.
SECTION 7: CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive
provision shall control. This Ordinance is designed to complement applicable State
laws and Norridgewock Ordinances.
SECTION 8: VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid such decision shall to invalidate any other section or provision of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 9: AMENDMENTS
An amendment to this Ordinance may only be initiated by a majority of a Town
Meeting. The Board of Selectmen shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed
amendments prior to the Town Meeting.
SECTION 10: AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at
reasonable cost to be charged to the person making the request. Notice of availability
of this Ordinance shall be posted in the Town Office.
SECTION 11: APPLICATION FORMS
The Town of Norridgewock shall develop application forms to be used by all
applicants seeking entrance permits.
SECTION 12: APPLICATION FEE
All applications for approval of entrance and road permits shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable fee, determined annually by the Board of Selectmen and made payable
to the Town of Norridgewock.
SECTION 13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. The standards contained in this Ordinance apply to all public and private roads
and
entrances within the Town initiated after the effective date of this Ordinance.
B. The Road Commissioner or his agent is authorized to enforce specific provisions
of this Ordinance as they apply to review and permits.
C. After the complete application has been received, the Road Commissioner or his
agent shall be responsible for issuing all Access/Driveway Entrance permits as
prescribed in this Ordinance; and for conducting inspections as authorized by this
Ordinance.
D. The Planning Board shall be responsible for monitoring the use of this Ordinance
as necessary, for ensuring that this Ordinance is properly enforced and for
administering the road acceptance application process.
SECTION 14: ROADS AND ACCESS CATEGORIES
All new developments and buildings, located in the Town of Norridgewock, shall have
access to a public way provided by one or more road and access categories described
below. The type of access shall be selected according to the number of dwelling units,
current or proposed. All ways, regardless of whether they are proposed for public
acceptance shall conform to the minimum standards established in this Ordinance.
A. Temporary Field or Woods Entrance: An entrance for temporary access to
property. A temporary field or woods entrance may not serve a residential
dwelling and must be removed within two (2) years.
B. Permanent Field or Woods Entrance: A permanent entrance for access to property.
A Permanent field or woods entrance may not serve a residential dwelling.
C. Driveway: May serve no more than one (1 residential dwelling. A common
driveway is not eligible for public acceptance.
D. Common Driveway: May serve no more than our (4) residential dwellings. A
Common driveway is not eligible for public acceptance.
E. Minor Private Road: May provide access for up to ten (10) residential dwellings.
A minor private road may be eligible for public acceptance if it meets all the
standards for a road.
F Major Private Road: May provide access for ten or more residential dwellings. A
major private road may be eligible for public acceptance if it meets all the
standards for a road.
G. Road: May provide access for residential dwellings or commercial properties. A
road may be eligible for public acceptance if it meets all the standards set forth
herein.
H. Public Road: May provide access for residential dwellings or commercial
properties. A public road has been accepted by the Town.
Mobile Home Park roads must follow this Ordinance.
Future Upgrades: All new roads and access ways constructed after the effective date of
this Ordinance may not serve new development that would exceed the capacity of the
road or access category n which they were constructed, unless the road or access way is
upgraded as necessary. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be implied to mean that the Town
of Norridgewock is required to upgrade a road or access way to meet any new
development or traffic demand.
SECTION 15: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
A. General Requirements: All Entrances
1. If culverts are required, they will be purchased and delivered to site at owner’s
expense. The Road Commissioner, or his agent will determine the size
(diameter, length and type) of the culvert. Culverts will meet the State of
Maine, Department of Transportation Specifications. Culverts will be installed
and maintained by the Town where they are within the right of way of a Public
Road. The Town shall size culverts to meet the Maine Department of
Transportation and Maine Department of Environmental Protection standards.
2. All drainage features at the intersection of the existing Town roads shall be in
accordance with Maine Best Management Practices and shall be approved by
the Road Commissioner or his agent.
3. The applicant shall obtain all necessary federal and state permits.
Description Temporary Permanent Driveway Common
Field Field Driveway
Entrance Entrance
Application fee Yes Yes Yes Yes
Inspections Yes Yes Yes Yes
Right of Way N/A N/A N/A N/A
Travel Way N/A N/A 16’ 18’
Maximum Grade within 75 feet of intersection:
3% 3% 3% 3%
Intersection 90 degrees 90 degrees 90 degrees 90 degrees
Maximum Length N/A N/A N/A N/A
Erosion Control Yes Yes Yes Yes
Shoulder Width N/A N/A N/A N/A
Base Gravel N/A N/A N/A N/A
Surface Gravel N/A N/A N/A N/A
Roadway Crown N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum Grade N/A N/A N/A N/A
All Drives and Field Entrances, temporary and permanent, shall be so located that
vehicles approaching or using the entrance will be able to obtain adequate sight distance
in both directions along the road or to maneuver safely and without interference with
traffic. The applicant shall specify the proposed sight distance for all entrances in the
application for review by the Town.
B. General Requirements: Roads
Roads shall conform to the Maine Department of Transportation’s Highway
Design Guide and Standard Specifications and the requirements set forth herein.
1. Design Requirements:
A. Connection to Existing Roads: When a proposed road for a
development is expected to generate average daily traffic of 400 trips
per day or more, it will have at least two road connections with
existing public roads or with roads on an approved subdivision plan for
which performance guarantees have been filed and accepted. Any road
with an average daily traffic of 400 trips per day, will have at least two
road connections to existing public road or roads on an approved
subdivision plan for which performance guarantees have been filed and
accepted.
B. Design Standards: The following design standards apply according to
street classification.
NOTE: These design standards are the recommended Minimum.
DESCRIPTION ROAD MAJOR MINOR INDUSTRIAL
PRIVATE PRIVATE COMMERCIAL
Right of Way Width 60’ 50’ 40’ 60’
Traveled Way Width 24’ 20’ 18’ 24’
Shoulder Width (each side) 2’ 2’ NA 3’
Sidewalk Width 5’ NA NA 5’
Minimum Grade .5% .5% NA .5%
Maximum Grade* 6% 8% NA 5%
Minimum Centerline
Radius Without Superlev. 280’ 280’ 175’ 400’
With Superlev. 175’ 175’ 110’ 300’
Roadway Crown* ¼ inch per foot *** ¼ inch per foot
Minimum Ditch Back Slope 2 to 1 2 to 1 NA 2 to 1
Minimum Ditch Fill Slope 3 to 1 3 to 1 NA 3 to 1
Ditch Bottom Elevation
Below Centerline 36” 36” NA 36”
Minimum Angle of road
Intersections 90 degrees 75 degrees 75 degrees 90 degrees
Maximum Grade within 75’
Of Intersection 3% 3% NA 3%
Curb Radii at Intersection 25’ 20’ NA 30’
Minimum right of way Radii
At intersections 10’ 10’ 10’ 20’
Minimum drainage ditch /slope Desirable minimum gradient of 1.0%. Never less than 0.5%.
NOTES: *Minimum grade may be exceeded for a length of 100’ or less.
** Roadway crown is per foot of lane width for paved road.
***Gravel surfaces shall have a minimum crown of ½” per foot of lane width.
****Road intersection angles shall be as close to 90 degrees as feasible but no less than the listed angle.
*****The dimension should be based on the turning radii of expected commercial vehicles, but no less
than 30’.
C. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right of
way.
D. Dead-End Streets: Dead end streets shall be no more than 1000’ long.
In addition to the design standards above, dead-end streets shall be
constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following
requirements for radii: Property line: 60’; outer edge of pavement;
50’; Inner edge of pavement: 34”. Where the cul-de-sac is in a
wooded area prior to development, a stand of trees can be maintained
with the center of the cul-de-sac. Dead-end roads may also provide a
permanent “T” or hammer head turn around in lieu of a cul-de-sac.
Such a turn around shall be 35’ in length and 20’ in width at a
minimum. The Board my require the reservation of a twenty-foot
easement in line with the street to provide continuation of pedestrian
traffic or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require the
reservation of a fifty-foot easement in line with the street to provide
continuation of the road where future sub division is possible.
If a waiver is requested for dead-end street lengths longer than 1000’
the Board may require additional turn-arounds. Waivers for dead-end
streets than 1000’ for commercial or industrial purposes will be
evaluated based on estimated traffic (trips per day).
E. Grades, Intersections and Sight Distances:
a. Grades of all roads shall conform in general to the terrains, so that
cut and fill are minimized while maintaining the grade standards of
this Ordinance.
b. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves in order
to provide the following minimum stopping sight distances based
on the street design speed.
Design Speed (MPH) 20 25 30 35
125’ 150’ 200’ 250’
Stopping sight distance shall be calculated with a height of eye at 3-
1/2’ and the height of object at ½’ from the pavement surface.
c. Where new street intersections or driveway curb-cuts are
proposed, sight distances, as measured along the road onto
which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the posted
speed limit and conform to the table below. Sight distances
shall be measured from the driver’s seat of a vehicle
standing on that portion of the exit with the front of the
vehicle a minimum of 10’ behind the curb line or edge of
shoulder, with the height of the eye 3.5’, to the top of an
object 4.25’ above the pavement.
Posted Speed Limit (mph) 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
Sight Distance 250’ 300’ 350’ 400’ 450’ 500’ 550’
For non-level roadway sections, sight distances should
Be adjusted according to the following chart to compensate
For grade effect:
Increase for Downgrades Decrease for Upgrades
Design Speed Correction in Distance Design Speed Correction in Distance
(mph) (in feet) (mph) (in feet)
3% 6% 9% 3% 6% 9%
30 10 20 30 28 10 30
40 20 40 70 36 10 20 30
50 30 70 44 20 30
Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth
And sight obstructions, including ground excavation, to achieve
The required visibility.
4. Cross (four cornered) street intersections shall be avoided
Insofar as possible, except as shown on the Comprehensive Plan
or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum distance of
125’ shall be maintained between centerlines of minor roads and 200’
between collectors or a collector and minor street.
F. Sidewalks: Where sidewalks are to be installed they shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
a. Sidewalks shall be located a minimum of 5’ from the curb facing or
edge of shoulder if the street is not curbed.
b Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5’ in width.
c. Bituminous Sidewalks:
i. The “subbase” aggregate course shall be less than 12” thick after
compaction.
ii The hot bituminous pavement surface shall be MDOT Plant Mix
Grade D constructed in two lifts each no less than 1”
compaction.
d Portland Concrete Sidewalks:
i The “subbase” aggregate shall be no less than 12” thick after
compaction.
ii The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with 6”
square, number 10 wire mesh and shall be no less than 4” thick.
G. Curbs: Where curbs are to be installed they shall meet the following
minimum standards:
1. Granite curbs shall be installed on a thoroughly compacted base
of 6” gravel.
2. Bituminous curbs shall be installed on the base course of
pavement. The specified traveled way width shall be measured
between the curbs.
SECTION 16: MATERIAL STANDARDS
A. Minimum material thickness shall meet the specifications in the table below,
after compaction.
STREET MATERIALS MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
ROAD MAJOR PRIVATE MINOR PRIVATE INDUSTRIAL
ROAD ROAD COMMERCIAL
Aggregate Sub-base Course (Maximum stone size of 6”)
With no base 21” 18” 15” 24”
With base course 18” 15” 12” 20”
Crushed Aggregate Base Course (if necessary)
3” 3” 3” 4”
Hot Bituminous Pavement Surface Course
Total Thickness 3.5” 3” 5”
Surface Course 1.5 “ 1.25” NA 1.5”
Base Course 2” 1.75” NA 3.5”
Gravel Surface Course 4“ 4” 3” 6”
The Town may also require sub grade geotextile fabric to be installed under the
Sub-Base where sub grade soils are excessively wet or have a high clay content.
B. Preparation:
1. Before any clearing has started on the right of way, the center line and
Side lines of the new road shall be staked or flagged at 50’ intervals.
2. Before grading is started, the area within the right of way necessary for
Construction of the traveled way, shoulders, drainage ways and utilities
shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable
material. All shallow ledge, large boulders and tree stumps shall be
removed from the cleared area.
3. All organic materials or other deleterious material shall be removed to a
depth of 2’ below the subgrade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall
also be removed to a depth of 2’ below the subgrade of the roadway. On
soils which have been identified by the Somerset County Soil
Conservation Service as not suitable for roadways, either the subsoil shall
be removed from the street site to a depth of 2’ below the subgrade and
replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate
subbase, or a MDOT approved stabilization geotextile may be used.
4. Except in a ledge cut, crossing of a stream or wetland, side slopes shall be
no steeper than a slope of 3’ horizontal to 1’ vertical, and shall be graded,
loamed, limed, fertilized and seeded according to the specifications of the
erosion and sedimentation control plan. Where a cut results in exposed
ledge, a side slope of no steeper than 4’ vertical to 1’ horizontal is
permitted.
C. Bases and Pavement
1. The Aggregate of Sub Base Course shall be sand or gravel durable
particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other
deleterious substances. The gradation of the part that passes a 3” square
mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
Sieve Designation % by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
.25” 25-70%
#40 0-30%
#200 0-07%
Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of rock exceeding
6” in any dimension.
2. If the Aggregate Subbase Course is found to be not fine-gradable
because larger stones, then a minimum of 3” of Aggregate Base course
shall be screened or crushed gravel of hard, durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay or other deleterious substances.
The gradation of the part that passed a 3” square mesh sieve shall meet
the following requirements:
Seive Designation % by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
.5” 45-70%
.25” 30-55%
#40 0-20%
#200 0-05%
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding 2” in
any dimension.
D. Pavement Joints: Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing
pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.
E. Pavements:
1. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the MDOT
specifications plant mix grade B with an aggregate size no more than 1”
maximum and a liquid asphalt content between 4.8% and 6% by weight
depending on aggregate characteristics. The pavement may be placed
between April 15th and October 30th, provided the air temperature in the
shade at the paving location is 35 degrees Fahrenheit or higher and the
surface to be paved is not frozen or unreasonably wet.
2. Minimum standards for the surface binder of pavement shall be the
MDOT specifications for plant mix grade C or D with an aggregate size
no more than .75” maximum and a liquid asphalt content between 5.8%
and 7.0% by weight depending on aggregate characteristics.
The pavement may be placed between April 15th and November 30th,
provided the air temperature in the shade at the paving location is 50
degrees Fahrenheit or higher.
F. Surface Gravel:
Surface gravel shall be placed on top of the aggregate subbase, shall not have
stones larger than 2” in size and meet the following gradation:
Sieve Designation % by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
2” 95-100%
.5” 30-65%
#200 7-12%
SECTION 17: ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENT AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Erosion and Sedimentation Control: The procedures outlined I the erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be implemented during the site preparation,
construction, and clean-up stages. The erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall be prepared in accordance with Best Management Practices of the Maine
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook for Construction. (Current
version).
B. Drainage: The applicant shall submit evidence demonstrating that the drainage
system has sufficient capacity to handle the storm events specified below.
(Note: minimum diameter of culverts is 15”)
Roadway Driveway Closed Open
Cross-culvert* Culvert System Channel
50 year 10 year 10 year 50 year
*The designer should check the impacts of a 100 year design flood frequency.
**If the driveway culvert is part of a stream system, design for a 50-year flood
frequency. Where necessary, the applicant shall employ use of stormwater
detention systems to maintain natural or existing stormwater runoff rates.
Calculations and designs shall be performed by professionals experienced in
hydrology and storm water management.
1. Drainage ditches shall be provided so as to effectively control water entering
and leaving the road area. Such drainage ditches shall be properly stabilized
so that the potential for unreasonable erosion does not exist. The lining of
drainage ditches will be based on the maximum gradient of the channel or
ditch and flow velocity. Ditch lining will be designed in accordance with
Best Management Practices of the Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Handbook for Construction, current version.
In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering a stream,
river, wetland, or water body, roads and their associated drainage ditches shall
be located, constructed, and maintained so as to provide an unscarified filter
strip, of at least the width indicated below, between the exposed mineral soil
or the road and the normal high water mark of a surface water body.
Average Slope of Land Exposed Width of Strip Between Exposed
Mineral Soil and Normal High Mineral Soil and Normal High
Water (Percent) Water Mark (ft. along surface of the ground)
0% 25’
10% 45’
20% 65’
30% 85’
40% 105’
50% 125’
60% 145’
70% 165’
Clean-up:
Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a
thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right of
way. If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the disposal site
shall be indicated on the plan and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil,
limed, fertilized and seeded.
SECTION 18: PUBLIC ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE:
A. All roads and private roads proposed for public acceptance shall comply with
the procedures and requirements of this Section.
B. Roads are eligible for public acceptance if they comply with all of the
specifications for a road.
C. Those applying for public road acceptance shall follow the application
procedures outlined in the Town’s Subdivision Ordinance.
D. The Board of Selectmen, with the assistance of the Road Commissioner or
committee shall review all proposals for road acceptance and shall make a
recommendation to the Town Meeting. The Town shall accept roads only by a
vote of the Town Meeting.
E. A road shall not be eligible for public acceptance unless it complies with all of
the requirements of this section.
F. The Board of Selectmen shall determine that a road is eligible for public
acceptance only after it conforms to the following:
1. The road complies with all of the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. The road has bituminous surface according to the specifications for a road.
3. The road has been designed and constructed according to the plans
developed by a professional engineer.
4. The road has been inspected by a professional engineer and certified to
have been constructed according to the requirements of this Ordinance
and the road plan.
5. The road developer has obtained all applicable permits from the Maine
Department of Transportation and the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection for the construction of the road.
G. If the Board of Selectmen determine that the road conforms to all applicable
standards, they shall hold a public hearing to discuss the road acceptance. The
Board of Selectmen may vote to recommend to the Town that the road be
considered for public acceptance.
H. All costs associated with design, construction and inspection of the road shall be
at the Applicant’s expense.
SECTION 19: PLAN REQUIREMENTS-ALL ROADS:
The Plans and other graphical representations submitted as part of the application shall be
prepared by a Maine Professional Engineer or a Maine Professional Land Surveyor and
shall include the following information:
1. All plans, profiles, and cross-sections shall be drawn at a scale of 1”=40’ horizontal and
1”=4’vertical.
2. The direction of magnetic north.
3. A plan and profile, typical cross-section views of all proposed road or street construction. Crosssection
views shall be taken at 50’ intervals.
4. The starting and ending point with relation to established roads, streets or ways and any planned or
anticipated future extensions of street. (All terminal points and the centerline alignment shall b
identified by survey stationing.)
5. Existing structures and established landmarks within 100 horizontal feet of the
proposed centerline of the street.
6. Dimensions, both lineal and angular, necessary for locating boundaries and
necessary for locating subdivisions, lots and easements.
7. Lots, names and addresses of all owners of abutting property.
8. All natural waterways, watercourses and wetlands in or on land contiguous to the
said road.
9. The kind, size, location, profile and cross-section of all existing and proposed
drainage ways and structures and their relationship to existing natural waterways.
10. A soil sedimentation and erosion control plan showing temporary and permanent
control measures.
11. Curve data for all vertical and horizontal curves shall be the centerline radius, arc
length, beginning of curve and end of curve points.
12. All centerline gradients shall be shown and expressed as a percent.
13. All curve and property line radii of intersections.
14. The limits and location of any proposed sidewalks and curbing.
15. The location and size of all existing and proposed overhead and underground
utilities, to include but not be limited to the following: (NOTE: when a location
is approximate, it shall be noted on the plan as such.)
a. Water supply lines and valves;
b. Sanitary sewer lines and manholes;
c. Storm sewer lines, manholes and catch-basins;
d. Telephone lines and poles;
e. Electrical power lines and poles;
f. Fire hydrants; and
g. Street lights.
16. The name(s) of each proposed new road or street.
17. The location of each existing or proposed driveway connecting with the street(s).
SECTION 20: WAIVERS:
Where the Board of Selectmen finds that extraordinary and unnecessary hardship may
result from strict compliance with this Ordinance or where there are special
circumstances of a particular site, they may vary these standards provided that such
waivers are not contrary to good design, public health, safety and general welfare of the
public. In granting a waiver, the Selectmen shall place reasonable conditions on the
modified proposal, as they deem necessary, to ensure that the objectives of this
Ordinance are met. In no case shall the requirements specified in this Ordinance for
gravel and paving thickness be reduced or waived.
PROPOSED SEWER USE CHARGE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
Section 1. The source of the revenues for retiring debt costs, capital expenditures, and operation and
maintenance of the wastewater collection, transport, and treatment facilities shall be:
*Up to $120,000.00 per year of the debt service of wastewater facilities shall be
recovered by applying this debt to the general tax base;
*Capital expenditures and the operations and maintenance cost will be recovered from
sewer use charges assigned to the residences and places of business connected to the
public sewer system.
Section 2. Sewer use charge rates shall be established by the Board of Commissioners on a yearly
basis. In general, charges will be based on water usage. The usage shall be identified by
the Norridgewock Water Department. The Sewer Use Charge will be computed and
billed at regular intervals throughout each calendar year, as established by the Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall establish a flat rate use charge to be
applied on a yearly basis to those users not serviced by a water meter. This flat rate
charge shall be approximately equivalent to the average residential user charge in the
Town of Norridgewock. A minimum charge shall also be billed to owners that are
provided a service as outlined in Article III, Section 4 of the Sewer Use Ordinance for the
Town of Norridgewock, but do not connect to the sewer system due to a finding of
economic hardship, unless abated by the Board of Commissioners.
Section 3. The Sewer Use Charge assigned to any property owner who contributes a significant
quantity of commercial or industrial wastes to the public sewers, or who contributes a
combination of sewage and industrial wastes to the public sewers, shall be determined on
a special rate structure based on water consumption where possible or as set by the Board
of Commissioners.
The property owners to be charged in this manner will be determined by the Board of
Commissioners on a year to year basis.
Section 4. A special sewer use charge shall be assigned to any commercial establishment, industrial
firm, or organization who, by virtue of the volume, strength, or unusual characteristic of
their waste alone, would overload or upset the capacity or efficiency of the wastewater
treatment facilities or any part thereof if such waste enters the public sewer, or whose
waste disposal situation is such that it would be in the public interest to waive the
requirements of the Sewer Use Ordinance. The Board of Commissioners, after
appropriate study and advice from the Town’s Consulting Engineer, shall assign a
Special Sewer Use Charge to the commercial establishment, industrial firm, or
organization by separate agreement with the user. The applicable portion of the preceding
section, as well as the equitable rights of the public shall be the basis of such an
arrangement.
Approved by
Legislative Body
June 26, 2017
Section 5. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right, from time to time, to change Sewer Use
Charges originally or previously assigned to any property owner.
Section 6. Abatement of sewer use charges may be considered by the Board of Commissioners. The
volume of flow to be used in computing sewer use charges shall be based upon, whenever
possible, metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the Norridgewock Water Department. In the event that a property owner
discharging wastes into the Treatment Plan produces evidence to the Superintendent,
demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of metered water does not
reach the Treatment Plant, the Board of Commissioners shall:
a) Establish a percentage of the total metered water to be used as a basis for computations
of any credit to be allowed,
b) Determine a specific quantity to be used as a basis for computing a credit for a single
non-recurring use, or
c) Direct the installation of appropriate flow measuring (and totaling) devices to measure
and record the actual amount of flow into the Treatment Plant in order to adjust the sewer
use charge.
Section 7. There shall be a lien to secure the payment of sewer charges legally assessed on real
estate within the Town, which shall take precedence of all the claims on such real estate,
excepting only claims for taxes.
The Treasurer of the Town shall have the authority and power to sue for and collect the
sewer charges in accordance with MRSA Title 38, Chapter 11, Section 1208.
Section 8. This Ordinance shall become effective upon passage at Town Meeting. This Ordinance
may be amended in accordance with the general provisions of the Town governing all
ordinances. Passage of this Ordinance shall supersede previous versions of the Town of
Norridgewock Sewer Use Charge Ordinance, as adopted February 12, 1992 and amended
on May 12, 1993 and amended on March 4, 1996. The invalidity of any portion of this
Ordinance shall not invalidate any other part.
SEWER USE ORDINANCE FOR THE
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
APRIL 1993
Ordinance for regulating the use of public and private sewers and drains, private
wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge
of waters and wastes into the public sewer system; and providing penalties for violations
thereof: in the Town of Norridgewock, County of Somerset, State of Maine.
Be it enacted by the Town of Norridgewock as follows:
DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates other wise, the meaning of terms used in this
ordinance shall be as follows:
Section 1. “Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)” shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20C, expressed in milligrams per
liter.
Section 2. “Board of Commissioners” shall mean the duly elected Sewer
Commissioners of the Town of Norridgewock, or their authorized
representative.
Section 3. “Board of Selectmen”shall mean the duly elected Selectmen of the Town of
Norridgewock or their authorized representative.
Section 4. “Building” shall mean a structure built, erected and framed of component
structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, or support of
persons, animals, or property of any kind.
Section 5. “Building Drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer. The building drain extends eight (8) feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
Section 6. “Building Sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.
Section 7. “Combined Service” shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm or surface water.
Section 8. “Commercial Service” shall mean an extension of use of the public sewer to
a commercial structure.
Section 9. “Contractor” shall mean any entity engaged in construction of building
sewer, storm drains, or sewer extensions within the area governed by the
Town.
Section 10. “Easement” shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
Section 11. “Economic Hardship” shall exist if a property owner qualifies for General
Assistance under the guidelines established by the Town of Norridgewock
and the State of Maine.
Section 12. “Engineer” shall mean the Professional Engineer retained by the Town of
Norridgewock. In the event the Town has not retained an Engineer, the term
“Engineer” as used herein will be construed to mean the Superintendent of
the Town of Norridgewock.
Section 13. “Floatable Oil” is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
Section 14. “Garbage” shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of food.
Section 15. “Industrial Service” shall mean an extension of use of the public sewer to an
industrial structure.
Section 16. “Industrial Wastes” shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes,
trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
Section 17. “Legislative Body” shall mean the Town of Norridgewock as established in
Town Meetings and within the authority granted to the Board of Selectmen.
Section 18. “Living Unit” means one or more rooms arranged for the use of one or
more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
Section 19. “Motel Unit” means a room or rooms which are directly accessible from an
outdoor parking area.
Section 20. “Natural Outlet” shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
Section 21. “Owner” shall mean the person, organization, or entity listed as the owner of
record as recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Section 22. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, municipal or quasi-municipal agency, state agency, federal
agency or other legal entity.
Section 23. “pH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams,
per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a
hydrogen-ion concentration of 10.
Section 24. “Pollutant” shall include but is not limited to dredged spoil, solid waste,
junk, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological
materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, dirt, and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial,
or agricultural wastes of any kind.
Section 25. “Properly Shredded Garbage” shall mean the wastes from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
Section 26. “Property Line” shall mean the edge of the street right-of-way if the
building sewer is to connect with the public sewer in a public street.
“Property Line” shall mean the edge of a sewer easement in those instances
where the building sewer connects to the public sewer in a sewer easement.
Section 27. “Public Sewer” shall mean a common sewer owned, operated, and
maintained by public authority, or governmental agency.
Section 28. “Residential Service” shall mean an extension of use of the public sewer to a
residential structure.
Section 29. “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
Section 30. “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage
water.
Section 31. “Sewer Extension” shall mean a new or upgraded system for wastewater
collection from one or more buildings not previously served by public sewer
and transport of said wastewater to a location within the existing public
sewer system as recommended by the Superintendent and approved by the
Board of Commissioners. The sewer extension shall consist of sewer pipe
and may include manholes, cleanouts, pump stations, or some combination
of those components, as necessary. The sewer extension may consist of new
construction only or may include an upgrade of existing components in the
public sewer and treatment systems to provide adequate transport and
treatment of the additional wastewater discharged into the system.
Section 32. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
Section 33. “Significant Industrial User” shall apply to an industry which discharges a
wastewater which:
a) Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment standards promulgated
by the EPA, or
b) Would have a substantial impact, either singly or in combination with
other industries, on the operation of the treatment works, or
c) Contains, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 gallons of raw material
containing priority pollutants and/or substances of concern and would
discharge a measurable quantity of these pollutants to the sewer system,
or
d) Would discharge more than 25000 gpd of process wastewater, or
e) Would discharge more than five percent (5%) of the flow or load of
conventional pollutants received by the Treatment Plant.
Section 34. “Slug” shall mean any discharge of water, or wastewater which in
concentration or any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation and adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of
the wastewater treatment works.
Section 35. “Storm Drain” (sometimes termed “Storm Sewer”) shall mean a drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted
water from any source.
Section 36. “Superintendent” shall mean the operator of wastewater facilities of the
Town of Norridgewock or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
The Superintendent is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the
Town’s wastewater facility.
Section 37. “Suspended Solids” shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in “Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” published by the American
Public Health Association and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
Section 38. “Town” shall mean the Town of Norridgewock and/or its duly authorized
employees or agents.
Section 39. “Unpolluted Industrial Process Water” shall mean wastewater from an
industry which is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria
in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers
and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
Section 40. “Unpolluted Water” is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and waste water treatment facilities provided.
Section 41. “Wastewater” shall mean the spent water of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial
establishments, together with such ground , surface and storm waters as may
be present.
Section 42. “Wastewater Treatment Plant” shall mean an arrangement of devices and
structures, for treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge.
Section 43. “Wastewater Facilities” shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
Section 44. “Water Course” shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of
water either continuously or intermittently.
Section 45. Abbreviations
For the purpose of this ordinance the following abbreviations shall have the meaning
ascribed to them under this article. References to standards of the following
organizations shall refer to the latest edition of same.
1. ANSI shall mean American National Standards Institute.
2. ASME shall mean American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
3. ASCE shall mean American Society of Civil Engineers.
4. ASTM shall mean American Society for Testing and Materials.
5. AWWA shall mean American Water Works Association.
6. cm shall mean centimeter.
7. CS shall mean Commercial Standards.
8. Celsius shall mean degrees Celsius.
9. Fahrenheit shall mean degrees Fahrenheit.
10. DEP shall mean State of Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
11. EPA shall mean United States Environmental Protection Agency.
12. ICR shall mean Industrial Cost Recovery.
13. kg shall mean kilograms.
14. l shall mean liters.
15. M shall mean meter.
16. mg/l shall mean milligrams per liter.
17. NEIWPCC SHALL MEAN New England Interstate Wastewater Pollution
Control Commission.
18. NPC shall mean National Plumbing Code.
19. ppm shall mean parts per million.
20. PVC-SDR 35 shall mean Polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe material with a standard
dimension ratio (pipe diameter/wall thickness) equal to 35.
21. sq m shall mean square meter.
22. WPCF shall mean Water Pollution Control Federation.
ARTICLE II
Liability Insurance Required
Section 1. A contractor engaged in construction within the Town and State right of
ways must present to the Board of Commissioners a Certificate of
Insurance showing minimum liability coverage of $1,000,000 aggregate
for bodily injury and property damage including collapse and
underground coverage before a permit will be issued for construction of
sewer extension. In addition, the contractor must either provide a
performance bond in the amount of the work or establish an escrow
account in the amount of the work. A 10% retainage will be withheld
from payment until final inspection by the Superintendent has been
performed and the work has been approved. Higher coverage may be
required by the Board of Commissioners when circumstances reasonably
require it including but not limited to, high liability work or contractor
with poor performance record. The Board of Commissioners shall be
notified prior to cancellation of the policy.
ARTICLE III
Use of Public Required
Section 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or
deposited any sewage, human excrement or liquid wastes, in any place or
manner except by means of an approved plumbing and drain system in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the requirements of the
State of Maine.
Section 2. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Norridgewock, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of these rules and regulations and the requirements of the State of
Maine.
Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of wastewater.
Section 4. The Owner(s) of all building or properties in the Town of Norridgewock in
which plumbing fixtures are installed and which abut any street or right-ofway
which has a public sanitary sewer of the Town shal connect these
fixtures directly to the proper public sewer, and if feasible, with a separate
connection for each house or building, in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided
that the road right-of-way where said public sewer is located is within 200
feet of the nearest point of the structure to be served. Exceptions may be
allowed by the Board of Commissioners if undue economic hardship wou7ld
result, in which case the property owner should request in writing a deferral
of these requirements and the Owner shall be required to demonstrate the
nature and degree of economic hardship. However, if the Owner’s
wastewater disposal system malfunctions connection to the public sanitary
sewer must be made regardless of hardship.
ARTICLE IV
Private Wastewater Disposal
Section 1. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Article
III, Section 4, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article and the State of
Maine Plumbing Code, Part II, Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules,
Chapter 241.
Section 2. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the Owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Plumbing
Inspector for the Town of Norridgewock. The application for such permit
shall be made on a form furnished by the Division of Health Engineering,
Maine Department of Human Services, which the applicant shall supplement
by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary
by the plumbing inspector. Permit and inspection fees (required under the
State of Maine Plumbing Code) shall be paid to the Plumbing Inspector at the
time the application is filed.
Section 3. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with the State of Maine Plumbing Code, Part II,
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the Minimum Lot Size Law
(Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 12, Chapter 423-A). No private
wastewater disposal system shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet without proper review and licensing by the Maine DEP.
Section 4. The Owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
ARTICLE V
Building Sewers and Connections
Section 1. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Board of Commissioners.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into
the system shall notify the Board of Commissioners in writing at least fortyfive
(45) days prior to the proposed change or connection, and shall comply
with Maine Revised Statutes Annotated,, Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter I,
Section 361, as amended.
Section 2. Amended as of November 2, 1993, Special Town Meeting.
There will be three (3) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential
service, (b) for commercial service, and (c) for industrial service. In any
case, the Owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to
the Town at the time an application is filed (the building sewer fee schedule
is provided separately. Permit fees shall be waived for residential services
which connect within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, as
referenced in Article III, Section 4, following initial installation of a public
sewer to service those buildings. However, an inspection fee of not more
than $15.00 will be charged for the services of a licensed plumbing inspector
to inspect the building sewer during the initial 90 day period.
Section 3. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the Owner. The Owner shall indemnify the
Town from any loss or damage which may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer and all building sewers
shall be the property of the Owner.
Section 4. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building requi4ring a sewer connection; except where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard,
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, however; for
this case, at least (1) separate building sewer shall be provided for each group
of four (4) living units without an increase in pipe size.
Section 5. Old building sewers may be used only when they are found, on examination
and testing by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of these rules and
regulations. Testing shall be in accordance with Article VII, Section 5 of the
Sewer Use Ordinance. All costs for inspection and testing shall be paid by
the Owner.
Section 6. The building sewer shall be: PVC Sewer SDR35-ASTM D3034, 12-1/2 foot
or 20 foot lengths with neoprene ring gasket, maximum allowable deflection
5.0 per cent; PVC water pipe class 200, SDR 21, for maximum 2-inch
diameter pressure service, 20-foot lengths ASTM-D2241 and D3139,
neoprene ring gasket, maximum allowable deflection 5.0 per cent; extra
heavy cast iron soil pipe ASTM A74, rubber ring gasket in grooved bell,
ASTM C564 or Ductile iron push-on joint sewer pipe, Class 51, ASTM
A746, with rubber ring gasket, 18 or 20 foot lengths. Any part of the
building sewer that is located within five (5) feet of the water service pipe
shall be constructed of SDR 21 PVC, or cast or ductile iron as described
above. Cast or ductile iron pipe may be required by the Town where the
building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or
unstable ground, the building sewer shall be cast or ductile iron pipe, except
if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle.
Section 7. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4)
inches, nor shall the slope of the pipe be less than one-eighth (1/8) inch per
foot.
Section 8. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation above the basement floor but shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost. To protect from frost, minimum soil cover of four and one half
(4 ½) feet without insulation and three (3) feet with insulation is
recommended. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in
straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made
only with properly curved pipe (see maximum allowable deflection above)
and fittings with angles of 45 or less. Where the length of the service from
the building to the sewer is greater than 100 feet or where a change of
alignment greater than 45 is required, a cleanout shall be installed as directed
by the Superintendent (see Appendix B for detail). The ends of building
sewers which are not connected to the building drain of the structure for any
reason, shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper, plug, or other
approved means. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage or industrial wastes carried
by such drain shall be lifted by approved mechanical means and discharged
to the building sewer.
Section 9. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspout, sump pumps, exterior
foundations drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to the public sanitary sewer. All such existing
connections shall be removed prior to connection of building sewer or drain
to the public sanitary sewer. This shall apply for all new and existing
building sewers and drains.
Section 10. This connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gas tight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the Superintendent before installation.
Section 11. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Pipe laying
and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM D2321 for PVC
pipe and AWWA C600 Type 4 laying condition except that no backfill shall
be placed until the work has been inspected by the Superintendent; and that
trench width measured at the top of the installed pipe shall not exceed twentyfour
(24) inches.
Section 12. The connection of the building sewer into an existing public sewer shall be
made at the property line. The connection of the building sewer from the
property line to existing sewer mains will be by the Town of Norridgewock
but shall be paid for the Owner unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Sewer Commissioners. Connection of building sewers from the property line
to a new sewer main, installed by the Town, shall be by the Town and at its
expense. The cost of maintenance of the building sewer from the building
drain to the sewer main shall be borne by the Owner.
Section 13. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent, at
least 48 hours in advance, when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.
When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewer pipes, such
trenches shall be inspected by the Superintendent before the trenches are
backfilled; and the person performing such work shall notify the
Superintendent when the installation of the building sewer is completed. If
the trench is backfilled before inspection, the Superintendent may require it
to be re-excavated for inspection at the Owner’s expense.
Section 14. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed I the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent.
Section 15. When any building sewer is to serve a school, hospital, public building or
similar institutions, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial
buildings, or which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will receive
sewage or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent
maintenance of said building sewer is anticipated, then such building sewer
shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The
Superintendent shall determine if and where this type of connection to the
public sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as
directed by the Superintendent. If required, a new manhole shall be installed
in the public sewer pursuant to Article VII, Section 4 and the building sewer
connection made thereto as directed by the Superintendent.
Section 16. Manholes and cleanouts shall be backfilled as shown in the detail in
Appendix B.
ARTICLE VI
Use of Pubic Sewers
Section 1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process
waters to any sanitary sewer.
Section 2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet as
approved by the Board of Commissioners and the DEP. Unpolluted industrial
cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Board
of Commissioners, to a storm sewer or natural outlet and the discharge shall
comply with Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 38, Chapter 3, Section
413, as amended.
Section 3. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sanitary sewers:
a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid, or gas which may create a fire or explosive hazard in the
wastewater facilities.
b) Any waters or pollutants containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant.
c) Any waters or pollutants having pH lower than 5.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewater collection, transport or
treatment systems.
d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes,
bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
e) Any waters or pollutants including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD,etc) which released in quantities of flow or concentrations or both
constitute a “slug” as defined herein.
f) Any heated waters or pollutants in amounts which will inhibit or interfere
with biological activity in the wastewater treatment works but in no case
heated waters or pollutants in such quantities that the temperature at the
wastewater treatment works influent exceed 104 Fahrenheit (40 Celcius).
Section 4. The following described substances, materials, waters, or pollutants shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will
not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
The Board of Commissioners may set limitations lower than the limitations
established established in the regulations below if in the Superintendent’s
opinion more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives.
In forming an opinion as to the acceptability, the quantity of subject wastes
in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the wastewater treatment
process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of
treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The limitations or restrictions of waste or wastewaters discharged to
the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Board
of Commissioners are as follows:
a) Wastewaters having a temperature higher than one hundred and fifty
degrees (150) Fahrenheit (65 Celcius).
b) Water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirtytwo
(32) and one hundred fifty (150) .F. (65 C.).
c) Wastewater from commercial establishments or industrial plants
containing floatable oil, fat, or grease shall not be discharges without a
grease trap approved by the Superintendent.
d) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may
be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
e) Any water or pollutants containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances in such quantities or
concentrations that any such material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds limits for such
materials which may be established by the Superintendent.
f) Any waters or pollutants containing odor-producing substances
exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent.
g) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as
may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable State or Federal Regulations.
h) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a “slug”.
i) Waters or pollutants containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
j) Any water or pollutants which, by interaction with other water or
pollutants in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
k) Any waters or pollutants have pH in excess of 9.5 or lower than 5.5.
l) Wastewater from home or commercial business operations such as
furniture stripping, auto body work or auto repair containing solvents,
oil, grease or other substances which are appropriate to the restrictions of
paragraph i of this section.
If any waters or pollutants are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 4 of this Article, and which in the
judgement of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard t life or constitute a public nuisance, the Board of
Commissioners may:
a. Reject the waters or pollutants,
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers,
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
d. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes.
When considering the above alternatives, the Board of Commissioners shall
give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the
discharger.
If the Board of Commissioners permit the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the pretreatment or equalization
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review of the Town’s Consulting
Engineer and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances, laws, and the Town’s discharge permit.
Section 6. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in
Section 4, paragraph c of this Article, or any flammable wastes, sand, or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
required by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these
interceptors, the Owners shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain
records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by
the Superintendent and Board of Commissioners. Any removal, hauling and
disposal of the collected materials must be performed in accordance with this
ordinance and which are subject to review by the Superintendent and Board
of Commissioners. Any removal, hauling and disposal of the collected
materials must be performed in accordance with this ordinance and state and
federal regulations. Emulsifiers shall not be used to clean out grease or oil
interceptors.
Section 7. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for
any waters or pollutants, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the Owner at his expense.
Section 8. When required by the Board of Commissioners, the Owner of any property
with commercial or industrial service shall install a suitable structure, such as
a manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structure when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The structure shall be installed and maintained by the
Owner at their expense, and shall be safe and accessible at all times.
Section 9. Board of Commissioners may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this Sewer Use
Ordinance. These requirements may include but are not limited to:
a. Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period.
b. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
c. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
e. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other
materials important to sewer use control.
f. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
g. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through
spills to the municipal sewer.
Section 10. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
pollutants to which reference is made in this Sewer Use Ordinance shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standards Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater”, published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the structure as
required in Section 8 of this Article, or upon suitable samples taken at said
structure. In the event that no special structure has been required, suitable
samples shall be taken at the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the wastewater facilities and to determine the existence of
hazards of life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a
premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from twenty-four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH is
determined from periodic grab samples).
All commercial establishments and industries discharging into a public
sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharging into a public sewer
shall perform such monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent may
reasonably require, including installation, use, and maintenance of
monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such
monitoring to the Superintendent. Such records shall be made available
upon request by the Superintendent to other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
ARTICLE VII
Sewer Extensions
Section 1. All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by the
Town shall be properly designed in accordance with the Design and
Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, ASCE Manuals and Reports on
Engineering Practice No. 37 (WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9). Plans and
specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to and approval
obtained from the DEP before construction may proceed. Review by the
Town’s Consulting Engineer will also be required prior to acceptance of the
design by the Superintendent. The design of sewers must anticipate and
allow for flows from all possible future extensions or developments within
the immediate drainage area. All costs of having the Town’s Consulting
Engineer review the Plans and Specifications shall be paid for by the owner.
Section 2. Sewer extensions, including individual building sewers from the sewer to the
property line, may be constructed by the Town under public contract, if, in
the opinion of the Town, the number of properties to be served by such
extension warrants its cost. Under this arrangement, the property Owner
shall pay for the installation of the building sewer from the property line to
his residence or place of business in accordance with the requirements of
Article VI. Property Owners may propose sewer extensions within the Town
by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority of the benefiting property
Owners, and filing it with the Board of Selectmen. The cost of such
extensions may be assessed to the benefited Owners in any manner
determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Section 3. If the Town does not elect to construct a sewer extension under public
contract, the property owner may construct the necessary sewer extension, if
such extension is approved by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the
requirements of Section 1. The property Owner must pay for the entire
design and installation, including all expenses incidental thereto. Each
building sewer installed must be installed and Design of sewers shall be as
specified in Section 4. The installation of the sewer expenses for this
inspection shall be paid for by the Owner. The Town’s Consulting
Engineer’s decisions shall be final in matters of quality and methods of
construction. The sewer, as constructed, must pass the leakage test required
in Section 5 before it is to be used. The cost of sewer extension thus made
shall be borne by the property owners, including all building sewers, and the
discharge shall comply with MRSA, Title 38, Chapter 413, as amended
Section 4. Sewer design must be approved by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection and shall be in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Pipe material and joints shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conforming to
ASTM D3034 or D3033 and the strength requirements of ADR 35 or
Class 52 Ductile iron meeting AWWA C150 with joints meeting AWWA
C104 and fittings meeting AWWA C110.
b. Minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight (8) inches.
c. All joints shall be prepared and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations.
d. Wye branch fittings shall be used and a watertight connection shall be
provided.
e. The minimum slope of sewer pipe and maximum width of the trench at a
point six (6) inches above the top of the sewer pipe shall be as follows:
Minimum Slope
In Feet Per
Pipe Diameter Trench Width 100 Feet
8” 2’ - 8” 0.40
10” 2’ - 10” 0.28
12” 3’ - 0” 0.22
14” 3’ - 2” 0.17
15” 3’ - 3” 0.15
16” 3’ - 4” 0.14
f. The depth of the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost,
but in no event less than three (3) feet with insulation and five and one
half (5 ½) feet without insulation.
g. All pipe shall be laid with a minimum of six (6) inches of ¾ “ crushed
stone all around so as to give uniform circumferential support to the pipe
unless otherwise recommended by the Town’s consulting Engineer.
h. ¾” crushed stone shall have the following gradation:
Sieve size % by Weight Passing
1 inch 100
¾ inch 95-100
½ inch 35-70
3/8 inch 0-20
No. 200 0-2
i. Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or at intervals not
exceeding three hundred fifty (350) linear feet and shall be precast (see
detail, Appendix B).
1. Precast manhole sections shall be manufactured in
accordance with
ASTM C913. The minimum compressive strength of
the concrete for all sections shall be 4000 psi and shall
be Type II. The circumferential steel reinforcement for
four (4) foot diameter riser sections, cone sections, and
base walls shall be 0.20 square inches per linear foot.
Reinforcing in the bottoms of precast bases shall be of
the same design. Reinforcing shall extend into the
tongue and groove of each manhole wall section.
2. The tongue and groove of manhole sections, including
the precast base, shall be formed of concrete so as to
receive the butyl rubber sealant. Sections shall be set so
as to be vertical and in true alignment and sealed with
two (2) one (1) inch butyl rubber strips.
3. Manhole steps shall be polypropylene reinforced with
steel rod, minimum width of sixteen (16) inches. All
steps shall be cast into walls of the precast sections so as
to form a continuous ladder with a distance of twelve
(12) inches between steps.
4. Precast base sections shall be monolithically pressure
cast. Holes for pipes shall be cast in the base section so
that there is a clear distance of four (4) inches minimum
between the inside bottom of the base section and the
pipe invert.
5. Pipe to manhole connections shall be made with flexible
manhole sleeves and stainless steel bands.
6. The top of the precast reinforced concrete unit shall be
set at a grade that will allow a minimum of one (1)
precast annular ring or a maximum of four (4) or a
minimum of two (2) courses of brick and mortar before
setting the cast iron frame and cover. Mortar for brick
masonry shall be Portland cement mixed in the
proportion of one part cement to two parts sand, worked
to the proper consistence.
7. The outside of the masonry work of all manholes shall
be plastered with a Portland cement mortar mixed in
proportion of one part cement to two parts sand. The
thickness of the mortar shall be one-half (1/2) inch, and
the mortar shall be carefully spread and thoroughly
troweled, leaving a smooth, substantially waterproof
surface. The mortar shall be extended to completely
cover the outside surfaces of all masonry work. The
inside brickwork shall be pointed.
8. The concrete manholes shall have a brick channel
passing through the bottom which corresponds in shape
with the lower half of the pipe. Side inverts shall be
curved and main inverts (where direction changes) shall
be laid out in smooth curves of the longest possible
radius. The top of the brick shelf shall slope to drain
towards the flowing through channel.
9. Manhole frames and covers shall meet the standards of
the Town. Manhole frames shall be eight (8) inches
high and shall be approximately thirty-two (32) inches
in diameter with a twenty-two (22) inch opening.
Frames shall weigh approximately 310 pounds.
Manhole covers shall be twenty-four (24) inches in
diameter and shall weigh approximately 175 pounds.
10. Prior to backfilling, wrap manholes with four (4) layers
of six (6) mil thick U.V. resistant, high grade
polyethethylene.
11. Manholes shall be back filled as shown on the detail in
Appendix B unless otherwise approved by the Engineer.
Section 5. All sewers shall satisfy requirements of a leakage test before they
are accepted by the Superintendent. The leakage test shall be as
follows:
a. For each six of pipeline, an initial leakage test shall be made
on the first section of the pipeline complete between two (2)
adjacent manholes. Thereafter, the leakage tests shall be
made on sections of approved lengths of completed pipeline,
which in no case shall exceed one thousand (1000) feet.
b. Each section shall be tested upon its completion.
c. The pipeline will be subject to testing for infiltration or
exfiltration.
d. The pipeline shall satisfactorily pass the leakage test with no
material except the gasket in the joint spaces. Caulking of
joints shall not be permitted.
e. Tests shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent. The allowable infiltration or exfiltration
shall be two hundred (200) gallons per inch of diameter per
day per mile of sewer.
f. Test sewer using low pressure air as follows:
1. Plug ends of section to be tested.
2. Supply air slowly to the pipe to be tested until the air
pressure inside the pipe is 4.0 psi greater than the
average back pressure of any ground water
submerging the pipe.
3. Disconnect air supply and also allow a minimum of
two (2) minutes for stabilization of pressure.
4. Following stabilization period measure drop in
pressure over a six (6) minute period.
5. Acceptable drop: Not more than 1.0 psi.
All manholes shall satisfy the requirements of a leakage test
before they are accepted by the Board of Commissioners.
The leakage test shall be as follows:
a. Tests must be observed and certified by the
Superintendent. Manholes must be complete except for
shelf and invert brickwork. Plug all pipes and other
openings in the manhole prior to test.
b. Infiltration test manholes with groundwater table above
highest joint. Manhole passes infiltration test if there is
no visible leakage into manhole.
c. For exfiltration test of manholes:
1. Plug pipes into and out of manhole and secure
plugs.
2. Lower groundwater table (GWT) to below
manhole. Maintain GWT at this level throughout
test. Provide means of determining GWT level at
any time throughout test.
3. Fill Manhole with water to top of cone.
4. Allow a period of time for absorption (determined
by Contractor).
5. Refill to top of cone.
6. Determine volume of leakage in an eight (8) hour
(minimum) test period and calculate rate.
7. Acceptable leakage rate: Not more than 1 gallon
per vertical foot per 24 hours.
Pump station design must be approved by the Town’s Consulting
Engineer and also by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection. All pump stations must pass leakage and performance
tests, as determined by the Town’s Consulting Engineer, before
they are accepted by the Superintendent.
All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner’s expense,
after final approval and recommendation of acceptance by the
Town’s Consulting Engineer and subsequent acceptance by the
Board of Commissioners, shall become the property of the Town
and shall thereafter be maintained by the Town. Said sewers,
after their acceptance, shall be guaranteed against defects in
materials or workmanship for twelve (12) months. The guarantee
shall be in the form of a maintenance bond or certified check in
an amount defined by the Board of Commissioners.
ARTICLE VIII
Protection from Damage
Section 1. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part
of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision may be subject to arrest
under the charge of criminal mischief as set forth in Maine Revised Statutes Annotated,
Title 17-A, Chapter 33, Section 806, as amended.
ARTICLE IX
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
Section 1. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing pertinent t discharge to the community system in
accordance with the provisions of this Sewer Use Ordinance.
Section 2. The Superintendent or other duly authorized representatives are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater facilities. The
industry may request that such information be kept confidential. The industry
must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question
might result in an unfair competitive advantage to competitors.
Section 3. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
Section 1, above, the Superintendent or other duly authorized representatives
of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the Owner. The Owner shall be held harmless for injury or
death to Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the Owner against
loss or damage to Owner’s property and against claims and/or demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the Owner, arising out
any misconduct or negligence by the Town, its employees, or its agents in the
performance of the necessary work referred to in Section 1, except as such
may be caused by negligence or failure of the Owner to maintain safe
conditions.
Section 4. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees or agents of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all private properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
ARTICLE X
Penalties
Section 1. Any person found to be violating any provision of this Sewer Use Ordinance
shall be served by the Superintendent with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently cease all violations.
Section 2. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in Section 1 of this Article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $200.00 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Section 3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Sewer Use Ordinance shall
become liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
Town by reason of such offense.
Section 4. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the Board of Commissioners
or Superintendent may institute any appropriate action including injunction or
other proceedings to prevent, restrain, or abate violations hereof. The Board
of Selectmen will make the final determination to institute litigation.
ARTICLE XI
Administration
Section 1. This Sewer Use Ordinance shall be administered by a Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall be responsible to the
Board of Selectmen and shall have the following responsibilities:
(a) Enforce the provisions of the Sewer Use Ordinance.
(b) Provide interpretation of the Ordinance.
(c) Establish rates, fees and other charges.
(d) Review and approve the Superintendent’s annual budget.
(e) Contract for services.
Section 2. The Board of Commissioners shall be composed of 5 members, elected by the
Town at the regular Town Meeting. Initial election shall provide one member
with a one year term, two members with two year terms, and two members
with three year terms. Subsequent annual elections will bill the expired
terms. If there is a vacancy, the Selectmen shall appoint a replacement to
serve until the next Annual Town Meeting.
Section 3. The Board of Commissioners is authorized to borrow up to $30000 for capital
expenditures and additional funds for emergency expenditures not to exceed
$60000 in total for both items at any one time. This debt would be repaid out
of sewer fees.
Section 4. Day to day direction of the Superintendent is the responsibility of the
Norridgewock Town Manager.
Section 5. Responsibilities not specified in the Ordinance shall be responsibilities of the
Board of Selectmen.
ARTICLE XII
License
Section 1. If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the work performed by any
contractor or property owner working within the Town, violates any
provisions of this Sewer Use Ordinance, or if any work is, in the opinion of
the Superintendent or the Town’s Consulting Engineer, sub-standard, the
Board of Commissioners may disapprove existing work or any future work in
the Town.
ARTICLE XIII
Validity
Section 1. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this Sewer Use Ordinance are
hereby repealed.
Section 2. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Sewer Use
Ordnance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Sewer Use
Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
ARTICLE XIV
Sewer Use Ordinance in Force
Section 1. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect when adopted by the Town of
Norridgewock.
Section 2. This ordinance enacted by the voters of the Town of Norridgewock March 2,
1992, amended May 1992 and November 2, 1993.
ARTICLE XV
Appeals
Section 1. Decisions of the Board of Commissioners may be appealed to the Municipal
Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision.
Should the Appeals Board make a decision in favor of the aggrieved party,
the case shall be remanded to the Board of Commissioners for correction.
The aggrieved party may take further appeals to the Superior court in
accordance with State Law.
1
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
ENACTED MARCH 3, 2008
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Purposes
2. Authority
3. Applicability
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments
B. Sections 15(N) and 15(N-1)
5. Availability
6. Severability
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
8. Amendments
9 Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map
B. Scale of Map
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries
11. Land Use Requirements
12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose
B. General
C. Non-conforming structures
D. Non-conforming Uses
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District
B. Limited Residential District
C. Limited Commercial District
D. General Development I District
E. General Development II District
F. Stream Protection District
14. Table of Land Uses
15. Land Use Standards
A. Minimum Lot Standards
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending
Over or Beyond the Normal High-Water Line of a “Water Body or Within
2
a Wetland
D. Campgrounds
E. Individual Private Campsites
F. Parking Areas
G. Roads and Driveways
H. Signs
I. Storm Water Runoff
J. Septic Waste Disposal
K. Essential Services
L. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
M. Agriculture
N. Timber Harvesting
N-1Timber Harvesting-Statewide Standards
O. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber
Harvesting
P. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Q. Soils
R. Water Quality
S. Archaeological Site
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
B. Permits Required
C. Permit Application
D. Procedure for Administering Permits
E. Special Exceptions
F. Expiration of Permit
G. Installation of Public Utility Service
H. Appeals
J. Enforcement
17. Definitions
3
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE FOR THE
MUNICIPALITY OF NORRIDGEWOCK
1. PURPOSES The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of
safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect
fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and
visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural
beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of
development in shoreland areas.
2. AUTHORITY This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the
provisions of Title 38 Sections 435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated
(M.R.S.A.).
3. APPLICABILITY This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of any river, or
upland edge of a freshwater wetland,
and all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of a stream.
4. EFFECTIVE DATE
A. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE AND ORDINANCE
AMENDMENTS This Ordinance, which was adopted by the municipal
legislative body on March 3, 2008, shall not be effective unless approved
by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, attested and
signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded t the Commissioner for
approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance or Ordinance
Amendment, within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the
Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, it shall be automatically approved.
(A letter of approval was received dated March 11, 2008 and signed by
David P Littell of the State of Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.).
B. SECTIONS 15(N) AND 15(N-1). Section 15(N) is repealed on the
statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 438-A(5), at which
time Section 15(N-1) shall become effective. Until such time as Section
15(N) is repealed, Section 15(N-1) is not in effect.
4
NOTE: The statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 438-A(5) is the effective
date of state-wide timber harvesting standards. That date is “the first day of January of the 2nd
year following the year in which the Commissioner of Conservation determines that at least
252 of the 336 municipalities identified by the Commissioner of Conservation as the
municipalities with the highest acreage of timber harvesting activity on an annual basis for the
period 1992-2003 have either accepted the state-wide standards or have adopted an ordinance
identical to the state-wide standards. 38 M.R.S.A. Section 438-A(5) further provides that “the
Commissioner of Conservation shall notify the Secretary of State in writing and advise the
Secretary of the effective date of the state-wide standards.”
5. AVAILABILITY A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and shall be access to any member of the public. Copies shall be
made available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person
making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted.
6. SEVERABILITY Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared
by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of the Ordinance.
7. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES Whenever a provision of this
Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the
municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
8. AMENDMENTS This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the
legislative body. Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal
Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of The Department of
Environmental Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body but
shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner
fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the
amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a
permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the
Commissioner.
9. DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
A. OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP The areas to which this
Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the following districts as
shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is made a part of
this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection
(2) Limited Residential
(3) Limited Commercial
(4) General Development I
(5) General Development II
5
(6) Stream Protection
B. SCALE OF MAP The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than: 1 inch=2000 feet. District boundaries shall be
clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for each district
shall be placed on the map.
C. CERTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP The
Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature
of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office. In the
event the municipality does not have a municipal office, the Municipal
Clerk shall be the custodian of the map.
D. CHANGES TO THE OFFICIAL SHORELAND ZONING MAP If
amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map within thirty
(30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection.
10. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES Unless otherwise set forth on
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are property lines, the
centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and the boundaries of the shoreland
area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district
boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
NOTE: The Maine Supreme Judicial Court has held that the Official Shoreland Zoning Map is the
primary tool to which to refer in determining district boundaries under ordinances that are not more
explicit in their district descriptions than the language of the Guidelines, and that where there is
inconsistency between the Map and these general test descriptions of the shoreland districts as provided in
the minimum guidelines, the Map prevails.
11. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS Except as hereinafter specified, no building,
structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or
part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved or altered and
no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
12. NON-CONFORMANCE
A. PURPOSE It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use
conformities, except that non-conforming conditions that existed before the
effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto shall be allowed to
continue; subject to the requirements set forth in Section 12. Except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a non-conforming condition shall not
be permitted to become more non-conforming.
6
B. GENERAL
(1) TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP Non-conforming structures, lots and
uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming
use or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot,
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE This Ordinance allows, without a
permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and
structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve expansion of
the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming
use or structure as federal, state or local building and safety
codes may require.
NOTE: See Section 17 for the definitions of non-conforming structures, non-conforming uses and nonconforming
lots.
C. NON-CONFORMING SRUCTURES
(1) EXPANSIONS A non-conforming structure may be added to or
expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that
for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the nonconformity
of the structure and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a) and
(b) below.
(a) After January 1, 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the
required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream or the upland edge of an wetland, that portion of the
structure shall not be expanded, as measured in floor area or
volume, by 30% or more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a
replacement structure conforms with the requirements of Section
12(C)(3), and is less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be
expanded if the original structure existing on January 1, 1989 had
been expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since that date.
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a non-conforming structure, the structure and
new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement is
met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee, basing its decision on the criteria specified in
Section 12(C)(2) Relocation below. If the completed foundation
does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure,
except for expansion in conformity with Section 12(C)(1)(a) above,
and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by
more than three (3) additional feet, as measured from the uphill side
7
of the structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first
floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the
structure.
(2) RELOCATION A non-conforming structure may be relocated within
the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located provided
that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its
designee, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present
subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State
law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules
(Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the
law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a
manner that causes the structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall
consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent
properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils
suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove
vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate
a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native
vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the
area from which the relocated structure was removed must be replanted
with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted
with at least one native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree
removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species of tree
shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted.
Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or
wetland than the trees that were removed. Other woody and
herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established.
An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or
ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the
original location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation
which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof.
8
(3) RECONSTRUCTION OR REPLACEMENT Any con-conforming
structure which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed , or damaged
or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market
value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may
be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within
twelve (12) months of the date of said damage, destruction , or removal,
and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance
with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to
the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its
designee in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case
shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its nonconformity.
If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than
the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure,
except as allowed pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as determined by
the non-conforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area
and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed
beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the
setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to
remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure,
vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(2)
above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required
setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is
removed by 50% or less of the market value, or damaged or destroyed
by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal
maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is
obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such
damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement
meets the setback to the greatest practical extent the Planning Board or
its designee shall consider , in addition to the criteria in Section
12(C)(2) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present,
if any.
(4) Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure. The use of a nonconforming
structure to another use unless the Planning Board, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have
no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream or
wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the
existing use.
9
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning
Board shall require written documentation from the applicant,
regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and
sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of pubic access to waters, natural beauty,
floodplain management, archaeological and historic resources, and
functionally water-dependent uses.
D. NON-CONFORMING USES
(1)Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited,
except that non-conforming residential uses may, after obtaining a
permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing
residential structures or within expansions of such structures as
allowed in Section 12(C)(1)(a) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on
which a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period
exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming
use, may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use
except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown
by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension o that time
period. This provision shall not apply to the resumption of
a use of a residential structure provided that the structure
has been used or maintained for residential purposed during
the preceding five (5) year period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use may be
changed to another non-conforming use provided that the
proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject
and adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no
greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria
listed in Section 12(C)(4) above
E. Non-conforming Lots.
(1) Non-conforming lots. A non-conforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built
upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such lot is in
separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in other
lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance
except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances
relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot
width or shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of
10
appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels
are in a single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption
of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lot do not meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance and if a principal use or
structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be
conveyed separately or together, provided that the State Minimum
Lot Size Law (12M.R.S.A. Sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are
complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of
record on the effective date of this ordinance, each may be sold on a
separate lot provided that the above referenced law and rules are
complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created
must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements
of this Ordinance.
(3) Contiguous Lots-Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more
contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record
at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, if
any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional
requirement of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if
one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal struct6ure
the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the
dimensional requirements.
This provision shall not apply to 2 or more contiguous lots, at least
one of which is non-conforming, owned the same person or persons
on March 1, 1993 and recorded in the registry o f deeds of the lot is
served by public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface sewage
disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at
least 20000 square feet of lot area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size
requirements of Section 12(E)(3)(a) are reconfigured or
combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of
shore and 20000 square feet of lot area.
11
13. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District includes
areas in which development would adversely affect water quality, productive
habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This district
shall include the following areas when they occur within the limits of the
shoreland zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, except that areas
which are currently developed and areas which meet the criteria for the
Limited Commercial or General Developments I Districts need not be
included within the Resource Protection District.
(1) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland
edge of freshwater wetlands and wetlands associated with
rivers, which are rated “moderate” or “high” value
waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting and
feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic
Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either
MDIF&W or the Department as of May 1, 2006. For the
purposes of this paragraph “wetlands associated with rivers”
shall mean areas characterized by non-forested wetlandvegetation
and hydric soils that are contiguous with a river,
and have a surface elevation at or below the water level of
the river during the period of normal high water. Wetlands
associated with rivers” are considered to be part of that river.
NOTE: The Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. Sections 480-A through
480-Z, requires the Department of Environmental Protection to designate areas
of “significant wildlife habitat”. Significant wildlife habitat includes:
Habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or
threatened species; high and moderate value deer wintering areas and travel
corridors as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife; high and
moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including nesting and
feeding areas as defined by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife;
critical spawning and nursery areas for Atlantic sea run salmon as defined by the
Atlantic Sea Run Salmon Commission; and shorebird nesting, feeding and
staging areas and seabird nesting islands as defined by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife.
(2) Floodplains along rivers, defined by the 100 year floodplain as designated on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate
Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps or the flood of record, or in the absence
of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
12
(3)Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or
greater.
(4)Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which
are not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high
water.
NOTE: These areas usually consist of forested wetlands abutting water bodies and nonforested
wetlands.
(5)Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion , undercutting, or river
bed movement.
B Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District includes those areas
suitable for residential and recreational development. It includes areas other than
those in the Resource Protection District or Stream Protection District, and areas
which are used less intensively than those in the Limited Commercial District or the
General Development Districts.
C Limited Commercial District. The Limited Commercial District includes areas of
mixed, light commercial and residential uses, exclusive of the Stream Protection
District, which should not be developed as intensively as the General Development
Districts. This district includes areas of two or more contiguous acres in size devoted
to a mix of residential and low intensity business and commercial uses. Industrial
uses are prohibited.
D General Development I District. The General Development I District includes the
following types of existing , intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or
intensive recreational activities or a mix of such activities, including but not
limited t the following;
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities,
or other commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as,
but not limited to amusement parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial,
industrial or recreational uses.
E General Development II District. The General Development II District includes the
same types of areas as those listed for the General Development I District. The
General Development II District, however, shall be applied to newly established
General Development Districts where the pattern of development at the time of
13
adoption is undeveloped or not as intensively developed as that of the General
Development I District. Portions of the General Development District I or II may
also include residential development. However, no area shall be designated as a
General Development I or II District based solely on residential use.
F Stream Protection District. The Stream protection District includes all land areas
within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
stream, exclusive of those areas within two-hundred and fifty (250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the upland edge of a wetland, Where a stream and its associated
shoreland area are located within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated
under the terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland.
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the
Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in
Section 15. The district designation for a particular site shall be determined from
the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all
applicable land use standards)
No Prohibited
PB Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI Allowed with permit issued by Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP Resource Protection
LR Limited Residential
LC Limited Commercial
GD General Development
SP Stream Protection
14
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES SP RP LR LC GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring
structures such as hunting, fishing and hiking YES YES YES YES YES
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and
trails YES YES YES YES YES
3. Forest management activities except for timber
harvesting & land management roads YES YES YES YES YES
4. Timber harvesting YES CEO YES YES YES
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities
other than timber harvesting CEO CEO YES YES YES
6. Fire prevention activities YES YES YES YES YES
7. Wildlife management practices YES YES YES YES YES
8. Soil and water conservation practices YES YES YES YES YES
9. Mineral exploration NO YES (2) YES (2)
YES
(2) YES (2)
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel
extraction NO PB (3) PB PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis YES YES YES YES YES
12. Emergency operations YES YES YES YES YES
13. Agriculture YES PB YES YES YES
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB YES YES
15. Principal structures an uses
A. One and two family residental including
driveways PB (4) PB (9) CEO CEO CEO
B. Multi-unit residential NO NO PB PB PB
C. Commercial NO NO (10) NO (10) PB PB
D. Industrial NO NO NO (10) NO PB
E. Governmental and Institutional NO NO PB PB PB
F. Small non-residentail facilities for educational,
scientific, or nature interpretation purposed PB (4) PB CEO CEO CEO
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB (4) PB CEO CEO YES
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other
structures and uses extending over or below the
normal
high-water line or within a wetland
a. Temporary
CEO
(11)
CEO
(11)
CEO
(11)
CEO
(11)
CEO
(11)
b. Permanent PB PB PB PB PB
15
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to yearround
residences LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
19. Home occupations PB PB PB CEO YES
20. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed
uses LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO (6) CEO (6) YES (12)
YES
(12)
YES
(12)
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution
lines involving ten poles or less in the shoreland
zone PB (6) PB (5) CEO CEO CEO
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution
lines involving eleven or more poles in the
shoreland zone PB (6) PB (6) PB PB PB
D. Other essential services PB (6) PB (6) PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses YES YES YES YES YES
23. Public and private recreational areas involving
minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO CEO
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds NO NO (7) PB PB PB
26. Road construction PB NO (8) PB PB PB
27. Land management roads YES PB YES YES YES
28. Parking facilities NO NO (7) PB PB PB
29. Marinas PB NO PB PB PB
30. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO YES YES YES
31. Filling and earth moving of >10cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO CEO
32. Signs YES YES YES YES YES
33. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
35. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB PB
(2) Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square
feet of surface area,
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
16
is disturbed
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(3) In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(4) Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the
Board of Appeals.
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(6) See further restrictions in Section 15(G)(3).
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(7) Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria, in
which case a
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
permit is required from the PB.
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(8) Except as provided in Section 15(G)(3)
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
(9) Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only
according to the
../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary
Internet
Files/OLK18D/SHORELAND
ZONING ORDINANC1.doc
provisions of Section 16(E), Special Exceptions. Two family residential structures are prohibited
(10) Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds
that are allowed in the respective district.
(11) Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is
required.
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department
of Environmental Protection, pursuant to 38 MRSA Section 480-C, if the activity occurs in,
on, over or adjacent to any fresh water wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and
and operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
17
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteation of any permanent structure.
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall
conform with the following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
Minimum Lot Mimimum
Area (sq. ft) Shore
Frontage ft.
(1)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit 40,000 200
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial
Or Industrial per principal structure 60000 300
© Public and Private Recreational
Facilities 40000 200
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of
a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not
be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was
established by owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22,
1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or
upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore
frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5)If more than one residential dwelling unit , principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial or use, or combination thereof, is
constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements
shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland,
18
except that in the General Development I District the setback from the
normal high-water line shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance. In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement
shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking
spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed in that district in
which case the setback requirements specified above shall apply.
In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall
neither apply to structures which require direct access to the water
body or wetland as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks
and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses.
(b) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential
structure exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory structure
meeting the required water body, tributary stream or wetland
setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a
single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard
tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure shall not
exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in height,
and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as
practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot
coverage and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the
structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than
the principal structure.
NOTE: A tributary stream may be perennial or intermittent. Where a tributary stream is
present within the shoreland zone, setback standards from that tributary stream are
applicable.
(2)Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures
which are permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential,
Limited Commercial, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to
structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar
structures have in no floor area.
(3)The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures,
including basements, shall be elevated at least one foot above the
elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of
these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent flood-plain
soils. In those municipalities that participate in the National Flood
Insurance Program and have adopted the April 2005 version, or later
version, of the Floodplain Management Ordinance, accessory structures
may be placed in accordance with the standards of that ordinance and
19
need not meet the elevation requirements of this paragraph.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other nonvegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty
(20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof, located within the shoreland
zone, including land area previously developed, except in the General
Development District, where lot coverage shall not exceed seventy (70)
per cent.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet
the structure setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and
associated fill provided all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated
buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is (are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland
edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally
existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally occurring
vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with vegetative
plantings.
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24
inches.
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on
rivers, streams, wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on
the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as
recent flood plain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or
a combination thereof, and no further structural development will
occur within the setback area, including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer-area is established within 25 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a natural buffer area does
not exist. The buffer area must meet the following characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is lacking
the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater
runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is
20
required, measured perpendicularly to the normal high-water
line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(O)(1)(a),
may traverse the buffer.
NOTE: If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of a water body, or tributary stream, a permit pursuant to the Natural
Resource Protection Act is required from the Department of environmental
Protection.
(5) Notwithstanding the requirement stated above, stairways or similar
(6) structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable
soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4)
feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland,
(unless permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, M.R.S.A. Section
480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access
alternative exists on the property.
C Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and other structures and Uses Extending
Over or Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a
Wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such
use and constructed so as to control erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural
beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on
fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension tan necessary to carry on
the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses
of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be wider than
six feet for non-commercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock
or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct
access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is
clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or
dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act.
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or
other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a
21
water body or within a wetland shall e converted to residential
dwelling units in any district.
(8) Except in the General Development Districts, structures built on,
over or abutting a pier, wharf or dock or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier,
wharf, dock or other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or over
water bodies shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 480-C. Permits
may also be required from the Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters.
D Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements
imposed under State licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5000) square
feet of land, not including roads and driveways for each site. Land
supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line
of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicles, tent or
shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
E Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated
with campgrounds are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or
thirty thousand (30000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone,
whichever is less, may be permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall beset back at least seventy-five
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a canopy shall
be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent
or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one
thousand (1000) square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and
location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall
be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site,
written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required.
22
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar is placed on-site for more
than one hundred and twenty days per year, all requirements for
residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public
sewage facilities.
Parking Areas
F. Parking Areas
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback
requirements for structures for the district in which such areas are
located. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public
boat launching facilities in Districts other than the General
Development I District shall be no less than fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the
Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists
further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and
shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing
directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and where
feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities,
the following shall apply:
(a) Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and
twenty (20) feet long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle
and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
G. Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts
and other related features.
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland
unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road
and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty
(50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant
that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation
of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts
23
and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or
driveway setback shall be increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal
distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty
(20) percent.
Section 15 (G)(1) does not apply to approaches to water
crossings or to roads or driveways that provide access to
permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline
or tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding
temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways
providing access to permitted structures within the setback area
shall comply fully with the requirements of Section 15(G)(1)
except for that portion of the road or driveway necessary for
direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road
right of way regardless of their setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection
District except that the Planning Board may grant a permit to
construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses
within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by
the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a
finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available
outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a
Resource Protection District, the road and/or driveway shall be set
back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland.
(4) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two
(2) horizontal to one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and
stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Section 15(P).
(5) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10)
percent for segments of less than two hundred (200) feet.
(6) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads
and driveways shall be designed , constructed, and maintained to
empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least (50) fifty feet plus
two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of
the ditch or culvert and normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage
which is directed to an un scarified buffer strip shall be diffused or
spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize
channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
(7) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
24
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch.
To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road, or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts
only where the grade is ten (10) percent or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent,
ditch relief culverts shall be places at approximately a (30)
degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the
centerline of the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and
their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with
appropriate materials.
(8) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
storm water runoff control installations associated with roads
and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning.
H. Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the
Resource Protection, Stream Protection, Limited Residential and
Limited Commercial Districts.
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be
allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square
feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises. In the
Limited Commercial District, however, such signs shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs relating to goods or
services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed
twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3)
25
square feet in area relating to the sale, rental or lease of the
premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without
restriction as to number provide that no such sign shall exceed (2)
two feet square.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the
ground.
(7) Signs may illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
I. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to
minimize storm water runoff from the site in excess of the natural
predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural
runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded
areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of stormwaters.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as
necessary to ensure proper functioning.
NOTE: The Stormwater Management Law (38 MRSA section 420-D) requires a full
permit to be obtained from the DEP prior to construction of a project consisting of 20,000
square feet or more of impervious area or 5 acres or more of a developed area in an urban
impaired stream watershed or most-at-risk lake watershed, or project with 1 acre or more
of developed area in any other stream or wetland watershed. A permit-by-rule is
necessary for a project with one acre or more of disturbed area but less than 1 acre
impervious area (20,000 square feet for most-at-risk lakes and urban impaired streams)
and less than 5 acres of developed area. Furthermore, a Maine Construction General
Permit is required if the construction will result in one acre or more of disturbed area.
J. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules, and the following: a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation
necessary to site a new system and any associated fill extensions, shall
not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water lie of a water body or the upland edge of a
wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first time residential
use in the shoreland zone.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems,
excluding fill extensions, to be constructed no less than one hundred (100) horizontal feet
from the normal high-water line of a perennial water body. The minimum setback
distance for a new subsurface disposal system may not be reduced by variance.
26
K. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be
limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side
distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection or
Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a
permitted use within said district, or except where the
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists.
Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located
so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding use and
resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and
distribution lines, towers and related equipment may be replaced
or reconstructed without a permit.
L Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to
determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet
of ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above
limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be
immediately capped, filled or secured by other equally effective
measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health
and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the
Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall
describe in detail procedures to be undertaken t fulfill the
requirements of Section 15 (L)(3) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and
runoff control features, shall be permitted within seventy-five
(75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland,
Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, of any property line without written
permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Within twelve (12) months following the completion of
extraction operations a any extraction site, which operations shall
be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100) cubic
yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12)
month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in
accordance with the following:
27
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location, or shall be buried on-site.
Only materials generated on-site may be buried or covered
On-site.
NOTE: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, 38 MRSA section 1301 and the solid
waste management rules, Chapters 400-419 of the Department of environmental
Protection’s regulations may contain other applicable provisions regarding disposal of
such materials.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one half to one
(2 ½:1) slope or flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land
areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation
native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be
obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the
stabilization project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning
Board may impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize
the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations
on surrounding uses and resources.
M. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in
conformance with the “Manure Utilization Guidelines”
published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on
November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7
MRSA sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within seventy-five
(75) feet horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream
or wetland. All manure storage areas within the shoreland
zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility
produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm
water.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet in surface area, within the
shoreland zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed
with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of
this Ordinance.
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a Conservation Plan may be available through the local
Soil and Water Conservation District Office.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within seventy-five (75)
28
feet, horizontal distance, from a water body, nor within
twenty-five feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and
wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be
permitted within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of
a water body, nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams and wetlands. Livestock
grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and which are
not in conformance with the above setback provisions may
continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in
accordance with a Conservation Plan.
NOTE: 17 MRSA section 2805(4) requires a municipality to provide the Commissioner
of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources with a copy of any proposed ordinance that
impacts farm operations. The law further requires the Commissioner to review the
proposed ordinance and advise the municipality if the proposed ordinance would restrict
or prohibit the use of best management practices. A copy of a shoreland zoning
ordinance that regulates no more restrictively than contained in these Guidelines need not
be provided to the Commissioner of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources.
N. Timber Harvesting
(1) Timber harvesting shall conform with the following
provisions:
(a) Selective cutting of nor more than forty (40) percent of
the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in
diameter measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level on any
lot in any ten (10) year period is permitted. In addition:
(i)Within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be
no clearcut openings and a well-distributed stand of
trees and other vegetation, including existing ground
cover, shall be maintained.
(ii)At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
water body or the upland edge of a wetland, harvesting
operations shall not create single clearcut openings
greater than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in the
forest canopy. Where such openings exceed fivethousand
(5000) square feet they shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such
clearcut openings shall be included in the calculation
of total volume removal. Volume may be considered
to be equivalent to basal area.
29
(b) Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40%
limitation in Section 15(N)(i)(a) above, may be allowed by
the planning board upon a clear showing, including a forest
management plan signed by a Maine licensed professional
forest, that such an exception is necessary for good forest
management and will be carried out in accordance with the
purposes of this Ordinance. The planning Board shall notify
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection of each exception allowed, within fourteen (14)
days of the planning board’s decision.
(c) No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water
body. In all other areas slash shall either be removed or
disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no
part thereof extends more than four (4) feet above the ground.
Any debris that falls below the normal high-water line of a
water body or tributary stream shall be removed.
(d) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels
as travel routes except when:
(i) Surface waters are frozen; and
(ii) The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(e) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or
culvert, except in areas with low banks and channel beds
which are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface
which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
(f) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and
designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering
the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of
timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be
removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
(g) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where
the operation of machinery used in timber harvesting results
in the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that an
unscarified strip of vegetation of at least seventy-five (&%)
feet, horizontal distance, in width for slopes up to ten (10)
percent shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil
and the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland. For each ten (10) percent increase in
slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by twenty (20)
feet, horizontal distance. The provisions of this paragraph
apply only to a face sloping toward the water body or
wetland, provided, however, that no portion of such exposed
mineral soil on a back face shall be closer than twenty-five
(25) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
30
N-1. Timber Harvesting-Statewide Standards [Effective on effective
date established in Section 4(B)]
(1) Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting
timber harvesting and related activities must take reasonable
measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of
water body and tributary stream banks, water body and
tributary streams and wetlands. If, despite such precautions,
the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or
the disturbance of water body and tributary stream banks,
water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil
lying within water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands
occurs, such conditions bust be corrected.
(2) Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall
be conducted such that slash or debris is not left below the
normal high-water of any water body or tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland. Section 15(N-1)(2) does not
apply to minor, incidental amounts of slash that result from
timber harvesting and related activities otherwise conducted
in compliance with this section.
(a) Slash activity used to protect soil from
disturbance by
equipment or to stabilize exposed soil, may be
left in place, provided that no part thereof extends
more that 4 feet above the ground.
(b) Adjacent to rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within
50 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
and
(ii) Between 50 feet and 250 feet horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line or
upland edge of a wetland, all slash larger than
3 inches in diameter must be disposed of in
such a manner that no part thereof extends
more than 4 feet above the ground.
(3) Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate
tree cover and shall be conducted so that a well-distributed
stand of trees is retained. This requirement may be satisfied
by following one of the following three options:
(a) Option 1 (40% volume removal), as follows:
(i) Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the
total volume on each acre of trees 4.5 inches
DBH or greater in any 10 year period is
allowed. Volume may be considered to be
31
equivalent to basal area;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is
windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground cover, must be maintained;
and,
(iii)Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of rivers and streams,
and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of a wetland, there must be no
cleared openings. At distances greater than 75
feet, horizontal distance, the normal highwater
line of a river or upland edge of a
wetland, timber harvesting and related
activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than 14000 square feet in the
forest canopy. Where such openings exceed
10000 square feet, they must be at least 100
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such
cleared openings will be included in the
calculation of total volume removal. Volume
may be considered equivalent to basal area.
(b) Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), as
follows:
(i) The residual stand must contain an average
basal area of at least 60 square fee per acre of
woody vegetation greater than r equal to 1.0
inch DBH, of which 40 square feet per acre
must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches
DBH;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is
windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground over, must be maintained; and
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of water bodies and
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of wetlands, there must be no
cleared openings. At distances greater than
75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a river, or upland edge of a
wetland, timber harvesting and related
activities must not create single cleared
openings greater than 14000 square feet in the
forest canopy. Where such openings exceed
10000 square feet, they must be at least 100
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Volume bay
32
be considered equivalent to basal area.
© Option 3 (Outcome based), which requires: An
alternative method proposed in an application,
signed by a Licensed Forester or certified
wildlife professional, submitted by the
landowner or designated agent to the State of
Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of
Forestry (Bureau) for review and approval,
which provides equal or better protection of the
shoreland area than this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification
form required by 12 MRSA chapter 805, sub chapter 5 which
option they choose to use. If landowners choose Option 1 or
Option 2, compliance will be determined solely on the criteria for
the option chosen. If landowners choose Option 3, timber
harvesting and related activities may not begin until the Bureau has
approved the alternative method. The Bureau may verify that
adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of trees is retained
through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located
randomly or systematically to provide a fair representation of the
harvest area.
(4) Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement
applies to the construction, maintenance, and use of skid trails
and yards in shoreland areas.
(a) Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities
shall not use river, stream or tributary stream channels as
travel routes except when surface waters are frozen and
snow covered, and the activity will not result in any
ground disturbance.
(b) Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to
prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff from
entering a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Upon
termination of their use, skid trails and yards must be
stabilized.
© Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of
mineral soil within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of any
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of 10
percent or greater, the setback for equipment operation
must be increased by 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an
additional 10 feet, horizontal distance, for each 5 percent
increase in slope above 10 percent. Where slopes fall
away from the resource, no increase in the 25-foot setback
33
is required.
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate
techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques
may include the installation of sump holes or settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or
disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions
must be corrected.
(5) Land Management Roads. Land management roads,
including approaches to crossings of water bodies, tributary
stream channels, and wetlands, ditches and other related
structures, must be designed, constructed, and maintained to
prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff from directly
entering the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Surface
water on or adjacent to water crossing approaches must be
diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid sedimentation
of the watercourse or wetland, Because roadside ditches may
not extend to the resource being crossed, vegetative filter
strips must be established in accordance with the setback
requirements in Section 15(N-1)(7) of this rule.
(a)Land management roads and associated ditches,
excavation, and fill must be set back at least:
(i) 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a river or wetland;
(ii) 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of streams; and
(iii) 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of tributary streams.
(b) The minimum 100 foot setback specified in Section 15(N-
1)(5)(a)(i) above may be reduced to no less than 50 feet,
horizontal distance, and the 50 foot setback specified in
Section 15(N-1)(5)(a)(ii) above may be reduced to no less
than 25 feet, horizontal distance, if, prior to construction,
the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent
demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no
reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch
relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation
of the water body, tributary stream or wetland, If, despite
34
such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of the
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
© On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management
road setback must be increased by at least 20 feet,
horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10
percent.
(c) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
(d) water control installations associated with roads must be
maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning. Drainage structures shall deliver a dispersed
flow of water into an unscarified filter strip no less than
the width indicated in the setback requirements in Section
15(N-1)(7). Where such a filter strip is impracticable,
appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland, Such techniques may include the installation of
sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts
placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or ditch water turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or
the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
(e) Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the
water control installations required in Section 15(N-
1)(5)(e) must continue until of the road is discontinued
and the road is put to bed by effective installation of water
bars or other adequate road drainage structures at
appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid surface water
flowing over or under the water bar, and extending a
sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water
does not reenter the road surface.
(f) Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of
presently existing roads must conform to the provisions of
Section 15(N-1). Any nonconforming existing roads road
continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more
nonconforming.
(g) Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing
roads need not conform to the setback requirements of
Section 15(N-1)(5)(a) if, prior to extension or
enlargement, the landowner or the landowner’s designated
35
agent demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction
that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch
relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation
of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite
such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
(h) Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing
minimum requirements, persons undertaking construction
and maintenance of roads and river, stream and tributary
stream crossings must take reasonable measures to avoid
sedimentation of surface waters.
(6) Crossings of waterbodies. Crossings of rivers, streams,
and tributary streams must allow for fish passage at all times
of the year, must not impound water, and must allow for the
maintenance of normal flows.
(a) Determination of flow. Provided they are properly
applied and used for the circumstances for which they are
designed, methods including but not limited to the
following are acceptable as a means of calculating the 10
year and 25 year frequency water flows and thereby
determining water crossing sizes as required in Section
15(N-1): The United States Geological Survey (USGS)
Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating
the Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for
Selected Recurrence Intervals. U.S. Geological Survey.
Water Resources Investigations Report 9904008. 45pp.
(b) Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or
enlargement of presently existing water crossings may
continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more
nonconforming; however, any maintenance or repair
work done below the normal high-water line must
conform to the provisions of Section 15(N-1).
(c) Other Agency Permits. Any timber harvesting and
related activities involving the design, construction, and
maintenance of crossings on waterbodies other than a
river, stream or tributary stream may require a permit
from the Land Use Regulation Commission, the
Department of Environmental Protection, or the US
Army Corps of Engineers.
36
(d) Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the
design, construction, and maintenance of crossings of
wetlands identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat
require prior consultation with the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Notice to Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water
crossing construction, maintenance, alteration and replacement
activities in shoreland areas must be given to the Bureau prior
to the commencement of such activities. Such notice must
contain all information required by the Bureau, including:
(i) a map showing the location of all proposed permanent
crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of al proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a
permit from state or federal agencies, a copy of the
approved permit or permits; and
(iv) a statement signed by the responsible party that all
temporary and permanent crossings will be constructed,
maintained, and closed out in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
(f) Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a
bridge or culvert sized according to the requirements of
Section 15(N-1)(6)(g) below. Streams and tributary streams
may be crossed using temporary structures that are not
bridges or culverts provided:
(i) concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or
tributary stream channel;
(ii) sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
(iii) there is no substantial disturbance of the bank, stream or
tributary stream channel;
(iv) fish passage is not impeded; and
(v) water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
Subject to Section 15(n-1)(6)(f)(i-v) above, skid trail
crossings of streams and tributary streams when channels of
such streams and tributary streams are frozen or snowcovered
or are composed of a hard surface which will not be
eroded or otherwise damaged are not required to use
permanent or temporary structures.
(g) Bridge and Culvert Sizing. For crossings of river, stream
and tributary stream channels with a bridge or culvert, the
following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to
provide an opening sufficient in size and structure to
accommodate 10 year frequency water flows or with a
cross-sectional area at least equal to 2 ½ times the cross37
sectional area of the river, stream, or tributary stream
channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than
provided in Section 15(N-1)(6)(g)(i) if techniques are
effectively employed such that in the event of culvert or
bridge failure, the natural course of water flow is
maintained and sedimentation of the water body or
tributary stream is avoided. Such crossing structure
must be at least as wide as the channel and placed above
the normal high-water line. Techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the effective use of any, a
combination of, or all of the following:
1. use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen
ground conditions;
3. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream
crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream or tributary
stream bed elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side
of the culvert;
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot
or according to the culvert manufacturer’s
specifications, whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is
adequately stabilized by riprap or other suitable
means to reasonably avoid erosion of material
around the culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed
under Section 15(N-1), but located in flood hazard areas
(i.e. A zones) as identified on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps (FHBM), must be designed and constructed under
the stricter standards contained in that community’s
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). For
example, a water crossing may be required to pass a
100-year flood event.
(v) Exception. Skid trail crossings of tributary streams
within shoreland areas and wetlands adjacent to such
streams may be undertaken in a manner not in
conformity with the requirements of the foregoing
subsections provided persons conducting such activities
take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of
38
shoreline integrity, the occurrence of sedimentation of
water, and the disturbance of stream banks, stream
channels, shoreline, and soil lying within ponds and
wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(h) Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting
and related activities, or upon the expiration of a Forest
Operations Notification, whichever is earlier, the following
requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and
tributary stream crossings by skid trails must either be
removed and areas of exposed soil stabilized, or upgraded
to comply with the closeout standards for land
management roads in Section 15(N-1)(6)(i) below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts
must either be removed immediately following timber
harvesting and related activities, or , if frozen into the
river, stream or tributary stream bed or bank, as soon as
practical after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks and
approaches to crossings of water bodies and tributary
streams must be immediately stabilized on completion of
harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or snow-covered, as
soon as practical after snowmelt. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected/
(i) Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the
water control features must continue until use of the road is
discontinued and the road is put to bed by taking the
following actions:
(i)Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road
drainage structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to
reasonably avoid surface water flowing over or under the
water bar, and extending sufficient distance beyond the
traveled way so that water does not reenter the road
surface.
(ii)Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or
dismantled and removed in a manner that reasonably avoids
sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream.
(iii)Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be
discontinued shall satisfy one of the following
requirements.
1. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in
size and structure to accommodate 25 year frequency
water flows;
2. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a
39
cross-sectional area at least 3 ½ times the cross-sectional
area of the river, stream or tributary stream channel; or
3. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to
reasonably avoid sedimentation of the river, stream or
tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption
of shoreline integrity occurs such conditions must be
corrected.
(7) Slope Table
Filter strips, skid trail, setbacks, and land management road
setbacks must be maintained as specified in Section 15(N-1),
but in no case shall be less than shown in the following table.
Average slope of land between exposed mineral Width of strip between exposed
Soil and the shoreline (percent) mineral soil and shoreline
(feet along surface of the ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
O. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) Except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land
extending seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from a water body,
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation
shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest
canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not
present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured between
tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of
sight to the eater through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a
well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For
the purposes of Section 15(O)(1)(b) a “well distributed stand of trees” shall
be defined as maintaining a rating score of 16 or more in each 25-foot by 50-
foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the following rating
system.
Diameter of Tree at 4 ½ feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
40
2-<4 in 1
4-<8 in 2
8-<12 in 4
12 in or greater 8
NOTE: As an example, if a 25 foot x 50 foot plot contains four (4) trees between 2 and 4
inches in diameter, two trees between 4 and 8 inches in diameter, three trees between 8
and 12 inches in diameter, and two trees over 12 inches in diameter, the rating score is :
(4x1)+(2x2)+(3x4)+(2x8)= 36 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 50-foot plot contains trees worth 36 points. Trees totaling 20 points
(36-20=16) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings are created.
The flowing shall govern in applying this pointy system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the landowner or
lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed except
as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15 (O)(i)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at
least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet
above ground level for each 25–foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three
feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer,
shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described in Section 15(O) paragraphs (1) and (1)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these
openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth
is present.
Section 15(O)(i) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent
to public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area
necessary.
(2) At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
41
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland,
there shall be allowed on any lot, an any ten(10) year period, selective cutting of nor
more than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four (4) inches or more in
diameter, measured 4 ½ feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with
the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty (40) percent
calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area.
(3) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not
be enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(4) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or
other woody vegetation shall b e regulated under the provisions of Section 15(O).
P. Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar
activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a
permit shall also require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall
include, where applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches..
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retainng walls or riprap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed
to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and
natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the
proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during
all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of
construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within
one (1) week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod,
seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent
stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure.
In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per
five hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method
may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid
siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay
bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected
from erosion from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be
designed and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty five (25) year
storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
42
(Q) Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental
impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and
water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring
subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other
similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons
may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional
Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have training
and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report
shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil surrounding land
and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The
soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil
limitations where they exist.
(R) Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the
waters of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other
activities or substances, will impair designated uses or the water classification of
the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(S) Archeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural
development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting
authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to action
being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider
comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the
application.
NOTE: Municipal officials should contact the Maine Historic Preservation Commission
for the listing and location of Historic Places in their community.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed or reappointed annually by July first.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance
with the provisions of 30-A MRSA section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with
the provisions of State Law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall,
without first obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or
structure requiring a permit in the district in which such activity or use would
occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or structure; or renew a
43
discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit pursuant
to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work
authorized by the permit is performed.
C. Permit Application.
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including
a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality, to the
appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show
evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an agent,
representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner with authorization
from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the
information in the application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall note upon each application the
date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit
or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site
evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted
whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use would require the
installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits. Within 35 days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement
Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall notify the applicant in writing either
that the application is a complete application, or, if the application is
incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to make the
application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer,
as appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit
applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a completed application.
However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision
on the application shall occur within 35 days after the first available date on
the Planning Board’s agenda following receipt of the completed application,
or within 35 days of the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is
found to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this
Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use
activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the
Board shall approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes a
positive finding based on the information presented that the proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface
44
waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life,
bird or other wildlife habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access
to inland waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the
comprehensive plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use;
and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use
Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as
conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an
application involving a structure if the structure would be located in an
unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance, or
regulation or stature administered by the municipality.
E Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D)
above, excepting structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may
approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a Resource
Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the
Resource Protection District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was
established and recorded in the registry of deeds of the county in which
the lot is located before the adoption of the Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other
improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along
rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated
on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings,
including basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-
year flood-plain elevation; and the development is otherwise in
compliance with any applicable municipal flood-plain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be ½ the width of the
100-year flood-plain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar
overhanging extensions, of all principal and accessory structures is
45
limited to a maximum of 1500 square feet. This limitation shall not be
altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set
back from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream
or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent, but not less
than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest practical
extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope
of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of
vegetation to be removed, the proposed building site’s elevation in
regard to the flood-plain, and its proximity to moderate-value and highvalue
wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits shall expire one year fro the date of issuance if a
substantial start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during
that period. If a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the
permit, the applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project, at
which time the permit shall expire.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary
district r any utility company of any kind may not install services to any new
structure located in the shoreland zone unless written authorization attesting to
the validity and currency of all local permits required under this or any
previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or
other written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials
and the utility.
H. Appeals.
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall
have the following powers:
(a)Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals,
on an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration
of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a
de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or
failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of
and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any order,
requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the
enforcement of this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of
Appeals.
NOTE: Whether an administrative appeal is decided on an “appellate” basis or on a “do
novo” basis, or whether an enforcement decision is appealable to the board of appeals,
46
shall be the decision of the municipality through its specific ordinance language. The
Department is not mandating one alternative over the other. If a municipality chooses
appleals procedures different from those in Section 16(H), it is recommended that
assistance be sought from legal counsel to ensure that the adopted language is legally
sound.
(b)Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the
limitations set forth in this Ordinance.
(2) Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following
conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted from dimensional
requirements including, but not limited to, lot width, structure height,
percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses
otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
(c) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of
Section 15 except for the specific provision which has created
the non-conformity and from which relief is sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would
result in undue hardship. The term “undue hardship” shall
mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Board of
Appeals may grant a variance to an owner of a residential dwelling
for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with
a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The board
shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the
installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary
for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the
disability. The board may impose conditions on the variance,
including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to
the time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling.
The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from the
dwelling” shall include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for
the safety or effectiveness of the structure.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as
possible in order to ensure conformance with the purposes and
47
provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent possible, and in
doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply with any
conditions imposed.
(f) A Copy of each variance request, including the application and all
supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded
by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by
the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be
made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the
Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer the Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this
time the Board may receive and consider new evidence and testimony,
be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own
independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its own
decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it
shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of the
Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to
specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to
the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record
of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals
shall not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to
the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider
written or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the
record of the Planning Board proceedings are inadequate, the Board of
Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board for additional fact
finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board
of Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, except for
enforcement-related matters as described in Section
16(H)(1)(a) above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty
(30) days of the date of the official written decision appealed
from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing
of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board
of Appeals a written notice of appeal which includes:
48
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why the appeal or variance should be granted.
b A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of
existing buildings and structures and other physical features
of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or
a variance, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board,
as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of
the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed
from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an
administrative appeal or a request for a variance within
thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a complete written
application, unless this time period is extended by the
parties.
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and
variance appeals within thirty-five (35) days after the close
of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for
its decision, including a statement of the facts found and
conclusions reached by the Board. The Board shall cause
written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered
to the applicant and to the Department of Environmental
Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision.
Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be
given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer,
and the municipal officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A MRSA section
2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five (45)
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A MRSA section 2691(3)(F),
the Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five
(45) days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a
decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision that is being
reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken n that
reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five (45)
days of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration
of a decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board
members originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to
49
the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement officer,
and other parties of interest, including abuttors and those who testified
at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings
and receive additional evidence and testimony. Appeal of a
reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen
(15) days after the decision on reconsideration.
I Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that
any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including
discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, and abatement
of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the
municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure
compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit
approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all
complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted
or denied, variances granted or denied, revocation actions, revocation of
permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and
fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this record shall be
submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land and Water Quality within
the Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or
abatement of the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon
notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any
and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby
authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering fines without Court
action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue
unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was
constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an
authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad
faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard
to public health and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent
or a contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall
50
be penalized in accordance with 30-A MRSA section 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500 per
violation for each day that the violation continues. However, in a resource protection
district the maximum penalty is increased to $5000 (38 MRSA section 4452).
17. Definitions.
Accessory structure or use-a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not
subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal
structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is
considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party-an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by
the granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose
land abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person
or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting
or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture-the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or
animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops;
dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and
vegetables; and ornamental and greenhouse products. Agriculture does not include
forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture-the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or
marine plant or animal species.
Basal Area-the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 ½ feet above ground level and
inclusive of bark.
Basement-any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more
and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility-a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing
of watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking
spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau-State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry.
Campground-any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in
temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or
other shelters.
Canopy-the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
51
Commercial use-the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other a “home
occupation,” defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production
of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental
of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Cross-sectional area-the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel
is determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the
average stream or tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream
channel width is the straight line distance from the normal high-water line on one
side of the channel to the normal-high-water line on the opposite side of the channel.
The average stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical
distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the stream or
tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.
DBH-the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development-a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or
vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other construction not
naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements-numerical standards relating to spatial relationships
including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability-any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or
mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect,
environmental conditions or illness; and also includes the physical or mental
condition of a person which constitutes a substantial handicap as determined by a
physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well
as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education,
vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Disruption of shoreline integrity-the alteration of the physical shape, properties or
condition of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A
shoreline where shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted,
scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in
the case of flowing waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.
Driveway-a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving
two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling or less.
Emergency operations-operations conducted for the public health, safety or general
welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law
enforcement and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the
threat of destruction or injury.
52
Essential services-gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric
power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment;
telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other
similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and
associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains,
drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings
which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure-an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure,
including all extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches
and greenhouses.
Expansion of use-the addition of one or more months to a use’s operating season; or
the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family-one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
Floodway-the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot in height.
Floor area-the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by
exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such
as porches and decks.
Forest management activities-timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation
activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber
stand improvement, pruning, regeneration f forest stands and other similar or
associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
Forested wetland-a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6)
meters tall (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller,
Forest stand-a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class
distribution, composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform
quality, to be a distinguishable unit.
Foundation-the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding
wooden sills and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other
base consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Freshwater wetland-freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than
forested wetlands, which are:
53
1. Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and
adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such
that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a
duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils.
Frashwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not conform to the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses-those uses that require for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland
waters and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are
not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding
recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and
retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities,
shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels,
retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or
requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be
located or operated at an inland site, and uses that primarily provide general public
access to inland waters.
Ground cover-small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed
organic matter of the forest floor.
Harvest Area-the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the
cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The
area affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these
activities, excepting unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected
by a harvest.
Height of a structure-the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to
construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the
structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that
have no floor area.
Home occupation-an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or
in a residential structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and
compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses;
and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members
residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure-any change in a structure or property which
causes further deviation from the dimensional standard9S0 creating the
nonconformity such as, but no limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or
wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure.
54
Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard
or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example,
there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies,
wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the required
setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing
structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this
allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite-an area of land which is not associated with a
campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to
exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements which may include
but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Industrial-The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or
processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
Institutional-a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library,
public or private school, hospital or municipally owned or operated building,
structure or land used for public purposes.
Land Management Road- a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of
motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities,
including associated log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads.
Licensed Forester-a forester licensed under 32 MRSA Chapter 76.
Lot Area-The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land
below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and
areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
Marina-a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its
principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and
which may also provide accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair
and construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and
tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market value-the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer,
both conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
55
Mineral exploration-hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the
nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land
and which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction-any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes
more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay,
rock, peat or other like material from its natural location and to transport the product
removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width-the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only
two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be
side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential-a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential
dwelling units.
Native-indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition-non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed
solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendment took effect.
Non-conforming lot-a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width
requirements of the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming structure-a structure which does not meet any one or more of the
following dimensions requirements: setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordnance or
subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal high-water line-that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in
the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation,
and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers that support non-forested wetland vegetation and
hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river
during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river.
Person-an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest,
or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond
the normal high-water line or within a wetland.
Temporary: Structures which in or over the water for less than seven (7)
months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
56
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7)
months or more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months.
Principal structure-a building other than one which is used for purposes wholly
incidental or accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal use-a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another
use on the same premises.
Public facility-any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property,
recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or
funded by a governmental body or public entity.
Recent floodplain soils-the following soil series as described and identified by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Poduck Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility-a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure
time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat
launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle-a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed,
and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and
which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and
motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit
must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State
Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system-a system intended to replace: 1)an existing system which is
either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or
use of the structure, or 2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit-a room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one
family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall
include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet
facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not
residential dwelling units.
Residual basal area-the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested
site.
57
Riprap-rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for
erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units
horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
Residual Stand-a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting
and related activities.
River-a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from
that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square
miles to its mouth.
Road-a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or
other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of
motorized vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
Service drop-any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any
portion of a water body provided that:
1. in the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely
upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway rightof-
way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1000) feet.
2. in the case of telephone service
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement
underground is less than one thousand (1000) feet in length.
Setback-the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body
or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shore frontage-the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot line with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone-the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any river; within 250 feet of the upland edge of
a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a stream.
Shoreline-the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a wetland.
Skid road or Skid trail-a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul
or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which
requires minimal excavation.
58
Slash-residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left of the ground after a timber harvest.
Stream-a free-flowing body of water from the confluence of two (2) perennial streams as
depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute
series topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the
point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland
within the shoreland area.
Structure-anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods
or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial
equipment normally associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors.
The term includes structure temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios,
and satellite dishes.
Substantial start-completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system-any system designed to dispose of waste or waste
water on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks;
disposal fields; grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or an
other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 MRSA section 414, any surface waste water disposal
system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment system.
Sustained sloe-a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measure area.
Timber harvesting and related activities-the cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose f selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the
shoreland zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall
not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated
pursuant to Section 15, “Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than
Harvesting.
Timber harvesting and related activities-timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted
to facilitate timber harvesting.
Tributary stream-means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a
bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or
bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary
stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity.
59
This definition does not include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this
Ordinance, and only app0lies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the
shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
NOTE: Water setback requirements apply to tributary streams within the shoreland zone.
Upland edge of a wetland-the boundary between upland and wetland d. For purposes of a
fresh water wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that six (6) meters
(approximately twenty (20) foot)tall or taller.
Vegetation-all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both
over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level.
Volume of a structure-the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body-any river or stream.
Water crossing-any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river,
stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland.
Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, waterlines,
sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland-a freshwater wetland.
Windfirm-the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow,
wind rocking and major breakage.
Woody vegetation-live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Town of Norridgewock
Site Plan
Review Ordinance
Approved
March 2, 2015
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
1. Purposes..............................................................................................................,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,..............3
2. Authority.......................................................................................................................................................................3
3. EffectiveDate................................................................................................................................................................3
4. Amendments...............................................................................................................................................................3
5. Conflicts with other Ordinances.........................................................................................................................4
6. Severability..................................................................................................................................................................4
7. Availability...................................................................................................................................................................4
8. Applicability.................................................................................................................................................................4
9. Administration and Enforcement......................................................................................................................5
10. Review Criteria..........................................................................................................................................................11
11. Application Procedure...........................................................................................................................................12
12. General Development Standards......................................................................................................................17
13. Definitions..................................................................................................................................................................33
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
3
1. Purposes.
The purposes of this Site Review Ordinance are:
A. To establish a procedure whereby the Planning Board may review new proposals to use
or develop land and buildings for commercial purposes. Possible uses include
commercial, industrial, office, community and service uses, municipal, institutional,
utility, and recreational uses.
B. To establish a fair and reasonable set of standards for evaluating each development.
C. To mitigate potential nuisances associated with development.
D. To address a wide range of environmental and planning issues associated with
development including: noise, odors, stormwater, erosion, phosphorus, waterbody
protection, traffic, parking, light and glare, scenic resources, groundwater, historic and
archeological resources, significant wildlife and aquatic resources, and other natural
resources.
E. To reduce off-site impacts from negatively affecting municipal services and
infrastructure.
F. To protect the water quality of all lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, brooks, wetlands, and
aquifers within the community.
2. Authority.
This Ordinance is prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A Section 3001 of
the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Effective Date.
This Ordinance is effective upon adoption at a Town Meeting.
4. Amendments.
This Ordinance may only be amended by majority vote of the legislative body, either at a
Town Meeting or through a referendum ballot. Amendments may be initiated by a majority
vote of the Board of Selectpersons, Planning Board, or by written petition by a number of
voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast in the municipality in the last
gubernatorial election.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
4
5. Conflicts with Other Ordinances.
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by
the Town of Norridgewock, or State of Maine, the more restrictive provision shall control.
6. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Availability.
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at
reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of
this Ordinance shall be posted in the Town Office.
8. Applicability.
A. Development for which a Site Review Permit is required:
1. Planning Board Review: The construction or placement of any new building or
structure for a non-residential use, including accessory buildings and structures,
totaling 2,500 square feet or more.
2. Code Enforcement Officer Review:
a. Non-residential use, including accessory buildings and structures, totaling less
than 2,500 square feet.
b. The construction or placement of any new building or structure for residential
use.
c. The expansion of an existing non-residential building or structure, including
accessory buildings and structures, that will enlarge the building or structure.
d. The conversion of an existing building, in whole or in part, from a residential use
to a non-residential use, provided the non-residential building or structure.
e. The conversion of an existing non-residential use, in whole or in part, to another
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
5
non-residential use.
f. The establishment of a new, non-residential use, even if no buildings or structures
are proposed, including such uses as gravel pits, mining operations, cemeteries, and
golf courses.
g. All development 35 feet or over in height.
h. For an existing non-residential use development: construction or modification of
any structure or use on site, such as, but not limited to signs, lighting, parking areas,
or landscaping, must conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
Note: All NON-RETAIL agricultural structures are exempt from review under this
ordinance. This includes temporary, seasonal farm stands.
Note: For all development that does not meet the above criteria a permit must still be
issued by either the CEO that allows work to begin and explaining its exemption
from full review.
9. Administration and Enforcement.
THE REVIEW AUTHORITY AS IT RELATES TO THIS ORDINANCE IS AS DEFINED UNDER
SECTION 8, SUB-SECTIONS 1 or 2
A. Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To administer this Ordinance.
2. To hear and decide upon applications according to this Ordinance.
3. To develop site review application forms.
4. To exercise additional powers and duties authorized by statute.
5. To review and propose updates to this Ordinance.
6. To conduct site visits and to review applications as authorized by this Ordinance.
7. To provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a written decision of each application
that they have authority to review.
B. Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties for all
construction, regardless of square footage:
1. To enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. To issue permits, and perform permit reviews as authorized by this Ordinance.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
6
3. To issue stop work orders and other appropriate notices of violation.
4. To investigate complaints and reported violations.
5. To maintain an appropriate public record of all permits issued, permit applications,
enforcement actions and other appropriate documents.
6. To provide the state of Maine with information concerning permits and development
activity as required.
7. To revoke permits issued in error or which are based upon erroneous information.
8. To assist the public with inquiries and other requests for information concerning this
Ordinance.
9. To enter property at reasonable hours or enter any building with the consent of the
property owner, occupant or agent to inspect the property or building for compliance
with this Ordinance.
10. To exercise additional powers and duties authorized by statute.
11. To assist the Planning Board with the review process.
12. To conduct site visits and to review applications as authorized by this Ordinance.
13. To issue permits.
C. Site Review Permits.
The Review Authority shall review and decide upon all applications and shall submit
their written decision within two (2) business days of approval on each application to
the Code Enforcement Officer File and/or applicant. The Planning Board shall prepare
the permit approval, including any conditions and submit it to the Code Enforcement
Officer, who shall issue the permit to the applicant.
No work or other development shall be undertaken on any use or project that requires
review until a permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. Permit Fee.
A non-refundable application fee payable to the Town of Norridgewock shall be
submitted with the application. The fee shall be established by the Board of
Selectpersons.
In addition to the application fee, all applicants for a Site Review Permit may be required
to pay an escrow fee of $1,000 per application, to be deposited in a special escrow
account designated for that development application. This fee shall be used for hiring
independent consulting services to review engineering and other technical submissions
associated with the application, and to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. If the
balance in this special account is drawn down by 75%, the Planning Board shall notify
the applicant, and require that the balance be brought back up to the original deposit
amount. The Planning Board shall continue to notify the applicant and require a deposit
as necessary whenever the balance of the escrow account is drawn down by 75% of the
original deposit. Failure to comply with this escrow fee requirement, at any time during
the review process, renders the application incomplete, and precludes further review of
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
7
the application. Any remaining balance in the escrow account thirty (30) days after a
final decision on the application shall be returned to the applicant. At any time during
the application review the municipality shall provide the applicant, upon written
request, an accounting of the expenditures from the fund. All expendatures will be
detailed at final close out.
E. Permit Expiration.
Permits are valid for 12 months from the date of the Review Authority’s approval for the
substantial start of construction. Permits that have expired shall become null and void
and the applicant shall obtain another permit as required by this Ordinance by
submitting another site review application to the Review Authority. A permit is
transferable to subsequent owners of the property.
F. Decisions.
After review of a complete application, the Review Authority shall determine whether
the proposal meets the review criteria contained in this Ordinance. The Review
Authority shall make a written finding of fact to support its decision and vote to approve
the application, approve the application with conditions, or deny the application. The
Review Authority shall submit its decision to the applicant and the Code Enforcement
Officer File within two (2) business days.
G. Burden of Proof.
The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that the proposal meets the
applicable review criteria and the standards contained in this Ordinance.
H. Rights not Vested.
The submittal of the application to the Code Enforcement Officer to review for a
complete application shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for the
purposes of bringing the application under the protection of Title 1, MRSA, Section 302.
The formal review process shall begin upon written notification from the Review
Authority to the applicant that a complete application has been received.
I. Site Inspection.
The Review Authority may perform an on-site inspection of the proposed project to
obtain knowledge about the site and the surrounding area.
J. Waivers.
1. The Review Authority may vote to waive any of the development standards or
submission requirements in this Ordinance when it finds one of the following:
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
8
a. One or more of the submission requirements, or development standards are not
applicable to the proposal due to the size of the project, circumstances of the site,
design of the project, type of project, or unique features of the proposed use.
b. The applicant may submit alternative designs, which meet or exceed performance
standards required under this ordinance. Such submissions shall not be waived
but may replace standard submissions.
2. The applicant shall submit information and materials to support the waiver request
with the application.
3. The Review Authority may only consider a waiver request when the applicant has
submitted a written waiver request in the application. The first item of the
application review shall be a consideration of any waiver request. The Review
Authority shall review the waiver request and, if it meets the appropriate criteria,
shall approve the request, and submit its decision, in writing, to the applicant. If the
Review Authority finds that the waiver request does not meet the criteria, it shall
deny the waiver and require the applicant to revise the application, as necessary.
The Review Authority may vote to suspend review of the application until the
applicant can supply all the necessary information. The applicant shall submit all
required information to the Review Authority within 60 calendar days of the denial
of the waiver request. Failure to submit the information within this time will require
that a new application be submitted for review. In no case shall the Review Authority
make a final decision on the application until the applicant supplies additional
information to the satisfaction of the Authority.
4. All waivers approved by the Review Authority shall be documented during the
review process.
K. Conditions.
Upon consideration of the review criteria, the Review Authority may attach such
conditions to the proposed application that it finds necessary to further the purposes of
this ordinance. Conditions are limited further to address items already contained in this
Ordinance. A condition may not be imposed to regulate any item not specifically
addressed in this Ordinance.
In determining whether conditions are appropriate or necessary, the Review Authority
shall consider the unique features of the following: site and surrounding area; proposed
use and proposed structure. A written finding of fact shall be created stating that unique
features are found to exist and suitable conditions can be imposed that will allow the
proposal to meet the purposes of this Ordinance.
The conditions shall be listed in the permit and shall be made enforceable under this
Ordinance.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
9
L. Public Hearing Requirements.
The Planning Board may hold a public hearing on each site review application as follows:
1. The public hearing shall be held within 30 days after the proposed application is
deemed complete. This period may be extended for up to 60 days by mutual consent
by the applicant and the Planning Board.
2. The notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be made as follows:
a. Published at least twice in a newspaper having general circulation within the
municipality. The date of the first publication shall be at least 7 days before the
hearing.
b. Mailed by first class mail to the applicant, at least 7 days prior to the hearing.
c. Mailed by certified, return receipt requested mail to all abutting property owners
as determined from the current tax assessment data, at least 7 days before the
public hearing. The Planning Board shall maintain a list of all property abutters
mailed a notice in the application file. Failure of an abutter to receive a notice
shall not invalidate the public hearing, nor shall it require the Planning Board to
schedule another hearing.
d. All costs are to be paid by the applicant.
3. The Planning Board may vote to continue the public hearing to receive additional
public comment or information concerning the application. The Board is not required
to meet the notice requirements listed above for the continued public hearing.
M. Appeals.
All Appeals shall be heard by the Town of Norridgewock Board of Appeals and follow the
same procedure as the Appeals Ordinance.
N. Enforcement and Penalties.
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a record of all enforcement actions and
shall institute or cause to be instituted in the name of the Town any actions that
might be appropriate for the enforcement of this Ordinance, including the use of
administrative consent agreements.
2. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, landowner’s agent, or
contractor, who is responsible for a violation of this Ordinance is liable for the
penalties in Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4452.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
10
3. The Code Enforcement Officer may represent the Town in District Court pursuant to
Rule 80k. However, should the services of the Town Attorney be required in
litigation in a higher court of law, the CEO shall first review the case with the Board
of Selectpersons.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
11
10. Review Criteria.
An applicant for a Site Review Permit shall demonstrate that the proposed use or project
meets the review criteria listed below. The Review Authority shall not approve an
application unless it makes written findings that all of these criteria have been met.
i. The application is complete and application and escrow fees have been paid.
ii. The proposal conforms to all the applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
iii. The proposed activity will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the
land’s capacity to hold water so that an unsound or unhealthy condition results as per
the DEP’s Erosion and Sediment Control Manual, in force, at the time of the permits
approval.
iv. The proposed activity will not have an adverse impact on wetlands.
v. The proposed activity will not have an adverse impact upon any waterbody such as a
lake, pond, river or stream.
vi. The proposed activity will provide for adequate storm water management.
vii. The proposed activity will provide for adequate sewage disposal.
viii. The proposed activity will not adversely impact any floodplain areas and will conform
to the applicable requirements of the Town of Norridgewock Floodplain Management
Ordinance.
ix. The proposed activity will not result in air or water pollution.
x. The proposed activity has sufficient water available for the current and foreseeable
needs of the development.
xi. The proposed activity will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely
affect the quality or quantity of groundwater.
xii. The proposed activity will dispose of all solid waste in conformance with all local
regulations and that the type and quantity of waste proposed to be sent to Town
facilities will not exceed their capacity.
xiii. The proposed activity will not have a significant detrimental effect on adjacent land uses
or other properties, which might be affected by waste, noise, glare, fumes, smoke, dust,
odors or their effects.
xiv. The proposed activity will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or
unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing or proposed highways or roads.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
12
xv. The proposed activity to the maximum extent possible will not have an adverse affect on
the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife
habitat identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Town of
Norridgewock, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical
or visual access to the shoreline.
xvi. The proposed activity shall conform to all the applicable requirements of the Town’s
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, and all other local Ordinances.
xvii. The proposed activity will not increase a great pond’s phosphorus concentration, if the
development is within the watershed of a great pond.
xviii. The Town has the capacity to provide fire and rescue services to the development.
11. Application Procedure.
A. The applicant shall submit the site review application to the Code Enforcement Officer
along with the appropriate application fees.
B. The Town of Norridgewock shall issue a dated receipt to the applicant upon receiving
the application fee.
C. Within 35 days of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make a
determination whether the application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of
his/her determination.
1. If the application is not complete the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the
applicant in writing of the specific materials needed to complete the application.
The applicant shall provide the required materials according to listed procedures.
2. If the application is complete, and is subject to the Planning Board review
process, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board Chairman
in writing that a complete site review application has been received.
3. The Planning Board will place the application on an agenda for review and
consideration. The Planning Board will provide the Code Enforcement Officer
and the Applicant with the date, time and location of said meeting at least 16 days
prior to the meeting.
4. Non-Residential applicant will provide proof to the Planning Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer of notice to abutters of application and meeting date. This notification
to abutters should be sent by certified mail.
D. The applicant shall, at least 14 days prior to the scheduled Planning Board meeting,
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, 7 copies of the site review application. The Code
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
13
Enforcement Officer shall distribute to the Planning Board copies of the application prior
to the meeting. The applicant may provide reduced copies of maps and plans, however;
at least one full size (typically 24”x 36” depending on readability) set of plans shall be
submitted.
E. Substantive review of the application shall not be deemed to have begun until the Code
Enforcement Officer makes a finding that the application is complete.
F. The Planning Board shall make a final decision upon the application within 90 days of
the initial meeting. However, upon mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning
Board, the final decision may be extended.
G. The Planning Board shall submit their final decision in writing to the applicant and to the
Code Enforcement Officer within two (2) working days from the Planning Board
meeting. Any conditions imposed upon the application shall be listed in their final
decision.
H. Submission Requirements.
All site review applications shall be submitted on the forms developed by the Review
Authority. The following materials and information shall be included with the Site
Review Application. The applicant shall indicate those submission items that are not
applicable to the proposal due to the particular location or design of the proposal.
1. Site Review Application.
2. Site Review Application and escrow fee.
3. Waiver Request Form, if applicable.
4. General information including the following:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and applicant’s agent, if
applicable.
b. Property location, including address, map and lot number.
c. Verification of the applicant’s right, title or interest in the property. If such
evidence is other than outright ownership and title as evidenced by a deed duly
recorded in the Somerset County Registry of Deeds, the entire
document/documentation (other than reference(s) to purchase price and
financing terms, which may be redacted) whether by lease, option, contract or
otherwise establishing right, title and interest shall be submitted with the
application.
d. Estimated cost of the proposal.
e. Schedule of construction including anticipated beginning and completion dates.
f. A description of the project.
g. Estimated square footage of the proposal.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
14
5. General location information including the following:
a. A copy of the tax map showing the property and surrounding parcels. Including a
list of all persons abutting or within 500 feet of the property.
b. A copy of the Somerset County soil map showing the property.
c. A copy of the USGS Topographic map showing the property.
d. A copy of the Town Shoreland Zoning Map showing the property, if located in a
Shoreland District.
e. A copy of the FIRM Map showing the property, if located in a designated
floodplain.
f. A copy of the National Wetlands Inventory Map showing the property.
g. A map drawn to scale showing the location, boundaries, elevations, uses and size
of the following: developed site, type of structures, setbacks, parking areas,
driveways and roads, drainage ways, easements and rights-of-way, watercourses,
water bodies and wetlands, number of acres within the development, size of all
impervious areas, all other significant natural and physical features and true
north. Note: The Review Authority may require the drawing be done by a
licensed surveyor, a licensed engineer, or similar appropriately licensed
professional, depending on the scale and extent of the project.
6. The location of all proposed subsurface wastewater disposal systems.
7. Indication of the water source for the proposal including evidence that an adequate
water supply is available to supply all the water needs of the proposal including fire
suppression (please note: the fire chief or State Fire Marshall should be consulted to
determine whether or not appropriate structures are required to supply a water
source to handle a fire threat).
8. Evidence that all other local permits have been obtained including but not limited to:
Shoreland Zoning, and Floodplain Management.
9. An erosion control plan as per the requirements of this Ordinance.
10. A storm water control plan as per the requirements of this Ordinance.
11. A phosphorus control plan as per the requirements of this Ordinance.
12. The location of any site or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or any archeological site identified by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission.
If there is such a site, the applicant shall submit a copy of the plan and a copy of any
proposed mitigation measures to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission prior
to submitting the site plan application. The applicant shall request that the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission comment on the adequacy of the proposed
mitigation techniques. The applicant shall then submit the Commission’s comments
with its site plan application.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
15
13. The location of any significant wildlife resources or natural areas.
14. The traffic access data for the site including an estimate of the amount of vehicular
traffic to be generated on a daily basis.
15. Any proposed areas or structures to be dedicated for public use.
16. Scaled drawings showing the location and construction specifications for all
proposed roads including drainage features such as ditches and culverts, access
points, driveways, parking areas and other traffic management and control features.
17. Any other material to show that the applicable performance standards or other
requirements of this Ordinance are followed.
18. The estimated quantities of flammable or hazardous materials to be stored or
handled on site.
19. List of what flammable or hazardous material would be stored or handled on site and
appropriate Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS).
20. The following approvals, where applicable, shall be submitted as part of the
development application.
a. Town of Norridgewock E911 Addressing Officer, for the names of any proposed
new streets.
b. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of
Development Act.
c. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Natural Resources
Protection Act or Stormwater Law, or if an MEPDES wastewater discharge license
is needed.
d. Maine Department of Human Services, if the applicant proposes to provide a
public water system.
e. Maine Department of Human Services, if an engineered subsurface waste water
disposal system(s) is to be utilized.
f. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water
Act is required.
g. Maine Department of Transportation Traffic Movement Permit, and/or Highway
Entrance/Driveway Permit or Town of Norridgewock Road Opening Permit.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
16
h. Comprehensive Economic Impact Study, if a large-scale retail development is
proposed.
Note: If the Review Authority is unsure whether a permit or license from a state or
federal agency is necessary, the applicant may be required to obtain a written
opinion from the appropriate agency as to the applicability of their regulations.
12. General Development Standards.
A. Air Quality
No development is permitted which will cause emissions of dust, ash, smoke, or other
particulate matter likely to damage human or animal health, vegetation, or property, by
reason of concentration or toxicity. Evidence that relevant state and federal regulatory
requirements have been met shall be considered sufficient to meet this standard. This
shall not be construed to regulate dust or odors generated by agricultural practices
conducted using accepted State of Maine Best Management Practices (BMP) current at
time of application.
B. Access to Public Streets
This section shall apply to all development requiring a permit that directly accesses
Public Streets. Compliance with this section shall not relieve the applicant of the need
for permitting under State Access Management Regulations. Proof of Compliance with
the Town of Norridgewock’s Road & Entrance Design Standards Ordinance and The
Town of Norridgewock’s Road Opening Ordinance is required.
1. General Provisions.
a. The number of access points shall be the minimum necessary to assure safe and
proper vehicular access to the site. As a general rule, no more than two access
points onto any single road will be allowed. Where more than one road abuts the
development site, the Review Authority may require the developer to access the
site from the road with less potential for congestion and traffic hazard.
b. All streets which can be expected to carry traffic to and from the development
shall have sufficient capacity or be suitably improved to accommodate the
amount and types of traffic generated by the development.
c. Access points shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to avoid the
stopping or standing of vehicles attempting to enter the development from the
street. Where necessary to ensure safety of drivers and pedestrians and to avoid
congestion, the developer shall install turning lanes, traffic directional islands,
frontage roads, signalization, or other traffic controls within public streets. All
such installations shall conform to standards in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices published by the American Traffic Safety Services Association.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
17
d. The Review Authority may require the developer to plan or install direct access
to adjoining properties where it will serve to reduce demand for vehicular
movement on public roads.
e. Visibility triangle: In order to provide adequate visibility, all access points shall
be kept free from visual obstructions, including signs, within a triangular area
defined by legs of 25 feet measured along the driveway and street lines.
2. Location and Design of Access Points
a. Sight Distances: All access points shall be located to provide minimum sight
distance of ten (10) feet for each mile per hour of posted speed limit in both
directions. Sight distance is measured from a point ten (10) feet behind the edge
of the traveled way, with the height of the eye at 3.5 feet, to the top of an object
4.5 feet above the street surface.
b. Access points shall be designed and constructed to a standard consistent with
their estimated volume as follows:
Low Volume: Peak hour volume of six (6) or fewer vehicles.
Medium Volume: Any access that is not a low volume or high volume.
High Volume: Peak hour volume of one hundred (100) or more vehicles.
i. Design Criteria.
All portions of an access point within the right-of-way of the street shall be
consistent with the surface of the existing roadway.
All access points entering a curbed street shall be curbed to the full radius of
the access point to a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet back from the edge of
the existing curb line.
All access points shall intersect the road at an angle as nearly 90 degrees as
site conditions permit, but in no case less than 75 degrees.
The curb radius for two-way access points shall be at least 20 feet. The curb
radius for one-way access points or access points with median islands shall be
between five and 10 feet on the inside corner and at least 30 feet on the
outside corner.
The width of a low volume driveway shall be no more than 20 feet. The width
of a medium or high volume driveway may be between 20 and 26 feet; for
driveways with a median island, the width shall apply to each side. Where
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
18
truck traffic is a major element, the width may be increased to 30 feet. The
width of individual, “right turn only” channels shall be no more than 20 feet.
From the edge of the traveled way, the access point should not exceed a grade
of 2 percent for a minimum of 40 feet, or, where a traffic study has been done,
for the full distance of the predicted queue of vehicles at the peak hour.
ii. Median and Channelization Islands
Medians or channelization island(s) are required for high volume access
points and may also be required for medium volume access points at the
discretion of the Review Authority. Median islands shall be between 6 feet
and 10 feet in width and shall create a throat (entry lane) of adequate length
based on the traffic study, but in no case less than 60 feet. All islands shall be
curbed with sloped curbing, with proper signs installed to direct traffic.
iii. Spacing Standards
No low or medium volume access point shall be located within one hundred
(100) feet of any street intersection. No high volume access point shall be
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any intersection. Distance shall be
measured from the point of tangency for the intersection curb radius to the
point of tangency for the access point curb radius.
All access points onto an existing public road shall be located at least 100 feet
from the next access point along that public road.
No access point shall be located within ten (10) feet of a property line.
iv. Any access point which intersects an existing or planned sidewalks shall
incorporate ramped access curbing in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. Erosion Control
1. All soil disturbance must be conducted in a manner which avoids sediment leaving
the property. Development must employ best management practices (BMPs) for
erosion control. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses, including
intermittent drainage swales, and waterbodies shall be avoided by employing BMP’s
as established by the most recent version of "Maine Erosion & Sediment Control
Handbook for Construction-Best Management Practices" Cumberland County SWCD
& MDEP-March 1991.
2. The least possible amount of disturbance will occur during construction in regard to
tree removal, de-vegetation, and soil disturbance. In particular, strips of naturally
vegetated areas existing on the down slope side of the construction site shall be
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
19
maintained as undisturbed buffer areas. Temporary erosion control measures shall
be installed prior to the start of any development. The applicant shall be responsible
for the proper installation and operation of all erosion control measures. Permanent
measures shall be installed as appropriate upon completion of the development.
3. Exposed soils on slopes 10% or greater will be initially stabilized (i.e., mulched,
covered, or reseeded) within two working days of disturbance. All exposed soils on
slopes less than 10% shall be stabilized within 15 days of disturbance.
4. All watercourses, waterbodies and wetlands will be protected from sedimentation by
the installation of silt fence barriers or other appropriate means. Such barriers shall
be installed before digging, soil removal, the stripping of vegetation, scarification, or
soil disturbance of any kind occurs within 500 feet of a watercourse, waterbody or
wetland or on slopes greater than 10%. The barriers shall be installed at all points
immediately down slope of soil exposing activities.
Hay bale barriers are not to be used as a primary means of erosion control, but may
be used as reinforcement or back-up to silt fencing or other effective primary
erosion control. Erosion control mix placed as a berm may be used in lieu of silt
fencing as a sediment barrier, especially on frozen ground.
5. All erosion controls must be inspected and repaired every week and before and after
any significant rainfall events (0.5 inches or greater).
6. Ditches or swales with slopes from 0-3% need to be vegetated, those at 3-5%
require a geotextile mat and appropriate seeding, and those at 5% or greater
require stone lining with an appropriate geotextile underlayment. All ditches not
stabilized by vegetation before Oct. 15 shall be stone lined.
7. Areas within 500 feet of waterbodies must receive final stabilization within 5
days of final grading. Other disturbed areas must have final stabilizing measures
in place within 10 days of final grading.
8. After September 15, or if construction activities are to be suspended for more
than 30 days, additional stabilization measures must be installed which include
seeding, and mulching (including securing of mulch), and water diversions
necessary to minimize on site drainage contribution to erosion.
9. Whenever any portion of the designed impervious area falls within 500 feet of a
watercourse, water body or wetland larger than one acre and the designed
impervious area exceeds 10,000 sq. ft. in area, or whenever the Review
Authority initiates a review in conjunction with the DEP, or other qualified water
quality experts and it is determined that because of the slope, soil erosion,
designed impervious area, and site location, there is a demonstrated need,
temporary or permanent sedimentation control mechanisms shall be utilized by
which sediment in run-off water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins,
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
20
sediment basins, silt traps, or other acceptable methods as determined by the
Review Authority, and in accordance with the current "Maine Erosion &
Sediment Control Handbook for Construction-Best Management Practices"
Cumberland County SWCD & MDEP-March 1991.
10. The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than ten feet to
an adjoining property.
D. Historic and Archaeological Resources
If any portion of the site has been identified, or is found to contain historic or
archaeological resources, the development plan shall include appropriate measures
for protecting these resources, including, but not limited to, modification of the
proposed building and site layout and design.
E. Materials Storage
1. All outdoor storage areas, including areas used for the storage or collection of
solid waste, automobiles, auto parts, building materials, machinery, or other
such items, shall have screening sufficient to minimize impact on roads, and
neighboring and other properties in the area. Walls, fencing, dense plant
material, or a combination of techniques can be used to achieve this intent. A
dense evergreen hedge six (6) feet or more in height at the time of planting shall
be the preferred means of attaining this standard. Any existing business shall
comply with this section within eighteen (18) months of approval of this
Ordinance unless waived by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Where a potential safety hazard to children is recognized by the Review
Authority, a physical barrier sufficient to deter small children from entering the
area shall be provided and maintained in good condition.
3. No bulk storage of flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be
permitted unless storage facilities are located at least seventy-five (75) feet from
any property line if above-ground, or forty (40) feet if underground. All
materials shall be stored in compliance with requirements of the Maine
Department of Public Safety and other appropriate Federal, State, and local
regulations.
All above-ground storage facilities for toxic, flammable, or explosive liquids shall
be located on impervious surfaces and shall be completely enclosed by a dike
high enough to contain the total capacity of the storage tank(s) plus the rain
falling into the area during a twenty-five (25) year, 24-hour duration storm, or
150 percent of the volume of the storage facility, whichever is greater.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
21
F. Natural Resource Protection
1. Natural Features
Site development shall minimize, insofar as possible, disturbance of natural
features. This shall be done by designating on the site plan the limits on
development-related clearing. Outside of the limits of development, there shall
be no tree removal, water channelization, soil disturbance, or grading and filling.
2. Habitat Protection
a. If any portion of the parcel has been identified as a critical natural area, or as
containing threatened or endangered species of plants or animals, the
subject areas shall be located outside of the clearing limits. The Review
Authority may require a mitigation or management plan to be reviewed by
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) or the Natural
Areas Program of the Department of Conservation, as appropriate.
b. If any portion of the area to be developed includes areas mapped by the
Maine IFW as Deer Wintering Areas, the developer shall consult with the
Department on means to limit the impact of the development on the habitat,
and incorporate those recommendations into the development plan insofar
as practicable.
c. If any portion of the area to be developed includes wetlands, as determined
by the Town of Norridgewock, the Maine DEP, or a certified soil scientist, the
developer shall avoid, minimize, and mitigate impacts on the wetland both
during and after construction.
3. Groundwater Protection
a. Any development generating a demand of 5,000 gallons per day or greater out of
groundwater supplies shall not affect groundwater availability beyond the
boundaries of the property.
b. Within the area identified as Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifer by the Maine
Geological Survey, no activity involving the production, use, or storage of
hazardous or toxic chemicals or petroleum products shall be conducted except in
accordance with a Spill Prevention and Management Plan developed at the time
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
22
of application and approved by the Town of Norridgewock.
G. Noise
1. No person shall, in any area which includes residential land uses (including
hotels and motels), make, continue or cause to be made or continued any
loud or unusual noises which shall interfere with normal activities or annoy,
disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others. Loud or unusual noises shall include but not be limited to:
A. The sounding of any horn or signaling device, except as a danger
warning.
B. The playing of any machine or device for the production or reproduction
of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet or comfort of
neighboring inhabitants and passersby.
C. The use of any loudspeaker or amplifier for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attraction of the public to a specific building or for the purpose
of communication within a business building.
2. Noise may be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, slow
response. The meter shall meet the most recent American National Standards
Institute "Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters". Sound levels
shall be measured at least 4 feet above ground at the property boundary.
3. Sounds emanating from safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure
relief valves, and other emergency or public safety devices are exempt from
these provisions.
4. On sites abutting a residential use, development construction shall be staged so
that exterior activities are not conducted between the hours of 9:30 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. The Review Authority may require additional measures for noise
suppression. We do not have a description of “residential use”. Wii be needed to
defend.
5. The Board of Selectmen may grant temporary exceptions upon written request.
H. Outdoor Lighting
A development may employ outdoor lighting which serves security, safety, and
operational needs to the extent that it does not impair the vision of vehicle
operators on adjacent streets or infringe on the enjoyment of neighboring
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
23
properties. All lighting fixtures shall be full-cutoff so that the lighting elements are
not exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings.
I. Parking
1. General
No new or expanded development shall be permitted unless off street parking is
provided in accordance with the following provisions.
2. Parking Lot Design Criteria
a. Location
All parking spaces and aisles shall be at least five (5) feet from any side or
rear lot line. This shall not be construed to eliminate the requirement for
screening. Aisles and parking spaces shall not be located within the right-ofway
of the public road.
b. Interior Circulation
i. The entry lane(s) should be designed to allow continuous and
uninterrupted traffic movement on the public road, through the
provision of adequate throat length, deceleration lanes, or other
measures. The entry lane shall not provide direct access to parking
spaces.
ii. Islands containing guardrails, curbs, fences, walls, or landscaping should
be used to identify circulation patterns of parking areas and restrict
driving movements diagonally across parking aisles, but shall be
designed and placed so as not to impede views of pedestrians and
vehicles.
iii. No parking spaces shall be directly accessible from the public road, nor
shall motorists be required to use the public road to enter or exit a
space. All spaces shall be accessible from an aisle without the necessity
of moving other vehicles.
iv. Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores or businesses
for safer pedestrian access and visibility.
v. Any layout that utilizes vehicular access service (“drive-up”) windows
shall provide a minimum of five car lengths of queuing space on the
incoming side of the first window. The required queuing space shall be
designed so that it shall not interfere with parking and circulation on the
remainder of the site.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
24
c. Layout of Parking Stalls and Aisles
i. Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width by eighteen
(18) feet in length. Stalls designated for handicapped use shall be a
minimum of twelve (12) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length and
marked appropriately. Stalls may be angled, provided aisles are
designated one-way, and each stall contains the minimum rectangular
dimensions. Stalls for parallel parking shall be no less than nine (9) feet
in width by twenty-two (22) feet in length.
ii. In paved lots, the planning board may require painted stripes to
delineate parking stalls. If required, stripes should be a minimum of four
(4) inches in width. Where double lines are used, they should be
separated a minimum of twelve (12) inches on center.
iii. Two-way aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet in width.
One-way aisles shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet in width.
iv. Bumpers or wheel stops shall be provided where improperly parked
cars might restrict traffic flow or pedestrian movement on adjacent
walkways, or damage landscape materials.
v. Oversized parking spaces may be designated in areas that ordinarily
serve such vehicles as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, delivery
trucks or tractor-trailer trucks.
d. Standards for Number of Parking Spaces
i. Basic Requirements for Parking Space
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided by the developer. The table
below shall be interpreted as a guide, subject to adjustments in
Subsection ii, following. For uses not listed, the publication Parking
Generation, 3rd Edition (ITE, most recent edition, see
www.ite.org/tripgen) shall be consulted. Within each development, at
least one space, plus one additional space for every twenty-five (25)
required, shall be designated as available for handicapped persons:
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
25
# of Spaces Land Use Activity
Places of Residence or Accommodation -- spaces per room or dwelling unit
1/3 Dedicated Retirement Home, Nursing Care Facility
1 Overnight accommodations
2 Multifamily buildings
Places of Public Assembly -- spaces per seat based on maximum seating capacity
1/4 Theater, with fixed seating
1/3 Church
1/2 Restaurant, Convention Center, Meeting Hall, Grange,
Bottle Club
Places of Commerce and Industry -- spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area.
1 Warehousing, Inside sales of motor vehicles
1 1/2 Industrial and Manufacturing Facilities, wholesaling
3 Grocery Stores over 5,000 sq.ft., Offices, professional,
and personal services, except as noted.
4 Retail Sales except as noted
5 Banks, Medical and Dental Offices, Fitness Clubs,
Child Care
Public and Institutional Facilities -- spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
2 Elementary Schools
4 Secondary School, Community Center, Municipal
Office.
6 College, Hospital
Miscellaneous -- criteria as specified
1 per 1,000 sf Indoor Sports Facility (Tennis, Fitness, etc.) -- no
spectators
1 per 4 seats, based
on max seating
capacity
Stadiums, Arenas, Racetracks, and other spectator
sport venues
30 per acre Mini-golf, Go-Carts, and other Outdoor Amusements
5 per lane Bowling Alley
3 per service bay +
1 per 10 vehicles
displayed
Motor Vehicle Sales and Service
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
26
ii. Flexibility in Standards: The Review Authority is permitted to modify
these standards as minimum requirements, under the following
circumstances:
a. By up to 10 percent, based upon a showing that similar uses under
similar circumstances generate greater or less demand.
b. In Norridgewock, the Board of Selectmen, with a recommendation
from the Planning Board may allow any use to meet its parking
requirement through contributions to the development and
maintenance of a municipal or public parking lot. Alternatively, the
Board of Selectmen may reduce the required parking by up to 30
percent, upon the condition that provided off-street parking not be
restricted to patrons/tenants of the development.
c. The following specified uses, because their peak hour/day varies from
conventional parking demand, may meet up to 50 percent of their
parking requirement through a shared-use agreement with another
use: churches, clubs, restaurants, theaters, sports facilities.
d. A development may include as a portion of its parking requirement,
the provision of parking spaces not located on the same lot provided
a) that the spaces are located within 250 feet of the property, b) that a
written agreement is in place for long-term use of the spaces, and c)
that the spaces would not be among the minimum required for the
use already existing on that lot.
e. The provision of spaces for vehicles used in the ordinary conduct of
the business, such as construction vehicles, tractor-trailers, and
vehicles displayed for sale, shall not be included in the above
calculations.
f. The Review Authority may waive the installation of parking spaces
provided that adequate provision is made for the development of
these spaces as needed in the future, specified by conditions of the
permit. Such conditions may require permanent set-aside of
adequate space, and provision of construction plans along with
specified conditions under which the installation will be triggered.
iii. Impact on Physical and Environmental Resources. Parking lots shall not
be excessively large, nor contain an area more than 25 percent greater
than the minimum set by these standards.
The Review Authority may require use of pervious or semi-pervious
materials as an alternative to pavement in order to reduce quantity or
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
27
improve quality of stormwater runoff.
iv. Mixed Uses: Any portion of a building or lot with a use that is distinct
from a principal use identified on the table above shall be considered as a
separate use for the purpose of calculating spaces, if it exceeds in area or
seating capacity 25 percent of the overall extent of the development. If a
mixed use consists of any residential use combined with any commercial
use, the planning board may waive or modify space requirements for the
residential use unless it consists of more than 67 percent of the total floor
space.
v. Loading bays shall be provided as necessary. Loading bays shall be a
minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by fifty-five (55) feet and be
designed and delineated so as not to interfere with traffic flow or other
parking spaces.
J. Screening of Structures, Parking Lots, and other Commercial Uses
1. Buffering from the Main Road.
New commercial uses shall be separated from the street by a vegetative buffer.
a. Requirements for buffering are not intended to prevent any commercial
establishment from having adequate visibility from the main road to promote its
name and its products and services.
b. The placement, species, and beginning size of vegetation specified for the planned
buffer must be included in the applicant’s plot plan, and are subject to final
approval by the Review Authority.
c. The buffer shall include a mixture of native shrubs and trees selected for
adaptability to roadside conditions. The owner shall be responsible for
maintenance of the buffer planting, and shall replace deceased plant material
within one growing season.
2. In cases where a parking lot exceeds one hundred fifty (150) spaces, additional
landscaping shall be placed within the lot, sufficient to divide the lot into two (2) or
more smaller units of no more than 100 spaces each. Landscaped islands shall
consist of fifteen (15) feet planted width, except that a pedestrian walkway may be
placed within the area, provided that it occupies no more than one-half the width.
3. Screening of Adjacent Properties
Screening shall be required wherever a proposed commercial use abuts a residential
development or pre-existing home, and in other instances where the Planning Board
determines uses may be incompatible.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
28
a. Screening shall consist of a natural (preferred) or artificial visual buffer sufficient
to ensure continuous year round screening. Screening shall be sufficient to
minimize the impacts of large buildings, vehicle movements, outdoor storage
areas, glare, and related commercial activity. Areas shall be maintained and
vegetation replaced as necessary. The following is intended as a guide:
i. A fifty (50) foot minimum will be required if the buffer will consist of natural
woodland, provided that the planning board may require supplemental
plantings to achieve an effective visual screen.
ii. A twenty-five (25) foot minimum will be required if the buffer will consist
primarily of dense planting of native coniferous trees.
b. Where no vegetation can be maintained, or due to unusual site conditions, the
planning board may approve a screen consisting of fences, walls, berms, or
combinations thereof.
K. Signs
1. Abandoned Signs
Any free-standing sign which advertises a business conducted, product sold, or
activity no longer in existence, or which, through lack of maintenance or other
reason, becomes a hazard shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person
responsible for the lot upon on which the sign is located.
2. Illuminated Signs
Signs may be illuminated internally or externally by full-cutoff lighting.
3. Sign Area and Placement
A new sign may not be placed within the road right-of-way and may not protrude
beyond the property line. All signs must be mounted on buildings or secured to the
ground in such a manner as to prevent them being dislodged by strong winds. Signs
in the vicinity of an access point shall be placed so as not to obstruct driver vision.
L. Stormwater Management
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to reflect or resemble, as
nearly as possible, natural runoff conditions in terms of volume, velocity, and
location of runoff. All systems shall be designed so as to have no significant adverse
effect on neighboring properties, downstream water quality, soil stability, or the
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
29
public drainage system. Where possible, existing natural features, such as berms,
swales, terraces, and wooded areas shall be retained in order to control runoff and
encourage infiltration of storm water.
2. Storm water drainage systems shall be designed to minimize the volume and rate of
outflow from the development, including engineered measures and off-site
improvements such that the downstream system can accommodate any additional
runoff. The storm water management system shall be designed to accommodate the
peak discharge of two (2) year, ten (10) year, and twenty-five (25) year frequency,
twenty-four (24) hour duration storms.
3. Stormwater practices shall be as described in Maine Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, Maine DEP, 2005 or most recent edition, see
www.maine.gov/dep/blwq/docstand/stormwater/stormwaterbmps.
4. A stormwater control plan prepared according to the requirements of DEP
Regulation chapter 500, “Stormwater Management” and Chapter 502 “Direct
Watersheds of Waterbodies most at Risk From New Development” shall be deemed
suitable to meet these standards.
5. Within lake watersheds, stormwater systems shall include runoff from roof drains
and camp roads to encourage infiltration and minimize phosphorus loading.
6. Stormwater systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning
at the applicants/property owners’ expense.
M. Wastes
1. Solid Waste
The development shall provide for the disposal of all solid wastes on a timely basis
and in an environmentally safe manner. The development will not produce wastes
that exceed the capability of the transfer station, in either volume or type of waste.
Any toxic, hazardous, or special waste must be disposed of in compliance with state
and federal regulation and in a manner approved by the Review Authority.
2. Sanitary and Liquid Wastes
a. A completed site evaluation form (HHE-200) which evidences adequate soil
conditions for wastewater disposal shall be a prerequisite to approval.
b. At the time of application, the developer shall specify the amount and exact
nature of all industrial or chemical wastes to be generated by the development,
and a plan to discharge such wastes only and in such quantities and/or quality as
to be able to be accepted into the disposal system or shipped to an approved
facility off site. All such plans shall be in conformance with applicable State and
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
30
Federal regulations.
N. Water Quality
1. General Standard
No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated,
untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such nature,
quality, toxicity, or temperature that run into or mix with surface or ground waters
so as to contaminate, pollute, or degrade such waters with objectionable shore
deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil, scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness,
or be harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
2. Impact on Groundwater
a. The Review Authority shall require an assessment of the impact of a development
on groundwater quality or quantity based on the proposed size or nature of the
development in cases where the development is projected to generate demand of
more than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day from groundwater sources. This
assessment shall contain at least the following information:
i. A map showing the basic soils types, and the location of any subsurface
wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells within the
development and within three hundred (300) feet of the development
boundaries.
ii. Depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
development.
iii. Data on the existing groundwater quantity and quality, either from test wells
or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
iv. An evaluation of the effect of the development on groundwater. This
evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within one thousand (1,000) feet
from potential contamination sources.
b. The assessment shall demonstrate that the development will comply with the
following standards:
i. No development shall increase any contaminant concentration in the
groundwater to more than one half (½) of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards, nor to an amount to exceed the Secondary Drinking Water
Standards as established by the Maine Dept. of Human Services at the time
of the permit issuance.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
31
ii. If existing groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the primary
standards, the applicant shall demonstrate no significant further
deterioration. If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the
secondary standards, the development shall not cause the concentration of
the parameters in question to exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of
the pre-existing concentration.
iii. Groundwater withdrawals or alteration of surface recharge characteristics
by a proposed development shall not lower the water table beyond the
boundaries of the development. No proposed development shall result in
a lowering of the water table at the development boundary by increasing
runoff or decreasing infiltration.
c. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be
constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If any
measures to reduce groundwater contamination and protect drinking water
supplies are recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included
as a note on the Plan, and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
3. Impact on Lake Water Quality
Any new or expanded development within the watershed of any Great Pond shall be
designed to limit the post development phosphorus export consistent with the
following standards and practices.
a. Unless otherwise noted, methods and standards for review under this section will
be the DEP manual Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide
for Evaluating New Development, revised May 1992 or most recent edition
(hereinafter referred to as "Phosphorus Control Method", see
www.maine.gov/dep/blwq/doclake/).
O. Avoidance and Mitigation of Damages to the Public Infrastructure
1. Roads
a. Applicants shall identify all county, city or township roads to be used for the
purpose of transporting parts, cement, and/or equipment for construction,
operation or maintenance of the development and obtain applicable weight and
size permits from the impacted road authority(ies) prior to construction.
b. Conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the impacted local road
authority(ies) to determine existing road conditions. The survey shall include
photographs and a written agreement to document the condition of the public
facility.
c. Be responsible for restoring or paying damages as agreed to by the applicable
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
32
road authority(ies) sufficient to restore the road(s) and bridges to preconstruction
conditions.
2. Drainage System
a. The applicant shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public
drainage systems stemming from construction, operation or maintenance of the
development.
13. Definitions.
Abutter: Any lot which is physically contiguous with the lot in question or within 500 feet
horizontal distance of the lot line, even if only at a point and any lot which is located directly
across the public or private street from the lot in question.
Accessory building, accessory structure or use: A detached, subordinate building or structure,
the use of which is clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building or structure
and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal building, structure or use.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this ordinance; A person whose land abuts land
for which a permit or variance has been granted, or any other person or group of persons who
have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or
variance.
Agriculture (Agricultural Production): The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or
lease, of plants and /or animals, including but not limited to forages and sod crops; grains and
seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products, livestock; fruits
and vegetables; and ornamentals and green house products.
Agricultural structure: a building, enclosure, or fence for (1) housing livestock; (2) raising
horticultural or agronomic plants; or (3) carrying out other practices associated with accepted
agricultural or farming practices.
Applicant: A person, group of people, business or corporation applying for a permit under this
Ordinance.
Aquifer: A saturated permeable geologic unit that can transmit significant quantities of water
under ordinary hydraulic gradients.
Business Day: Any day that the Municipal Town Office is open for at least 4 hours in a day.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for sheltering or
housing people, animals, business processes or activities, equipment, goods or materials of any
kind or nature.
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
33
Critical Natural Area: Any area identified and listed by the Natural Areas program of the Maine
Department of Conservation as containing rare or unique botanical features or habitat for rare,
threatened, or endangered plant species or rare and unique natural communities.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings,
landscaping, parking areas and streets.
Development: A change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Full-cutoff Light: A lamp where all light is directed down towards the ground, and no light is
directed up into the sky (graphics below courtesy The University of Texas McDonald
Observatory).
Full–cutoff Light NOT full-cutoff
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of
ten acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area
in excess of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially
formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single
owner.
Habitable: Space in a structure that can be lived in, worked in or used for any significant human
purpose such as residences, places of worship, business establishments, schools, hospitals or
municipal buildings.
Historic or Archeological Resource: Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission as having significant value as an historic or
archeological resource.
Impervious surface: The area covered by buildings and associated constructed facilities, areas
which have been or will be covered by a low permeability material, such as asphalt or concrete
and areas such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas, which have been or will be
compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability.
Large-scale Retail Development – A development as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4366.
Level of Service: A term used by traffic engineers, indicating a scale of “A” to “F”, measuring the
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
34
volume of vehicular traffic in relation to the capacity of an intersection or road segment. Levels
of service “E” to “F” describe road situations with severe problems attributable to traffic
congestion.
Material (Mineral) Extraction Operation: The breaking of the surface soil in order to facilitate
or accomplish the extraction or removal of more than 1,000 cubic yards of product or
overburden from the earth within 12 successive calendar months; any activity or process that
for the extraction or removal or the product or overburden; and the preparation, washing,
cleaning or other treatment of that product so as to make it suitable for commercial, industrial
or construction use, but it shall not include the excavation or grading preliminary to a
construction project.
Peak Hour Volume: The highest number of vehicles found to be passing over a section of a lane
or roadway during any 60 consecutive minutes. Typically there is a peak hour condition in the
A.M. and a peak hour condition in the P.M. for which the roadway or intersection is analyzed for
capacity and level of service.
Residential Use: One (1) or two (2) family homes only and shall include modular, prefabricated and
manufactured homes known as Mobile Homes exclusively for residential occupancy and may contain one or
two families as a principal dwelling. The homes shall be detached or semi-detached used for residential
occupancy only.
Sight Distance: The visible distance available to a motorist at an access point to a public road,
sufficient to allow a vehicle to enter the road without inhibiting the progress of other vehicles.
For the purpose of calculation, sight distance is measured from the height of a hypothetical
driver 3 ½ feet above the driveway at a point ten (10) feet behind the street line, to an object 4
½ feet above the street.
Sign: An advertising message, graphic illustration, or insignia erected or inscribed for public
view for the purpose of promoting the interests of the occupant of the premises or owner of the
sign.
Sign Area: The surface area of that portion of the sign containing the advertising matter. Signs
which have no separate sign surface shall be measured by taking the smallest area of a
rectangle or circle which encloses the advertising matter. For two-sided signs, only one side of
the sign shall be counted towards sign area.
Sign, canopy or projecting: A sign that is a part of a or attached to an awning, canopy, or other
fabric, plastic, or structure protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service
area. It also means a sign that is attached to the building wall and extends more than 6 inches
from the face of such wall.
Sign, freestanding: A sign that is directly and permanently supported, and physically separated
from any other structure.
Street, Public: An existing state, county, or town way; dedicated for public use and shown upon
2015 Norridgewock Site Plan Review Ordinance
35
a plan approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the County Registry of Deeds.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something
located on the ground.
Substantial Start: This should be based on measuring actual construction. Such measurement
would be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and applicant prior to Permit issuance.
Water body or watercourse or surface water(s): Any river, stream, brook, pond, lake or
wetland.
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetland includes swamps,
marshes, bogs, certain forest areas and similar areas.
Zone of Contribution: An area of an aquifer that contributes water to a well or other extraction
point under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be realistically
anticipated (180 days of pumping at approved yield with no recharge from precipitation). It is
bounded by the groundwater divides that result from pumping the well and by the contact of
the aquifer with less permeable materials such as till or bedrock. In some cases, streams or
lakes may act as recharge boundaries. In all cases, the zone of contribution shall extend up
gradient to its point of intersection with prevailing hydrogeological boundaries (a groundwater
flow divide, a contact with till or bedrock, or a recharge boundary).
TOWN OF NORRIDGEWOCK
STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING ORDINANCE
ADOPTED AT A SPECIAL TOWN MEETING ON JUNE 19, 1994.
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish an official street naming and house
numbering method for the Town of Norridgewock that will provide an actual physical
location, in conformity of address, between local property tax maps, mailing and other
delivery services, enhanced 911 telephone system, and to assist emergency vehicles.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to 30-A MRSA Section 3001 for the purpose of
protecting public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 2: AREA OF APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to any street, building or vacant lot in the Town of
Norridgewock.
SECTION 3: AUTHORIZATION
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the sole authorization to assign
numbers to any building or vacant lot within the boundary lines of the Town of
Norridgewock. That number shall be the official address used for property identification
on Town records. The Town Manager shall be designated as the Addressing Office with
signatory powers.
SECTION 4: METHOD OF NUMBERING
All buildings within the Town of Norridgewock used as residences or businesses shall
obtain an identifying number. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make
known to the Addressing Officer the location of the building for addressing purposes.
Numbers will assigned at 50 foot intervals according to the following:
A. Beginning at the point of the road closest to the center of Town, designated as
the Monument, numbers will proceed sequentially to the farthest point.
B. All structures on the right side of the street/road will be assigned an odd
number.
C. All structures on the left side of the street/road will be assigned an even number.
D. Where 2 or more structures fall on the same address point, the way accessing the
distant structures shall be named and signed. (See Section 7).
SECTION 5: NUMBERS AFFIXED TO BUILDINGS
Upon written notification to do so from the Board of Selectmen or its designee, the owner
or occupant of any dwelling or business shall, within thirty (30) days, cause to be affixed
to such dwelling or business, the designated number. The number shall be of reflective
material, not less than three inches in height, and placed on the building in such a manner
as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or to a person approaching from the
street. Where the building is placed at such a distance from the street or road that a
number placed on it is not visible, the number shall be placed on a post or other suitable
object in such a manner as to be visible from the street, During the initial phase of
numbering, the Town will provide appropriate numbers to all owners or occupants of
record, and structures or replacements, shall be purchased by the owner or occupant but
must conform in size and reflectivity. Any person who neglects or refuses so to number
such structure or erects a number other than that assigned shall cause the proper number
to be affixed at the expense of the owner or occupant.
SECTION 6: NAME OF NEW STREETS
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the sole authorization to provide the
name of a new street that is to be maintained by the Town of Norridgewock. However, a
subdivision street will also be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
SECTION 7: PRIVATELY OWNED WAYS
All private roads or ways, serving two (2) or more numbered structures or providing
access to other privately owned ways, shall be named, and approved by the Selectmen or
designee.
SECTION 8: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Norridgewock shall have the
responsibility of enforcing this Ordinance. The Town does not wish to impose fines for
violation of this Ordinance. The numbering system will assist the Town in providing
services, and failure to comply may make it more difficult to do so.
SECTION 9: APPEAL
Any persons aggrieved by a decision of the code enforcement officer in the
administration or enforcement of this Ordinance may appeal that decision to the Town of
Norridgewock Board of Appeals at any time within thirty (30) days of notification of
violation, by informing the Town Clerk, in writing, of said appeal.
SECTION 10: VALIDITY, SEVERABILITY, AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER
ORDINANCES
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION11: EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption by vote of the
municipal legislative body.
1
NORRIDGEWOCK SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ADOPTED AT ANNUAL TOWN MEETING
MARCH 6, 2006
2
Section 1 General
A. Title:
This Ordinance shall be known as the Town of Norridgewock Subdivision Ordinance and will be
referred to as “This Ordinance”.
B. Authority:
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30 - A, M.R.S.A.
Section 4401 through 4407.
C. Purpose:
The purposes of this Ordinance are:
- To provide for an expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed
subdivisions.
- To clarify the approval criteria of the State Subdivision Law, found in Title 30 -A,
M.R.S.A. Section 4404.
- To preserve and enhance the rural character of the community.
- To assure the safety, health, and welfare of the people of the Town of Norridgewock.
- To protect the natural resources of the Town of Norridgewock.
- To assure that a minimal level of services and facilities are available to the residents of
new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions can support the proposed uses and
structures.
- To promote the development of an economically sound and stable community.
D. Applicability:
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all development considered a subdivision as
defined by Title 30 -A, M.R.S.A Section 4401 and this Ordinance.
E. Effective Date:
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date of the adoption by the Town of
Norridgewock on:
F. Conflicts with other Ordinances:
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision shall
control.
G. Validity and Severability:
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
H. Availability:
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be accessible to
any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost to be
charged to the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted
3
in the Town Office.
I. Application Forms:
The Town of Norridgewock Planning Board shall develop application forms to be used by all
applicants seeking subdivision approval.
J. Application Fee:
All applications for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee,
determined annually by the Board of Selectmen, and made payable to the Town of Norridgewock:
K. Amendments:
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the legally constituted municipal governing
body at a regular or special town meeting or by referendum ballot.
Section 2 Definitions
Abutter: The owner of any property with one or more common boundaries, or across the road
from the property involved in an application.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or. denial of a permit under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts lands for which a
permit has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of a permit.
Applicant: The person applying for subdivision approval under this Ordinance.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the
required fee and all the information required by this Ordinance, or by a vote to waive certain
submission or performance standards by the Planning Board.
Final Plan: The final drawings and other required materials on which the applicant’s plan of
subdivision is presented to the Planning Board for approval which, if approved, may be recorded
at the Registry of Deeds.
Person: includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as
well as an individual.
Preliminary Plan: The preliminary drawings and other required materials indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Board for consideration.
Property Owner: The owner of land shall be determined to be that person listed on the Town of
Norridgewock property tax assessment records.
4
Public Improvements: The term shall include all roads; fire protection structures and ponds; any
structure or land proposed to be dedicated to the Town; any land or structure which is offered as an
easement to the Town; and, all storm drainage structures that are designed to allow water to flow
outside the property of the subdivision.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings and supportive data describing the project proposed by
the applicant for initial review before submitting an application for subdivision approval.
Subdivision: As defined in Title 30 - A, M.R.S.A. Section 4401.
Wetland: A swamp, marsh, bog or similar areas which are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soils. This is also meant to include forested wetlands.
Section 3 Review Criteria
The Planning Board shall consider the following criteria and before granting approval must
determine that:
A. The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this
determination, it shall at least consider:
- The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the floodplain,
- The nature of the soils and subsoils and their ability to support waste disposal adequately,
- The slope of the land and its effect upon effluents, and,
- The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and regulations.
B. The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonable needs of the
subdivision.
C. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing municipal or
private water supply, if one is to be used.
D. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the land’s
capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
E. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or
unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed.
F. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are used.
G. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on the town’s ability to dispose
of solid waste, if Town services are used.
H. The proposed subdivision will not have an undue adverse effect on historic sites, archeological
sites, or significant wildlife habitat as identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
5
Wildlife.
I. The proposed subdivision conforms with all the applicable standards and requirements of this
Ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and other local ordinances. In making this determination, the
Planning Board may interpret these ordinances and plans.
J. The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet all the review criteria,
standards, and requirements contained in this Ordinance.
K. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any pond or lake or within 250 feet
of any wetland, great pond or river as defined in Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, Article 2-B, the
proposed subdivision will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably
affect the shoreline of that body of water.
L. The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect
the quality or quantity of ground water.
M. Based on Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, information must be presented by the applicant as to whether the
subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area, the
subdivider shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundary within the
subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring
that principal structures in the subdivision will be constructed with the lowest floor, including the
basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
N. All fresh water wetlands within the proposed subdivision must be identified on any maps
submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these wetlands. All wetlands shall be
preserved to the greatest extent practicable.
O. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has been identified on any
maps submitted as part of the application. All rivers, streams or brooks shall be protected from any
adverse development impacts.
P. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water management.
Q. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river, stream, brook, great pond or
wetland as these features are defined in Title 38, Section 480-B, none of the lots created within the
subdivision shall have a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
R. The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not unreasonably increase a
great pond’s phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life of the proposed
subdivision.
S For any subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed subdivision will not cause
unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways
in an adjoining municipality in which part of the subdivision is located.
6
Section 4 Administration and General Procedures
A. Administration:
1. The Planning Board shall administer this Ordinance and review all subdivision
applications according to the applicable review criteria and standards.
B. Decisions:
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine if the subdivision application is complete
and present his/her finding to the Planning Board.
2. After review of a complete application the Planning Board shall determine whether the
application meets the Review Criteria contained in Section 3 of this Ordinance. The
Planning Board shall vote to approve the application, deny the application, or approve the
application with conditions.
3. If in its findings, the Planning Board determines that the application may not meet the
review criteria, and that additional actions by the applicant will be sufficient to meet them,
it may require such actions, as conditions of approval. The conditions may set forth
requirements in addition to those set forth in the Ordinance only when the Planning Board
finds it necessary to further the purposes of this Ordinance. All conditions approved by the
Planning Board shall be listed along with the reasons for these conditions in the Planning
Board’s decision and on the final subdivision plan.
4. The Planning Board shall list any waivers approved by the Board on its decision form,
and, on the final subdivision plan, and the reasons for such approval.
C. Burden of Proof:
1. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show the proposed subdivision application
meets the applicable review criteria and standards contained in this Ordinance.
D. Rights Not Vested:
1. The submittal of a sketch plan or a preliminary plan to the Planning Board to review for a
complete application shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for the
purposes of bringing the application under the protection of Title 1, M.R.S.A., Section
302. The formal review process shall begin upon written notification to the applicant that a
complete application has been received.
E. Site Inspection:
1 The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct an on-site inspection of the proposed project
and report his/her findings to the Planning Board.
2. The Planning Board may vote to conduct an on-site inspection of the proposed project.
The Planning Board shall schedule the date and time of the site inspection at the sketch
7
plan meeting or at another time. The Planning Board shall post the date, time and place of
the site inspection at the Town Office.
F. Waivers:
1. The Planning Board may vote to waive any of the review criteria and/or ordinance
performance standards when it finds one of the following:
a. One or more of the review criteria and /or ordinance performance standards are
not applicable to the proposal due to the size of the project, circumstances of the
site, design of the project, or unique features of the proposal.
b. The applicant has proposed an alternative design that meets or exceeds the
requirements set forth in the performance standards.
2. The applicant shall submit information and materials that support the waiver request with
the application.
3. The Planning Board may only consider a waiver request when the applicant has submitted
a written waiver request in the application. The first item of the application review shall be
a consideration of any waiver request. The Planning Board shall review the request and if
it meets the criteria for a waiver, shall approve the request. If the Planning Board finds that
the request does not meet the waiver criteria, the Board shall deny the request. The
applicant shall amend the application as required if the waiver is not approved by the
Board. The Planning Board may vote to suspend review of the application until the
applicant provides any information necessary as a result of not obtaining the waiver. In no
case shall the Planning Board make a final decision upon the application until the
applicant supplies any additional information to the satisfaction of the Board.
G. Subdivision Review Process:
1. All subdivision applicants shall be required to follow a three-tier review process as
follows:
- Sketch Plan Review
- Preliminary Plan Review
- Final Plan Review
H. Revisions to Approved Plans
1. An application for a revision to a previously approved plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Board at least 14 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. If the
revision involves a modification to a condition imposed by the Planning Board; the
addition of additional units; the addition of new lots; or an expansion of the subdivision,
then the procedure for a new application shall be followed. If the revision only involves
minor modifications to the plan, the Planning Board may consider the revision request at
the meeting. The Planning Board may vote to hold a public hearing on the proposed
revision.
2. The Planning Board’s scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which
are proposed to be revised or that are adversely affected by the proposed revision.
3. The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plans and 7 copies of the revised
8
portions of the plans. The application shall include enough supporting data to allow the
Planning Board to make a decision that the proposed revision meets the review criteria.
4. The Planning Board shall vote to approve the revision, deny the revision or approve the
revision with conditions. The Planning Board may vote to require that additional
information be submitted to ensure that the review criteria are met.
I. As Built-Plans:
1. Upon Completion of all the public improvements contained in the subdivision, the
applicant shall submit a copy of as-built plans to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement
Officer, and the Road Commissioner.
J. Appeals :
1. An aggrieved party may appeal any final decision of the Planning Board under this
Ordinance to the Norridgewock Board of Appeals, within 45 days of the date the Planning
Board issues a written order of its decision.
K. Public Hearing Requirements:
1. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on all final plan applications to receive
public comment and information concerning the application.
2. The public hearing notice shall be made as follows:
a. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 35 days after determining
that the application is complete. A notice of the date, time and place of the public
hearing shall be:
(1) Published, at least two times, in a newspaper having general circulation in
the municipality. The date of the first publication shall be at least 7 days
before the hearing.
(2) Mailed by first class mail to the applicant, at least 14 days prior to the
public hearing.
(3) Mailed by first class mail to all property abutters, at least 14 days prior to
the public hearing. The Planning Board shall maintain a list of all
property abutters and record the date the notice was mailed. Failure of an
abutter to receive a notice shall not invalidate the public hearing, nor shall
it require the Board to schedule a new public hearing.
3. The Planning Board may vote to continue the public hearing to receive additional public
comment or information concerning the application. The Board is not required to meet the
notice requirements listed above for the continued public hearing.
L. Joint Meetings:
1. If any portion of a proposed subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, the Planning Board
shall follow the notice, meeting, and review requirements specified in Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A., Sections 4401- 4407.
M. Performance Guarantee:
1. A performance guarantee may be required for all public improvements proposed for the
subdivision. If required the applicant shall submit a proposal for the performance
guarantee at the time of submission of the Final Plan.
9
2. The performance guarantee shall include one of the following:
a. A certified check, in an amount equal to the expense of installing the public
improvements, made payable to the Town.
b. A performance bond, in an amount equal to the expense of installing the public
improvements, made payable to the Town, issued by a surety company.
c. A conditional agreement with the Town, whereby no lot in the subdivision may be
sold and no building permit issued until the applicant installs all public
improvements. A phase development plan may be incorporated into the
conditional agreement.
d An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution which shall
indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision and
may not be used for any other project or loan.
3. Prior to the release of the performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall determine that
the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements
specified in this Ordinance and the subdivision plans. The Planning Board shall base its
decision upon the inspection reports filed by the Code Enforcement Officer, other
Municipal Officials or other designated inspectors.
4. If, the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, or other designated inspection official
finds that any of the public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, they shall report this condition
to the Town Manager and Selectmen. The Selectmen shall take any steps necessary to
preserve the Town’s rights.
N. Inspection Requirements:
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for conducting and/or coordinating all
inspections with other municipal officials. The following municipal officials shall perform
the following inspections:
a. The Road Commissioner shall inspect all roads including roads to be considered
for public acceptance and private roads and associated drainage systems. (All
roads shall be inspected according to the road standards contained in the
Norridgewock Road Ordinance).
b. The Local Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the installation of all subsurface waste
water treatment systems.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect all erosion control measures,
stormwater management features, and all other site features.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for scheduling all inspections with the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer and all other inspection officials
shall keep a record of all inspections and all deficiencies. It shall be the responsibility of
the Code Enforcement Officer to notify the applicant in writing that a deficiency exists
and the steps necessary to remedy the situation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
notify the Planning Board and the Selectmen whenever the applicant fails to remedy a
deficiency. Upon completion of the subdivision and/or consideration of release of the
performance guarantee, all inspection reports shall be made available to the Planning
Board and the Selectmen.
10
Section 5 Sketch Plan Review
A. Purpose:
The purpose of the sketch plan submittal is for the applicant to present general information
regarding the proposed subdivision to the Planning Board and to receive the Planning Board’s
comments prior to the expenditure of substantial sums of money for developing the subdivision
plan.
B. Procedure:
1. The applicant shall submit a complete sketch plan application to the Planning Board at least 14
days before a scheduled meeting of the Planning Board.
2. The applicant shall present the sketch plan application to the Planning Board and make verbal
presentation regarding the site and the proposed subdivision.
3. Following the applicant’s presentation, the Planning Board may ask questions and make
suggestions to be incorporated into the application.
4. The Planning board shall determine the contour intervals to be shown on the plan.
5. The Planning board shall decide if the proposed subdivision meets the definition of a
subdivision and if the applicant may submit a final plan for consideration.
C. Submissions:
1. The sketch plan shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of roads, lots,
buildings, and other features in relation to existing site conditions. The sketch plan does
not have to be an engineered plan and may be a free-handed penciled sketch.
2. The sketch plan shall be submitted on the application forms provided by the Planning
Board and include the following:
a. A copy of the Tax Assessors map of the site and surrounding area.
b. A copy of the U.S.G.S. topographic map of the area showing the outline of the
proposed subdivision.
c. A copy of the County Soil Survey showing the area of the proposed subdivision.
Section 6 Preliminary Plan Review
A. Procedure:
1. The applicant shall, at least 14 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Board,
submit a complete preliminary plan application to the Town Clerk and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall be issued a dated receipt and the preliminary
plan application shall be placed on the Planning Board’s agenda to be reviewed for a
complete application.
2. The application shall include 7 complete copies of all maps and related attachments. The
11
Planning Board shall receive 5 copies; the Code Enforcement Officer shall receive one
copy; and, one shall be placed in the Town Office for public review.
3. As soon as possible, after the receipt of the preliminary plan the Town shall notify by first
class mail all abutters to the proposed subdivision that an application for a subdivision has
been submitted to the Planning Board, specifying the location of the proposed subdivision
and including a general description of the project. The notice shall also indicate that a
copy of the application is available for public review at the Town Office. The Planning
Board shall maintain a list of all abutters notified by first class mail, specifying the date
the notice was mailed.
4. Within 35 days of the receipt of the preliminary plan application, the Planning Board shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of its
determination. If the application is not complete, the board shall notify the applicant of the
specific material needed to complete the application.
5. The Planning Board may hold a public meeting within 35 days of determining that it has
received a complete application.
6. Within 35 days of the public meeting, or within another time as may be mutually agreed to
by the Board and the applicant, the Planning Board shall make a decision on the
application.
7. Upon approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant is eligible to submit a final plan to
the Planning Board for consideration. The approval of the preliminary plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan or intent to approve the final plan, but rather it shall
be deemed an expression of approval of the design of the preliminary plan as a guide to
preparation of the final plan. The final plan shall be submitted for consideration upon
fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and conditions of preliminary approval,
if any.
B. Preliminary Plan Submissions:
1. The applicant is responsible for supplying all the necessary information to show that the
proposed subdivision meets the review criteria, and requirements and performance
standards contained in this Ordinance. The preliminary plan submissions shall consist of
the following:
a. A receipt from the Town indicating that the application fee has been paid.
b. A preliminary plan application form and all required attachments and maps.
c. Waiver request form, if applicable.
d. A location map, drawn at an appropriate scale to show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to adjacent properties. The map shall show the following:
(1) Boundaries and designations of all shoreland zoning and other land use
districts.
(2) An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
owner’s property if not included in the subdivision proposal.
12
e. The following general information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and applicant’s agent.
(2) The applicant shall provide proof of right, title or interest in the property.
(3) A copy of all existing and proposed, deed restrictions, rights-of-way, or
other encumbrances affecting the property.
(4) The book and page and tax map and lot information of the property.
(5) The names of all property owners abutting the property.
(6) Acreage of the proposed subdivision, acreage of roads, and acreage of any
land not included in the subdivision.
f. A subdivision plan consisting of one or more maps drawn to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch. The plan shall show the following:
(1) Name of the subdivision.
(2) Number of lots.
(3) Date, north point, graphic scale.
(4) Proposed lot lines with dimensions.
(5) A survey of the perimeter of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by
bearing and distances, made and certified by a Registered Land Surveyor.
The corner of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by
permanent markers. The plan shall indicate the type of permanent marker
proposed to be set or found at each lot corner.
(6) Contour intervals as specified by the Planning Board.
(7) The location of all wetlands regardless of size.
(8) The location of all rivers, streams, brooks and ponds within or adjacent to
the subdivision.
(9) The location of all slopes in excess of 20% slope.
(10) The number of acres within the subdivision, location of property lines,
existing buildings, vegetative cover type, and other essential existing
features.
(11) The location of any significant sand and gravel aquifers,
(12) The boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood
elevation as depicted on the Town’s most recent FIRM Map.
(13) The boundaries of all shoreland zoning districts.
(14) The location and boundaries of any significant wildlife habitat as
identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(15) The location of any site or structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or any archeological site identified by the State Historic
Preservation Commission.
(16) The location of all rare and endangered plants as identified by the
Department of Conservation.
(17) The location of all subsurface wastewater disposal system test pits or
borings and test data and appropriate documentation.
(18) The location of all existing and proposed wells and appropriate
documentation.
(19) All erosion control features proposed for the site.
(20) All storm water control features proposed for the site.
(21) All parcels of land proposed to be owned or held in common or joint
ownership by the subdivision or individual lot owners. All land proposed
13
to be offered for public acceptance to the Town.
(22) Documentation showing that adequate public water and/or sewer is
available to serve the subdivision if municipal services are to be used.
(23) Road plans, specifications and appropriate documentation as required by
the Norridgewock Road Ordinance.
(24) The type and location of any proposed fire control features, and
appropriate documentation.
g. A statement indicating how the solid waste from the subdivision will be handled.
h. Documentation indicating that the applicant has the financial and technical
capacity to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
i. Any other data necessary to meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
j Indicate how all roads and other public improvements will be maintained until the
improvements are dedicated to the Town or for private roads and improvements,
how they will maintain them over their lifespan.
k. One sheet may be prepared with all requirements of g through j listed and signed
by all the proper authorities.
SECTION 7 Final Plan Review
A. Procedure:
1. The applicant shall, at least 14 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Planning Board,
submit a complete final plan application to the Code Enforcement Officer. The applicant
shall be issued a dated receipt and the final plan application shall be placed on the
Planning Board’s agenda to review for a complete application.
2. The application shall consist of 2 mylar and 3 paper copies. The Planning Board shall
receive 2 mylar and 3 paper copies. One paper copy shall be placed in the Town Office for
Public review.
3. Within 35 days of the receipt of the final plan application, the Planning Board shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant in writing of its
determination. If the application is not complete, the Board shall notify the applicant of the
specific material needed to complete the application.
4. The Planning Board may schedule a public hearing to review the final plan within 35 days
of determining that it has received a complete application.
5. Within 35 days of the public hearing or within another time as may be mutually agreed to
by the Board and the applicant, the Planning Board shall make a decision on the
application.
6. Upon voting to approve the final plan, the Planning Board shall sign 2 mylar and 3 paper
copies. The applicant shall file the approved final subdivision plan with the Register of
Deeds, within 45 days of the date upon which the plan is approved. After recording, the
Planning Board shall receive one mylar and 2 paper copies. Failure to file the plan with
the Register of Deeds, within 45 days, shall make the plan null and void. Final Plans not
14
filed in the appropriate time shall be resubmitted to the Planning Board according to the
requirements of Section 7 of this Ordinance.
The Applicant shall provide the Town proof that the Subdivision Plan was filed with the
Register of Deeds, and shall submit to the Tax Assessors a copy of the subdivision plan
showing the proposed lots, which corresponds to the scale of the Town Tax map showing
the subdivision.
B. Final Plan Submissions:
1. The applicant is responsible for supplying all the necessary information to show that the
proposed subdivision meets the review criteria and requirements and performance
standards contained in this Ordinance. The final plan submissions shall consist of the
following:
a. A receipt from the Town indicating that the application fee has been paid.
b. A final plan application form and all required attachments and maps.
c. All the submission materials required for a preliminary plan.
d. All conditions and modifications approved by the Planning Board for the
preliminary plan shall be contained on the final plan.
e. All waivers approved by the Planning Board shall be shown on the final plan.
f. All additional studies and/or materials required by the Planning Board, as
applicable.
g. A signature block shall be provided on the final plan.
h. A performance guarantee, if applicable.
i. The location and type of all permanent markers set at all lot corners.
j. Written copies of any documents of land dedication, and written evidence that the
Board of Selectmen is satisfied with the legal sufficiency of any documents
accomplishing such land dedication.
k. Any conditions placed on the final plan by the Planning Board shall be clearly
listed on the plan. Planning Board imposed conditions shall be listed separately
from any conditions or restrictions placed on the subdivision by the applicant.
l Proof that all other applicable State and Federal permits have been obtained.
Section 8 Performance Standards
A. The performance standards contained in this section shall apply to all subdivision proposals in the
Town of Norridgewock.
B Minimum Lot Requirements
1 Any lot within the Norridgewock Water District shall have at least 20,000 square feet of
lot area and not less than 100 feet of road frontage. Any lot outside of the Norridgewock
Water District shall have at least 30,000 square feet of lot area and not less than 150 feet
of road frontage except in the situation of a cul-de-sac (dead-end road) on a private road
when the frontage will be seventy five feet.
C. Monuments:
1. Permanent monumentation as required by the Maine Board of Registration of Land
Surveyors shall be installed at the following:
a. At all road intersections and points of curvature, but no farther than 750 feet apart
15
along road lines without intersections or curves.
b. At all corners and angle points of the subdivision boundaries where the interior
angle of the subdivision boundaries is 135 degrees or less.
c. At all other subdivision boundary corners and angle points plus lot boundary
corners and angle points.
d If lot lines are not 90 degrees to the road, then monuments shall also be set 100
feet from the road at each side line.
D. Water Supply:
1. Individual wells shall be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface water, and
contamination from subsurface wastewater disposal systems and other sources of
pollution. The lot design shall permit the placement of wells, subsurface wastewater
disposal systems and reserve areas in compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules and the Well Drillers and Pump Installers Rules.
2. The water supply for the subdivision and each lot shall be adequate to supply all the
potable, and other water requirements of the development. The applicant shall submit
documentation from a Hydrologist or a Well Driller familiar with the area, stating that
adequate water is available to supply the subdivision.
3 Public Water Supply:
The applicant shall submit a letter from the Norridgewock Water District indicating that
an adequate supply of water is available to serve the subdivision.
E. Fire Protection and Other Emergency Vehicles:
1. They shall design the subdivision so that the Fire Department and all other emergency
vehicles shall have unrestricted access to all developed areas within the subdivision.
F. Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Systems:
1. The applicant shall submit evidence of site suitability for subsurface wastewater disposal
system prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator in compliance with the Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules of the State of Maine. All test pit or test boring locations shall
be shown on the subdivision plan and be accompanied by an HHE-200 Form or other
format which shows the appropriate soils data.
2. The applicant shall submit the test pit/boring data to the Town of Norridgewock LPI for
review. The LPI shall review the data for conformance with State Law and this Ordinance
and issue the applicant a written statement. The LPI shall state whether the data submitted
is sufficient to make a reasonable determination that the soils will accommodate a
subsurface system or indicate if additional data or site analysis is needed. The applicant
shall submit the LPI’s statement with the preliminary plan application.
3. In no instance shall a disposal area for a lot or structure be granted a New System
Variance from the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. Holding tank systems shall not
be allowed to serve new lots or structures.
G Public Sewer
1 The applicant shall obtain a letter from the Town Manager/Sewer Administrator indicating
16
that the proposed subdivision sewer lines including the connection to the municipal
system are adequate and conform to all applicable town standards.
H. Erosion Control:
1. All activities which involve filing, grading, excavation or other similar activities which
result in unstabilized soil conditions shall comply with the following:
a. The site shall be developed to prevent soil erosion from entering waterbodies,
wetlands, stormwater drainage features, and adjacent land. All temporary and
permanent erosion control measures shall be designed in accordance with the “
Maine Erosion and Sedimentation Control handbook for Construction: Best
Management Practices, published by the Cumberland County Soil and Water
Conservation District and the Maine Department of Environment Protection,
March 1991 or as most recently amended.
b. All temporary and permanent erosion features shall be shown on the subdivision
plan.
I. Stormwater Control:
1. All construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from
the site. Where possible existing natural runoff control features shall be retained to reduce
runoff and encourage infiltration.
a. A storm water control plan shall be developed to limit peak discharges from the
site to predevelopment levels through a system of swales, culverts, and best
management practices equivalent to those described in the Stormwater
Management for Maine: Best Management Practices, published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, 1995 or as most recently amended.
2. A storm water control plan shall be developed as
required, by a registered engineer, for the site
according to the following standards:
a. Peak discharges shall be limited to the predevelopment levels for the 2-year, 10-
year and 25-year frequency, 24 hour duration storm.
b. A storm water control plan that is developed according to the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection Regulations, Chapter 500, Direct
Watersheds of Waterbodies Most at Risk from New Development shall be deemed
to be a suitable equivalent to these standards.
J. Waterbody Protection:
1. The locations of all rivers, streams, brooks, and wetlands shall be identified on the
subdivision plan. This shall include all perennial and intermittent streams and forested
and non-forested wetlands.
K. Ground Water:
1. Any development proposed within a Sand and Gravel Aquifer as identified by the Town
of Norridgewock shall be designed and constructed according to a plan which takes into
17
account the impact of the development upon the aquifer.
2. The Planning Board may require the applicant to provide a plan developed by a
hydrologist which shows that the proposed development will not have an adverse impact
upon the aquifer. The Planning Board, in making the determination that a plan is required,
shall consider the density of the development, and existing conditions or problems within
the area.
L. Historic, Archeological, Wildlife Habitat, Scenic Areas, and Rare and Natural Areas:
1. The subdivision plan shall show the locations of any historic and archeological sites,
wildlife habitat, scenic areas and rare and natural areas. If any of these areas are on the
site, a protection plan shall be developed in accordance with the following:
a. If any portion of the site is designated as a significant archeological or historic site
by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission,or listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, the applicant shall develop appropriate measures for the
protection of these resources according to local, state and federal regulations.
b. If any portion of the site is within an area designated as a scenic area or a unique
natural area by the Maine Natural Areas program, the applicant shall develop
appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for
such designation.
c. If any portion of the site is within a wildlife habitat area, the applicant shall
consult with the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or a qualified
wildlife biologist and develop measures to protect these areas from environmental
damage and habitat loss. Wildlife habitat areas shall include the following:
(1) habitat or endangered species appearing on the official state or federal list
of endangered or threatened species.
(2) High or moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats as defined by
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(3) Deer wintering areas as identified by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife.
M. Financial and Technical Capacity:
1. The applicant shall submit evidence if required by the Planning Board that he/she has
adequate financial and technical capacity to design and construct the development in
accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. Evidence of
adequate financial and technical capacity shall consist of the following:
a. A list of all technical and professional staff involved with the proposal and
preparation of the application including their qualifications and experience with
projects of similar size and scale.
b. A list of all persons with inspection and oversight responsibilities for the
development and if available, the persons selected to construct the project,
including their qualifications and experience with projects of similar size and
scale.
18
c. A letter from a financial institution such as a bank or other lending institution that
states that the applicant has the necessary funds available or a loan commitment
from this institution to complete the proposed development within the time
specified by the applicant.
N. Conformity With All Other Applicable Local Ordinances:
1. The applicant shall show that the subdivision meets all other applicable local ordinances
Including Shoreland Zoning, Floodplain Management and the Norridgewock Road Ordinance.
O. Road and Traffic Access Standards:
1. All proposed public and private subdivision roads shall
be designed, constructed and installed according to the
Road Ordinance of the Town of Norridgewock.
2. Previously accepted existing Town ways may be exempted.
P. Agricultural, Forest and Rural Resources
1. Whenever a proposed subdivision is adjacent to an active farm, pasture field, a woodlot listed
under Tree Growth, a productive forestry site or a borrow pit operation, suitable provisions
shall be incorporated in the subdivision proposal to minimize future conflicts between
residential sites and agricultural, forestry or borrow operations. A disclosure notice, shall be
included in the deed for each lot, to inform the new landowner that agricultural, forestry or
borrow pit activities generate noise, dust and odors.
SECTION 9. ENFORCEMENT
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. No plan of a division of land within the Town which would constitute a subdivision shall be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a final plan has been approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with this Ordinance.
C. A person shall not offer to convey or convey any land in a subdivision which has not been
approved by the Planning Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
D. A person shall not sell, lease, offer or otherwise convey any land in an approved subdivision which
is not shown on the plan as a separate lot.
E. No public utility, water district, sanitary district, or any utility company of any kind shall serve any
lot in a subdivision for which a final plan has not been approved by the Planning Board.
F. Development of a subdivision without Planning Board approval shall be a violation of law.
Development includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land, or lots, or construction of
buildings, which require a plan approved as provided in this Ordinance and recorded in the
Registry of Deeds.
19
G. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased or otherwise conveyed before the road upon which the
lot fronts is completed in accordance with this Ordinance up to and including the entire frontage of
the lot.
H. Violations of the above provisions of this section are a nuisance and shall be punished in
accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. ss.4452.
20
APPENDIX A
SUBDIVISION LAW
TITLE 30-A SECTION 4401-4407
Title 30-A Chapter 187 Planning and Land Use Regulation (Heading: PL 1989 c 104 Pt A @45
B. Granting approval of the proposed subdivision or [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C Section 10
(new) 1
C. Granting approval upon any terms and conditions that it considers advisable to:
(1) Satisfy the criteria listed in section 4404;
(2) Satisfy any other regulations adopted by the reviewing authority; and
(3) Protect and preserve the public’s health, safety and general welfare
(1989. c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C Section 10 (new).]
6. Burden of proof; findings of fact. In all instances, the burden of proof is upon the person
proposing the subdivision. In issuing its decision, the reviewing authority shall make findings of
fact establishing that the proposed subdivision does not meet the criteria described in subsection 5.
[1989 c 104, Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 1(new)].
7. Conditioned on variance. If the initial approval or any subsequent amendment of a subdivision is
based in part on the granting of a variance, the subdivider must comply with section 4406,
subsection 1, Paragraph B. [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C Section 10 (new)].
PL 1989 Ch 104 Section A45, C10 (new).
PL 1989 Ch 497 Section 4-7 (amd)
PL 1995 Ch 93 Section 1 (amd)
PL 1997 Ch 226 Section 1 (amd)
PL 1999 Ch 761 Section 11 (amd)
Section 4404 Review Criteria
When adopting any subdivision regulations and when reviewing any subdivision for approval, the
municipal reviewing authority shall consider the following criteria and, before granting approval, must
determine that: [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C Section 10 (new)].
1. Polution> The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water or airpollution. In making
this determination, it shall at least consider: [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C Section 10
(new)].
A. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains; [1989 c 104 Pt A
Section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
B. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; [1989 c
104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
C. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents: [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C section 10
(new)].
D. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C
Section 10 (new)].
E. The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and regulations; [1989 c 104 Pt A
21
Section 45 and Pt C Section 10 (new)].
2. Sufficient water. The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the subdivision. [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
3. Municipal water supply. The proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on an
existing water supply, if one is to be used; [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C Section 10
(new)].
4. Erosion. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the
land’s capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results; [1989 c 104 Pt
A Section 45 and Pt C section 1(new)].
5. Traffic. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable highway or public road
congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing
or proposed and if the proposed subdivision requires driveways or entrances to a state or state aid
highway located outside the urban compact area of an urban compact municipality as defined by
Title 23, section 4. Department of Transportation has provided documentation indicating that the
driveways or entrances conform to Title 23 Section 4 and any rules adopted under that section;
[2001 c 560 Section 1 (amd)].
H-1. This subchapter may not be construed to prevent a municipality from enacting an ordinance
under its home rule authority that:
(1) Expands the definition of “subdivision” to include the division of a structure for commercial
or industrial use; or
(2) Otherwise regulates land use activities.
A municipality may not enact an ordinance that expands the definition of “subdivision” except as provided
in this subchapter. A municipality that has a definition of “subdivision” that conflicts with the
requirements of this subsection at the time this paragraph takes effect shall comply with this subsection no
later than January 1, 2006. Such a municipality must file its conflicting definition at the county registry of
deeds by June 30, 2003 for the definition to remain valid for the grace period ending January 1, 2006. A
filing required under this paragraph must be collected and indexed in a separate book in the registry of
deeds for the county in which the municipality is located.
[201 c 651 section 3 (new)].
I. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the
definition of subdivision under paragraphs D-1 to D-6, or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by
the original holder of the security interest or that person’s successor in interest, does not create a
lot for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives
of this subchapter.
[201 c 359 section 5 (amd)].
5. New structure or structures. “New structure or structures” includes any structure for which
construction begins on or after September 23, 1988. This area included in the expansion of an
existing structure is deemed to be a new structure for the purposes of this subchapter.
{1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
6. Tract or parcel of land. “Tract or parcel of land” means all contiguous land in the same
ownership, provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road are
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless the road established by the owner of land
on both sides of the road. [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
7. Outstanding river segments. In accordance with Title 12, section 402, “outstanding river
segments” means: [1989 c 104 Pt A Section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new); c 497 section 3
22
(amd).]
A. The Aroostook River from the Canadian border t the Masardis and T.10, R.6, W.E.L.S town line,
excluding the segment in T.9, R.5 W.E.L.S [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C Section 10
(new)].
B. The Carrabassett River from the Kennebec River to the Carrabassett Valley and Mt Abram
Township town line; [1989 c 104 Pt a Section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
C. The Crooked River from its inlet into Sebago Lake to the Waterford and Albany Township town
line. [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
D. The Damariscotta River from the Route 1 bridge in Damariscotta to the dam at Damariscotta
Mills; [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and pt C section 10 (new)].
E. The Dennys River from the Route 1 bridge to the outlet of Meddybemps Lake, excluding the
western shore in Edmunds Township and No. Plantation; [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C
section 10 (new)].
F. The East Machias River, including the Maine River, from ¼ of a mile above the Route 1 bridge
to the East Machias and T.18, E.D., B.P.P. town line, from the T.19, E.D., B.P.P. and Wesley
town line to the outlet of Crawford Lake, and from the No. 21 Plantation and Alexander town
line to the outlet of Pocomoonshine Lake, excluding Hadley Lake, Lower Mud Pond and Upper
Mud Pond. {1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
G. The Fish River from the bridge at Fort Kent Mills to the Fort Kent and Wallagrass Plantation
town line, from the T.16, R.6, W.E.L.S. and Eagle Lake and Winterville Plantation town line,
and from the T.14, R.6, W.E.L.S. and Portage Lake town line to the Portage Lake and T.13,R.7,
W.E.L.S. town line, excluding Portage Lake;[1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10
(new)].
H. The Kennebago River from its inlet into Cupsuptic Lake to the Rangeley ad Lower Cupsuptic
Township town line; [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
Title 30-A Chapter 187, Planning and Land Use Regulation (Heading: PL 198, c 104, Pt A @45 (new).
B. A concrete monument. [1989, c 104, Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
C. An iron pin; or [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
D. A drill hole in ledge. {1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)]
3. Utility installation: A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any
kind may not install services to any lot or dwelling unit in a subdivision, unless written
authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits required under this
chapter has been issued by the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements
have been made between the municipal officers and the utility, except that if a public utility,
water district, sanitary district or utility company of any kind has installed services to a lot or
dwelling unit in a subdivision in accordance with this subsection, a subsequent public utility,
water district, sanitary district or utility company of any kind may install services to the lot or
dwelling unit in a subdivision without first receiving written authorization pursuant to this
section. [2001 c 40 section 1 (amd)].
4. Permit display. A person issued a permit pursuant to this subchapter in a great pond watershed
shall have a copy of the permit on site while work authorized by the permit is being conducted.
[1991 c 838 section 15 (new)].
PL 1989 Ch 104 Section A45, C10 (new)
PL 1989 Ch 326 Section 2 (amd)
23
PL 1989 Ch 497 Section 10 (amd)
PL 1989 Ch 769 Section 1 (amd)
PL 1989 Ch 772 Section 4 (amd)
PL 1991 Ch 548 Section D5 (amd)
PL 1991 Ch 838 Section 15 (amd)
PL 1997 Ch 199 Section 1 (amd)
PL 2001 Ch 40 Section 1 (amd)
Revisions to existing plat or plan
Any application for subdivision approval which constitutes a revision or amendment to a subdivision
plan which has been previously approved shall indicate that fact on the application and shall identify
the original subdivision plan being revised or amended. In reviewing such an application, the
municipal reviewing authority shall make findings of fact establishing that the proposed revisions do
or do not meet the criteria of section 4404. [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new) c
497 section 11 (amd)].
1. Recording. If a subdivision plat or plan is presented for recording to a register of deeds and that
plat or plan is a revision or amendment to an existing plat or plan, the register shall: [1989 c 104
Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)].
A. Indicate on the index for the original plat or plan that it has been superseded by another plat or
plan; [1989 c 104 {Pt A section 45 an Pt C section 10 (new)]
B. Reference the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the new plat or plan is recorded: and
[1989 c 104 Pt A section 45and Pt C section 10 (new) ]
C. Ensure that the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the original plat or plan is recorded
is referenced on the new plat or plan [1989 c 104 Pt A section 45 and Pt C section 10 (new)]
1989 Ch 104 Section A45 and Pt C section 10 (new)]
1989 Ch 497 section 11 (amd)]
Subchapter 5: ENFORCEMENT OF LAND USE REGULATIONS (HEADING: PL 1989, C 104,
PT A @ 45 (NEW)
451. Training and certification for code enforcement officers
Certification required; exceptions. Beginning January 1, 1993, a municipality may not employ
any individual to perform the duties of a code enforcement officer who in not certified by the
office except that; [1997 c 296 sections 5, 6 (amd); 2003 689 Pt B section 6 (rev)}.
Updated through the end of the 121st Legislature. Created 2004-11-22, Page 44