1.
ORDINANCE RELATING TO ANIMALS
AND FOWL IN THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
A. General
1. Definitions
As used in and for the purposes of this ordinance the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning assigned to them herein.
"Owner" shall mean any person who keeps, has temporary or permanent custody,
posses, harbors, exercises control over, or has a property right in the animal, livestock, or
fowl provided that veterinary hospital, commercial kennels, and pet shops and their
employees shall not be considered to be owners to the extent hereinafter provided.
"Public Nuisance Animal" shall mean any animal which unreasonably (1) annoys
humans (2) endangers the life and health of other animals or persons (3) gives offense to
human senses or which substantially interferes with the rights of the citizens other than its
owner to enjoyment of life and property. The term public nuisance animal shall mean and
include, but not limited to any animal which:
2. Is repeatedly found at large or;
3. Damages the property of anyone not its owner or;
4. Molests pedestrians or;
5. Chases vehicles or;
6.Excessively makes disturbing noises including, but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances
causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors
and others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored or;
6. Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings
where animal is kept, or;
7. Attacks other domestic animals
"Public Nuisance Conditions" shall mean an unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive
condition occurring in any facility including, but not limited to, any commercial kennel,
cattery, hog pen, riding stable, farm, pet shop, or petting zoo, causing by the size, number
or type of animals maintained, kept or harbored on any premises due to the inadequacy of
the facility or establishment which maintains, keeps or harbors any animal under conditions
which constitute cruelty to such animals, or where the animal maintained, kept or harbored
is a public nuisance anima1.
B. ANIMAL CONTROL PROGRAM
1. Authorization
a. The Town Manager is authorized to establish animal control Program, designate a
person to perform the duties of administrator of animal control and appoint one or more
persons to be animal control warden(s). The program shall include the enforcement of the
provisions of this ordinance and the operation of any town animal control facility. This
program shall operate in conduction with and support animal control programs from other
jurisdictions.
2. Powers of Animal Control Wardens
Animal Control Wardens are authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of the
ordinance as follows:
(1) By impounding animals found to be at large, injured or diseased;
(2) By issuing citations to persons in violation of this ordinance declared to be an
infraction;
(3) By notifying the Newport Police Department and for working in conduction
with for any violation of any provisions of this ordinance
(4) By enforcing cruelty prevention's provisions of this ordinance by rescuing and
impounding mistreated animals;
(5) By administrating emergency veterinary assistance or first aid to injured animal
which come into the custody of the Town without the consent of the owner of
such animals. For this purpose, neither the individual animal control warden
administrating such emergency assistance, or first aid, or the Town or any of its
employees or agents shall be liable for acts committed or omitted in the course of
rendering such emergency assistance or first aid.
3. Powers of Police Officers
Police Officers shall be empowered and authorized to perform all the duties of animal
control warden(s) as set forth in this ordinance as well as all State Law provisions
regarding Animal Welfare.
4. Records
Accurate and detailed records of all licenses issued, impoundment's, care, feeding and
veterinary treatment rendered, disposition of animals and animal control undertaken shall
be kept and maintained in accordance to Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 7 Part
9.
C. Animal Control Regulations
1. Manner of keeping animals prohibition of nuisances
(1) No person shall keep or maintain any animal in the Town in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, comfort and health of any person residing in the Town or
permit the animal to be a public nuisance or to cause or permit the animal to
become a public nuisance.
(2) No owner of any animal or owner of any animal holding facility shall fail to
abate a nuisance caused by an animal owned by the person or under the person's
control, nor shall any person fail to abate a public nuisance condition found to exist
upon the premises owned or controlled by the person after having been notified by
an animal control warden or other law enforcement officer.
2. Excessive Noise Prohibited
.
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
;
(1) No person who owns, keeps. or has in his possession any animal of any kind
whatsoever shall permit such animal to disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood permitting an animal to disturb the quiet of any person or
neighborhood or failure to keep any animal from chasing, frequent, or long
continued noise to the disturbance of comfort or repose of any person or
neighborhood. is declared to be a public nuisance and detrimental to the public
health and welfare. I
(2) Any person disturbed by a noisy animal shall notify the animal control agent.
After this notification is made the animal control agent shall notify the owner or
keeper of said animal of the complaint and if this person fails to abate said nuisance
after being duly warned shall be in violation of this ordinance.
3. Defecation Removal of Excrement
No person owning keeping, or having custody of a dog shall allow or permit excrement of
such dog to remain on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant
thereof, or upon public property. Any person having custody or control of the animal
which leaves excrement upon such property shall cause the excrement to be removed
immediately.
4. Injuring or Poisoning of Animals
(I) Any person who accidentally or otherwise strikes an animal with ~y motor
vehicle and injures or kills the animal. shall immediately notify the animal control
agent, or police department of the location of said incident.
$. Liability for Injury to or Destruction of an Animal at Large
(1) The Town, its employees and agents shall not be held liable for acts committed
or omitted as the result of subduing or taking custody of an animal found running
at large, or as the result of subduing, taking custody of, or destroying, any animal
that is the act of pursuing, attacking, or wounding a human or another animal.
6. Disposal of Animal Carcasses
(I) The owner or custodian of an animal may not deposit, nor leave such animal
upon its death on a public property or the property of another person. All such
dead animals shall be promptly disposed of by cremation, burial, or other sanitary
means.
(2) Newport Public Works Department shall collect all dead animals found on
Town owned property or streets, whereas the owner/keeper of such animal can not
be located. They shall then dispose of any carcasses found.
7. Relation to County and State Animal Regulations
It is the intent of the Selectmen, as empowered by the Town Meeting, that the animal
control regulations of this ordinance shall supplement and exceed the animal control
regulations of the county and the state where no higher restriction is in effect insofar as
these regulation conflict with, or refer to the animal control regulations the county or of
the state or regular matters not regulated by the county or state, these regulations will
apply within the Town of Newport.
8. Fine for Infraction Violations
The fine for violation of this ordinance shall be as follows:
1. Fifty (50) dollars for each initial offense;
2. One hundred (100) dollars for a second violation of the same
regulation occurring within six months of the previous offense;
3. One hundred and fifty (150) dollars for each subsequent violation of
the same offense occurring within six months of the previous offense
after two or more violations have occurred.
D.REPEAL
The licensing and control of the dog Ordinance, dated November 19, 1974, is hereby
repealed. This ordinance being passed by the Town of Newport and adopted by the
Selectmen.
Special Town Meeting June 1, 1992
--- --------



















TOWN of NEWPORT
CURFEW ORDINANCE
I
Sec. 1 Curfew Hours for Minors:
1.1 Legislative Findings:
Page 1
(a) In recent years, the Town of Newport has
experienced large and growing seasonal
influxes of unaccompanied minors from other
communities as well as a growing number of
unsupervised minors, within our own
community. This influx can be attributed
to the geographic location of our
community, the 24 hour services and
accessibility to Interstate 95. In our own
community we have seen an increase of
juveniles who are allowed, through no
parental intervention, to roam at will all
hours of the day and night.
(b) During the calendar year ending December
31, 1997, the Town of Newport experienced
an increase in assaults, disturbances of
the peace, incidents of disorderly conduct,
and other crimes and violations committed
by minors, for a total of 677 incidents in
1997. A percentage of these crimes and
violations have been committed by
unaccompanied minors during late night and
early morning hours.
(c) Unaccompanied minors, and especially those
under the age of eighteen, are particularly
susceptible by reason of their lack of
maturity and experience to participate in
personally harmful and unlawful activities,
and to be victims of older perpetrators of
crime.
(d) A curfew ordinance for persons under the
age of eighteen is necessary for the
protection of the general public; to
reduce the incidence of crimes, violations,
and victimization of minors, and to promote
public health, safety and welfare.
1.2 Definitions:
(1) "Curfew hours" means:
Page 2
11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following
day.
(2) "Emergency" means:
An unforeseen combination of circumstances
or the resulting state that calls for
immediate action. The term includes, but
is not limited to, a fire, a natural
disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to
prevent serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
(3) "Establishment" means:
Any privately-owned place of business
operated for a profit to which the public
is invited, including but not limited to,
any place of amusement or entertainment.
(4) "Guardian" means:
(A) A person who, under court order, is
the guardian of the person of a minor;
(B) A public or private agency with whom a
minor has been placed by a court;
(C) A person or public or private agency
that harbors or provides shelter to an
unaccompanied minor.
(5) "Minor" means:
Any person under eighteen years of age.
(6) "Operators" means:
Any individual, firm, association,
partnership, or corporation operating,
managing, or conducting any establishment.
The term 'includes the members or 'partners
of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
(7) "Parent" means:
A person who is;
Page 3
(A) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or
stepparent of another person; or
(B) At least eighteen years of age and
authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
{8} "Public place" means:
Any place to which the public has access
and includes, but is not limited to,
streets, highways, and the common areas of
schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and
shops.
(9) "Remain" means to:
(A) Linger or stay; or
(B) Fail to leave premises when requested
to do so by a police officer or the
owner, operator, or other person in
control of the premises.
(10) "Serious bodily injury" means:
Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.
(11) "Unaccompanied minor" means:
Any person under eighteen years of age who
is not in the presence, or under the direct
supervision, of that person's parent or
court-appointed guardian.
1.3 Offenses; Page 4
(l) A minor commits an offense if he or she
remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the
Town during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an
offense if he or she knowingly permits, or
by insufficient control allows, the minor
to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the
Town during curfew hours.
(3) The owner, operator, or any employee of an
establishment commits an offense if he or
she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon
the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
1.4 Defenses;
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under
subsection 1.3 that the minor was:
(A) Accompanied by the minor's parent or
guardian.
(B) On an errand at the direction of the
minor's parent or guardian, without
any detour or stop.
(C) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate
travel.
(D) Engaged in an employment activity, or
going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any
detour or stop.
(E)
(F)
(E)Involved in an emergency.
On the sidewalk abutting the minor's
residence or abutting the residence of
a next-door neighbor if the neighbor
did not complain to the Police
Department about the minor's presence.
-~
Page 5
G) Attending an official school,
religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults,
a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going
to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults,
a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor.
(H) Engaging in organized activities for
the purpose of exercising First
Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion,
freedom
of speech, and the right of assembly,
or similar rights under the Maine
Constitution.
(I) Legally emancipated by court order at
the time of the violation.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under
subsection 1.3(3) that the owner, operator,
or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the Newport Police Department that
a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and
refused to leave.
1.5 Enforcement:
(1) Any Town of Newport police officer
receiving a complaint or observing an
apparent violation of this ordinance shall
have authority to investigate and issue
appropriate summonses. An officer's
investigation may include temporary
detention of an apparent violator pursuant
to and in accordance with Title 17-A MRSA S
17, for the purpose 0 ascertaining and
verifying the identity, age and current
residence address of the person being
Investigated. I
(0. 1 "" ~
Page 5
(2) Before taking any enforcement action under
this section, a police officer shall ask
the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer
shall not issue a citation or issue a
summons under this section unless the
officer reasonably believes that an offense
has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no
defense in subsection 1.4 is present.
(3) Police officers investigating a complaint
or an apparent violation of this ordinance
are authorized to contact the parent or
guardian of any minor under investigation,
for the purpose of verifying the minor's
identity, age and current residence
address, and for the purpose of returning
the minor to the custody of such parent or
guardian.
1.6 Penalties:
A person who violates a prov1s1on of this
ordinance is guilty of a separate offense for
each day or part of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by
a fine not to exceed $500.
1.7 Severability:
(A) A finding by any court that prov1s1ons of
this ordinance are unenforceable or void
shall not operate as a bar to enforcement
of the remaining provisions of this
ordinance.
(B)
Upon acceptance of this ordinance, any
existing ordinance in conflict is hereby
repealed.






















HOLDING TANK ORDINANCE
OF THE
TOWN OF NEWPORT
BE IT ENACTED AND ORDAINED by the Town of Newport,
and it is hereby enacted and ordained as follows:
SECTION 1. PURPOSE. The purpose of this ordinance
is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive
and retain waste water from residential or
commercial uses. It is hereby declared that the
enactment of this Ordinance is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Newport.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS. Unless the context
specifically and clearly indicated otherwise, the
meaning of terms in this Ordinance shall be as
follows:
"Authority" shall mean Licensed Plumbing Inspector
(LPI) of the Town of Newport.
"Holding Tank:" A closed, water-tight structure
designed and used to receive and store waste water
or septic tank effluent. A holding tank does not
discharge waste water or septic tank effluent to
surface or ground water or onto the surface of the
ground. Holding tanks are designed and constructed
to facilitate ultimate disposal of waste water at
another site.
"Improved Property" shall mean any property within
the municipality upon which there is a structure
intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy, or use by humans or animals and from
which structure waste water shall or may be
discharged.
"Municipality" shall mean the Town of Newport,
Penobscot County, Maine.
"Owner" shall mean any person vested with
ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of
any property located in the municipality-
“Person” shall mean any individual, partnership,
company, association, corporation, or other group or
entity.
"Waste water" shall mean any liquid waste
containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension
or solution, or the water-carried wastes from the
discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing
machines, sinks, garbage disposers, dishwashers, or
other sources of water-carried wastes of human
origin. The term specifically excludes industrial,
hazardous,or toxic wastes and materials.
I
Section 3. Rights and privileges granted. The
Licensed Plumbing Inspector is hereby authorized
and empowered to undertake, within the
municipality, the control of and methods of
disposal of holding tank waste water and the
collection and transportation thereof-
Section 4. Rules and regulations to be in
conformity with applicable law. All such
Ordinances adopted by the Town of Newport shall be
in conformity with the provisions herein, all other
ordinances of the Town, all applicable laws, I rules
and regulations of the administrative agencies of
the State of Maine. Holding tanks cannot be used
for seasonal conversion, see Subsection 301.3 of
the State of Maine Plumbing Code or new I
construction within the shoreland zone of a major
water course as contained in the Town Of Newport
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
Section 5. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all waste
water from any improved property utilizing a I
holding tank shall be done solely by) or under the
direction and control of, the Licensed Plumbing
Inspector, and the disposal thereof shall be made
r
:
at such site or sites as may be approved by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
section 6. Duties of owner of improved property.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a
holding tank shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with
this or any other provisions of applicable law, the
rules and regulations of the Town of Newport, and
any administrative agency of the State of Maine;
and
B. Permit only Maine Department of Environmental
Protection licensed septage waste haulers to
collect, transport, and dispose of the contents
therein and to provide the LPI a copy of the
disposal manifest within 14 days.
Section 7. Alternative disposal. An alternative
means of waste disposal shall meet first time
system criteria. Replacement system criteria shall
not be considered.
Section 8. Violations and Penalty. Any person who
violates any provisions of this Ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than One-
Hundred ($100.00) and not more that Three-Hundred
dollars ($300.00) in addition to costs and legal
fees. Each act of violation and every day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. If the Town is the
prevailing party in any action brought to enforce
this ordinance, the Town must be awarded reasonable
attorneys' fees, expert witness fees, and costs,
unless the court finds that special circumstances
make the award of these fees and costs unjust.
Section 9. Abatement of nuisances. In addition to
any other remedies provided in this ordinance, any
violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a
nuisance and shall be abated by the municipality or
Licensed Plumbing Inspector by seeking appropriate
equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
Section 10. Repeal. All ordinances or resolutions,
or parts of ordinances or resolutions, insofar as
they are inconsistent herewith, are hereby
repealed.
Section 11. Severability. If any sentence,
clause, Section, or part of this ordinance is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional. illegal,
or invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections, or parts of this ordinance.
Section 12. Effective date. This ordinance shall
become effective on the day of its adoption.
CERTIFIED: The Newport Board of Selectmen being
the municipal officers hereby certify to the
municipal clerk that this is a true copy of the
Holding Tank Ordinance of the Town of Newport,
Maine.
Signed, November 27th, 1996
Newport Board of Selectmen
Albert Worden
Thomas J. Breitweg, Jr.
James Brann
ATTEST: A true copy of an ordinance entitled
"Holding Tank Ordinance of the To of Newport" as
certified to me by the municipal officers on the
27th day of November, 1996
Signed, November 27,1996
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
1
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT, MAINE
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Land Use Ordinance of the
Town of Newport, Maine,” and will be referred to herein as the “Ordinance”
B. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article
VIII-A of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, Sections 4351 and 4352, of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
C. PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are as follows:
1. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN INPLEMENTATION
To implement the policies and recommendations of the Town of Newport
Comprehensive Plan;
2. PRESERVATION OF THE TOWN CHARACTER
To preserve and protect the character of Newport by dividing the Town into
neighborhood districts according to the use of land and buildings and the intensity of
such uses;
3. PROTECTION OF THE GENERAL WELFARE
To assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the Town of Newport;
4. PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
To protect and enhance the natural, cultural, and historic resources from unacceptable
adverse impacts and to integrate new developments harmoniously into the Town’s
natural environment;
5. PROMOTION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
To promote the development of and economically sound and stable community;
6. REDUCTION OF TRAFFIC CONGESTION
To lessen the danger and congestion of traffic on roads and highways, limiting
excessive numbers of intersections, driveways, and other friction points, minimizing
hazards, and insuring the continued usefulness of all elements of the existing
transportation system for their planned function;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
2
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (cont.)
2. BALANCING OF PROPERTY RIGHTS
To protect property rights and values by balancing the rights of landowners to use
their land for the purposes regulated by this Ordinance with the corresponding rights
of abutting and neighboring landowners to enjoy their property without undue
disturbance form noise, smoke, dust, fumes, odor, glare, traffic, storm water runoff, or
the pollution of ground or surface water resources;
3. REDUCTION OF FISCAL IMPACT
To provide the means of evaluating development proposals for their fiscal impact on
the municipality’s ability to provide and improve necessary public facilities and
services; and
4. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS
To establish procedures whereby the Town Officials may review the developments
regulated by this Ordinance by providing fair and reasonable standards for evaluation
such developments; to provide a public hearing process through which town residents
may raise questions and receive answers regarding how such developments may
affect them; and to provide procedures whereby aggrieved parties may appeal
decisions made under this Ordinance to the Board of Appeals.
D. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance shall apply to all land areas within the Town of Newport. All
buildings or structures hereinafter constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or
moved, and the uses of buildings and land including the divisions of land, in the
Town of Newport, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Ordinance. No
buildings, structure or land are shall be used for any purpose or in any manner except
as provided for in this Ordinance.
E. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation, or ordinance, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standard shall govern.
F. SEVERABILITY
In the event that any section, subsection, or any provision of this Ordinance shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such
decision shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section, subsection, or
other portion of this Ordinance; to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are
hereby declared to be severable.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
3
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (cont.)
G. AMENDMENTS
1. INITIATION
An amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
a. The Planning Board provided a majority of the board has so voted
b. Request of Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board, or
c. Written petition of 10% of the number of registered voters who voted in
the most recent gubernatorial election.
2. HEARINGS
All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for their
recommendation. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on any proposed
amendment. Within 30 days of receiving a proposed amendment, the Planning Board
shall make a written recommendation to the Board of Selectmen.
3. MAJORITY VOTE
After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Board, by a majority of members
present, the amendment shall be adopted or rejected by the majority vote of the voters
at a Town Meeting.
4. SHORELAND ZONING
The appropriate State agency shall be notified of amendments to this Ordinance
within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such amendments to determine
conformance with the State Shoreland Zoning Law and guidelines where and if
appropriate.
H. ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
The Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board, and Board of Appeals each shall
report annually to the Town Manager and Board of Selectmen on their respective
experience with the administration of this Ordinance during the previous year. Their
reports to the Manager and board of Selectmen shall include any recommended
amendments they may have that would:
1. Enhance their ability to more effectively meet their respective administrative
responsibilities under this Ordinance; and
2. Enhance the implementation of the purposes of this Ordinance contained in subsection C,
paragraphs 1 through 9, above.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
4
SECTION I: GENERAL PROVISIONS (cont.)
I. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this Ordinance, when adopted, and any amendments thereto,
shall be effective immediately following its/their adoption or approval at Town
Meeting or Special Town Meeting. A copy of this Ordinance shall be certified by the
Town Clerk and shall be on file with the Town Clerk.
J. REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE
The existing Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Newport, Maine enacted March 4,
1985, as amended, are repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance. The
adoption of this Ordinance, however, shall not affect nor prevent any pending or
future prosecution of, or action to abate, any violation of the Ordinances repealed by
this section, if the violation is also a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. It
is further the intention and direction of this Section that if this Ordinance is, held to
be invalid or void in its entirety, that the Ordinances repealed by this Section shall be
automatically revived.
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS
A. BURDEN OF PROOF
The burden of establishing that any non-conforming structure, use, or lot is a lawfully
existing non-conforming structure use or lot as defined in this Ordinance shall, in all
instances, be upon the owner of such non-conforming structure, use, or lot and not
upon the Town of Newport.
B. CONVERSION TO CONFORMANCE ENCOURAGED
Owners of all existing non-conforming structures and uses shall be encouraged to
convert such existing non-conforming structures and uses to conformance wherever
possible and shall be required to convert to conforming status as required by this
ordinance.
C. CONTINUANCE
The use of any building, structure, or parcels of land, which is made non-conforming
by reason of the enactment of this ordinance, or which shall be made non-conforming
by reason of a subsequent amendment, may be continued, subject to the following
provisions:
1. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND
Continuance of non-conforming uses of land shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. An existing non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
5
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES OF LAND-cont.
b. If any non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent use of land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district
in which such land is located; and
c. A non-conforming use may be moved within the boundaries of the lot
provided that the Planning Board finds that the change in location on the
lot meets all the following standards:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening;
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting
2. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Continuance of non-conforming structures shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. No such structure shall be enlarged or altered in any way that increases its
non-conformity;
b. Should any structure, exclusive of the foundation, be destroyed, or
damaged by any means, exclusive of planned demolition, said structure
may be rebuilt on the existing foundation to the dimensions of the
structure which was destroyed provided rebuilding is begun within one
year; and
c. A non-conforming structure may be moved within a lot in a manner which
would decrease its non-conformity in terms of setback requirements,
provided that the Planning Board finds that the change in location is
appropriate in regards to meeting the following standards:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening;
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and Lighting
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
6
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES OF LAND-cont
3. EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES
Continuance of a non-conforming use of a structure shall be subject to the following
provisions:
a. No structure devoted to a non-conforming use shall be enlarged or
extended;
b. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of the adoption of amendment of this Ordinance, but no such uses
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
c. Any non-conforming use of a structure or premises may be changed to
another non-conforming use provided that the Planning Board shall find
that the proposed use is more consistent with the District’s purpose than
the existing non-conforming use;
d. If a non-conforming use of a structure or premises is superseded by a
permitted use, the non-conforming use shall not thereafter be resumed
e. If any such non-conforming use of a structure ceases for any reason for a
period of more than twelve (12) consecutive months, any subsequent use
of such structure shall comply with standards specified by this Ordinance
for the district in which such structure is located; and
f. A structure housing an existing non-conforming use may be moved,
within the lot, in a manner which would be more appropriate location,
provided that the Planning Board finds that the change in location is
appropriate in regards to meeting the following standards:
(1) Location and character;
(2) Fencing and screening
(3) Landscaping, topography, and natural features;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting
4. CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ORDINANCE
This Ordinance shall not require any change in plans, construction, size, or designated
use for any building, structure, or part thereof for which a completed application for a
local permit has been made, provided application has been subject to substantive
review, or a permit that has been issued and upon which construction has been
lawfully commenced prior to the adoption or amendment of the Ordinance. Such
construction shall start within sixty (60) days after the issuance of such permit.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
7
SECTION II: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES AND LOTS-cont.
5. NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
A single parcel of land, the legal description of which or the dimensions of which are
recorded on a document or map recorded in the Registry of Deeds which at the
effective date of adoption or subsequent amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet
the lot area or width requirements or both, of the district in which it is located, may be
built upon as an existing non-conforming lot of record even though such lot may be
contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, provided that all other
provisions of this Ordinance are met.
6. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
Ownership of land and structures which remain lawful but become non-conforming
by the adoption or amendment of the Ordinance may be transferred and the new
owner may continue the non-conforming uses subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
8
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Town of Newport is hereby divided into the
following districts.
1. Mixed Residential 1 District (MR1)
2. Mixed Residential 2 District (MR2)
3. Commercial/Industrial District (C/I)
4. Commercial District (C)
5. Rural District (R)
6. Nokomis Pond Water District (WD)
7. Village District (V)
B. STANDARDS ESTABLISHING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICTS DESCRIPTIONS
1. MIXED RESIDENTIAL 1 DISTRICT (MR1)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Mixed Residential 1 District is to provide an area for high density
residential and commercial development designed to be consistent with the
performance standards of this Ordinance.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Mixed Residential 1 District is illustrated on the Official Zoning
Map of the Town of Newport
2. MIXED RESIDENTIAL 2 DISTRICT (MR2)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Mixed Residential 2 District is to provide an area to
accommodate future residential development near and adjacent to existing facilities.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Mixed Residential 2 District is illustrated on the Official Zoning
Map of the Town of Newport.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
9
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS- cont.
3. COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Commercial/Industrial District is to identify a suitable area of the
community, conveniently located with respect to transportation and municipal
services.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Commercial/Industrial District is illustrated on the Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Newport.
4. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Commercial District is to identify those areas of the community
which have historically developed commercially and to identify areas of the
community which are suitable for future commercial development to the extent that
development sprawl is minimized.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Commercial District is illustrated on the Official Zoning Map of
the Town of Newport.
5. RURAL DISTRICT (R)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Rural District is to preserve an area of the town that has
traditionally been agricultural and includes open fields, pastures, and stands of trees.
The district is intended to protect specific quality of life features that make rural areas
desirable for residential development. The area is characterized by large properties,
farmsteads, and family homesteads. The soils in this area are generally viewed as
being poor in respect to drainage and the use of individual septic systems. Therefore
this district is considered to be the best suited to large lots, single family dwellings,
farms and open space pasture lands.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Rural District is illustrated on the Official Zoning Map of the
Town of Newport.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
10
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS-cont
6. NOKOMIS WATER POND DISTRICT (WD)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Nokomis Water Pond District is to protect the Nokomis
Pond water reservoir. This district extends 1,000 feet from the high water
mark of Nokomis Pond. Any development within this area, in addition to
meeting the performance standards within this Ordinance, must be reviewed
by the Newport Water District for determination of its impact on the water
resource. This will help insure the continued protection of the Town’s water
supply from possible groundwater contamination.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Nokomis Water Pond District is illustrated on the Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Newport.
7. VILLAGE DISTRICT (V)
a. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Village District is to accommodate existing residential,
commercial and in-home business occupations and provide an are of similar
development which is consistent with the performance standards of this
Ordinance.
b. AREAS INCLUDED
The location of the Village District is illustrated on the Official Zoning Map
of the Town of Newport.
C. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Districts established by this Ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on the
Official “Land Use Zoning Map of Newport, Maine” the following rules of
interpretation shall apply:
The official copy of the map shall be that map which bears the certification that it is
true and correct, signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board and attested by the
Town Clerk, and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
D. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to boundary lines of Districts as shown on the official
“Land Use Zoning Map of Newport”, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
11
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS-cont
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets,
highways, public utilities or right of ways shall be construed as following such
center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following shore lines of any lake or pond
shall be construed as following the normal high water mark;
3. Boundaries indicated as being extensions of center lines of streets shall be
construed to be extension of such center lines;
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams,
rivers, or other continuous flowing water courses shall be construed as following
the channel center line of such watercourses;
5. Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extension of features listed above
shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official map
shall be determined by scale of the map;
6. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the official map, or in other circumstances where uncertainty
exists with respect to the location of a boundary, the Planning Board shall
interpret the district boundaries.
E. DIVISION OF LOTS BY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
In the event that a District boundary line divides a lot or parcel of the same ownership
of record, at the time such line is established by adoption of subsequent amendment
of this Ordinance, the Planning Board, after written finding of fact, that such
extensions will not create unreasonable adverse impacts on the existing uses of the
adjacent properties, may
a. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is
greater that ten (10) acres, extend the regulations applicable to the less restrictive
portion into no more than twenty percent (20) of the more restrictive portion.
b. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is less
than ten (10) acres, extend the regulations applicable to the less restrictive portion
into no more that fifty percent (50) of the more restrictive portion.
c. When that portion of the lot which is located in the more restrictive District is
equal to that which is located in the less restrictive District, extend the regulations
applicable to the less restrictive portion to all of the more restrictive portion.
d. Except that, no such extensions shall be granted by the Planning Board into any
Protection Districts.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
12
SECTION III: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS-cont
F. AMENDMENTS TO DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The Board of Selectmen, of its own initiative, and the Planning Board or any property
owner may petition, for a change in the boundary of any District. No change in a
District boundary shall be approved without a duly authorized majority vote at a
Special or Annual Town Meeting. A warrant article shall not be presented for
consideration without written findings of fact upon substantial evidence that:
1. The change would be consistent with: the standards of the District boundaries in
effect at the time; the Comprehensive Plan; and the purpose, intent, and
provisions of this Ordinance; and
2. The change in District boundaries will satisfy a demonstrated need in the
community and will have no undue adverse impact on existing uses or resources;
or that new District designation is more appropriate for the protection and
management of existing use and resources within the affected area. The Board of
Selectmen will not act upon petition for a change in District boundaries unless
notice is first given to all owners of land abutting or located within 1000 feet of
the parcel for which a change in boundaries is sought. The Board of Selectmen
may require, as a part of any petition for a change in District boundaries, that the
petitioner submit the names and addresses of all such surrounding landowners as
well as notify all registered voters.
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES
A. ACTIVITIES DESCRIBED
A matrix listing the uses permitted in the various Districts, under this Ordinance
begins on page 14.
The various land uses contained in the matrix are organized according to the
following six (6) activity classifications:
1. Resource Extraction Activities
2. Residential Activities
3. Institutional Activities
4. Commercial Activities
5. Industrial Activities
6. Transportation and Utilities
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
13
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES- cont
A. SYMBOLS USED IN SCHEDULE OF USES
The following contained in the Schedule of Uses have the following meanings:
1. DISTRICT SYMBOLS
SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
V Village District
MR-1 Mixed Residential 1 District
MR-2 Mixed Residential 2 District
C/I Commercial/Industrial District
C Commercial District
R Rural District
WD Nokomis Pond Water District
2. PERMIT SYMBOLS
SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
Y Uses Allowed Without a Permit
N Uses Prohibited Within District
C Use Requires a Code Enforcement Permit
P Use Requires a Planning Board Permit
B. USES SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO PERMITTED USES MAY BE
PERMITTED
1. USES ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT: Uses substantially similar to those
allowed without a permit, but are not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be
permitted upon a ruling by the Code Enforcement Officer that such use is
substantially similar to such uses.
2. USES REQUIRING A CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT: Uses
substantially similar to those requiring a Code Enforcement Officer Permit, but
which are not listed in the Schedule of Uses, may be permitted by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
14
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES-cont
3. USES REQUIRING A PLANNING BOARD PERMIT: Uses substantially similar
to those requiring a Planning Board Permit, but which are not listed in the
Schedule of Uses, may be permitted by the Planning Board.
D. USES SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO PROHIBITED USES ARE PROHIBITED
Uses substantially similar to any uses listed as a Prohibited Use in the Schedule of
Uses, shall be prohibited.
E. COMPLIANCE WITH PERFORMANCE STANDARDS REQUIRED
All uses permitted must occur and be maintained in compliance with the applicable
requirements and performance standards contained in Section V
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
1. RESOURCE EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES
a.) Commercial timber harvesting C C C C C C N N
b.)Production of Commercial
Agricultural Products N N C C C C N N
c.) Mineral extraction not associated C C C C C C P N
with permitted development,
affecting an area of less than
2 acres in size;
d.) Mineral extraction operations for N N P P N P N N
any purpose affecting an area of 2
acres or greater in size except when
associated w/permitted development
e.)Filling, grading, draining, dredging C C C C C C P C
or alteration of water table or water
level, not including individual wells
f.) Accessory uses and structures C C C C C C C C
that are essential for the exercise of
uses listed above.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
15
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (cont.)
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX (cont.)
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
2. RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITIES
a.) Single-family Detached dwelling C C N N N C C C
aa. Condominium / Town Houses P
b.)Single-family Mobile Home C C N N N C C C
c.) Multi-family Dwelling: duplexes C C N N N C N C
d.) Multi-family Dwelling: 3 or more P N N N N P N P
families, including apartments;
e.)Mobile home parks; P P N N N N N P
f.) Nursing Home/Boarding Care P N N N N P P C
Facility
g.) Home Occupations; C C C C C C C C
h.) In-Law apartments; C C N N N C C C
i.)Group homes with up to 3 residents C C N N N C C C
j.) Group homes with more than 3 P P N N N P P P
Residents
k.)Accessory uses or structures that C C N N N C C C
are essential for the exercise of uses
listed above.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
16
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (cont.)
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX (cont.)
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
3. INSTITUTIONAL ACTIVITIES
a,)Hospital P P N N N N N N
b.) Medical Clinic, Facilities and C C P N N N N N
Services
c.) Government Facilities & Services C C P N P P N C
d.)Public Schools P P N N N P P P
e.)Private Schools (under 15 students) C C N N N P P C
f.)Day Care Centers C C P N P C P C
g.) Churches C C N N N C N C
h.)Cemetery P P N N N P N N
i.) Fraternal organizations P N N N P P N P
j.) Community Center P N N N P P N P
k.) Accessory uses and structures C C C N C C C C
that are essential for the exercise of
uses listed above.
l.) Addiction Treatment Facilities N N N N P N N N
m.) Marijuana Dispensing Facilities N N N N P N N N
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
17
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (cont.)
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX (cont.)
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
4. COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
a.) Automobile supplies P N P N C N N C
b.) Automobile Body Repair P N P N P N N P
c.) Automobile Repair/Service P N P N P N N P
d.) Banks/Credit Unions P N N N C N N C
e.) Beauty Shops C N N N C N N C
f.) Sporting Camps N N N N N P N N
g.) Clothing Store C N P N C N N C
h.) Fireworks Sales N N P N P N N N
I.) Craft Shops C N N N C N N C
j.) Florist shop/Greenhouse C N P N C C N C
k.) Fuel Oil Sales C N P C C N N C
l.) Funeral Homes C N N C C N N C
m.) Professional Offices C N P C C N N C
n.) Professional Offices Complex C N P C C N N C
o.) Pharmacy C N N C C N N C
p.) Restaurant P N P C C P N C
q.) Animal Hospital/Clinic N N P C C P N C
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
18
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES
–(cont.)
SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
4. COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES(cont)
q.) Take-Out Restaurant (no interior C N N N C C N C
seating.)
r.)Recreation Vehicle Sales & Service P N P N C N N C
s.) Automobile Sales P N P N C N N C
t.) Boarding Kennels N N N N P P N N
aa. Commercial Kennels N N N N P P N N
u.) Bed and Breakfast C C N N C C N C
v.) Motel, hotels, Inns, maximum of N N P N C N N C
ten rooms
w.) Motel, hotel and Inns, more than N N P N P N N P
ten rooms
aa.) Campgrounds N N N N N P N N
bb.) Retail Establishments of more N N P N P N N P
than 5,000 square feet
cc.) Retail Establishments less than C N P N C N N C
5,000 square feet, not listed above
dd.) Accessory uses and structures C C C C C C N C
that are essential for the exercise of
uses listed above.
ee.) Self-storage buildings N N C C C N N N
ff.) Sales and service of motor homes P N P N C P N C
and camper trailers
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
19
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (cont.)
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX (cont.)
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
5. INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES
a.) Lumber yard, sawmill N N P P N C N N
b.) Transportation Facility and N N P P N N N N
Terminal Yard
c.) Bulk Oil and Fuel Tank Storage in N N P P N N N N
excess of 50 gallons except for
on-site heating and cooking purposes
d.) Salvage and Recycling Facility N N P P N N N N
e.) Wholesale Business Facility N N P P N N N N
f.) Light manufacturing Facility N N P P P N N N
g.) Disposal of Solid Waste N N P P N P N N
h.) Sewage Treatment Facility N N N P N P N N
i.) Wood Products Manufacturing N N P P N N N P
Facility
j.) Print/Publishing Facility N N P P N N N P
k.) Warehousing Facility N N P P N N N P
l.) Distributing Facility N N P P N N N P
m.) Processing Facilities (industrial) N N P P N N N N
n.) Processing Facilities (agricultural) N N P P P P N N
o.) Accessory uses and structures N N P P P P N N
that are essential for the exercise
of uses listed above
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
20
SECTION IV: SCHEDULE OF USES (cont.)
F. SCHEDULE OF USES-MATRIX (cont.)
Activities/Districts MR1 MR2 C/I I C R WD V
6. TRANSPORTATION & UTILITIES
a.) Land management roads with
water crossings of minor flowing
waters.
C C C C C C N C
b.) Land management roads with
water crossings of standing waters
C C C C C C N C
and of major flowing waters.
c.) Road construction projects, other C C C C C C N C
than land management roads, and
not part of a project requiring a
Planning Board permit
d.) Road construction projects, other P P P P P P N P
than land management, which are
part of projects requiring Planning
Board Review
e.) Major utility facilities, such as
transmission lines, water supply
and sewage treatment facilities,
P P P P P P P P
but not including service drops.
f.) Accessory uses and structures that C C C C C C P C
are essential for the exercise of uses
listed above.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
21
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS
SECTION USERS GUIDE: This section contains general performance standards with
which all development proposals submitted for approval pursuant to this Ordinance
must comply.
The purpose of the regulations contained in this section is to allow maximum utilization of
land while insuring against adverse impacts on environment, neighboring properties, and the
public interest. This assurance is provided by separating the area of the Town of Newport
into districts and permitting specific land use within each, provided that a use meets all the
additional criteria specified in this Ordinance.
This regulatory approach has been termed “performance zoning” because it permits a use to
be developed on a particular parcel only if the use on that parcel meets “performance”
standards which have been enacted to insure against the use causing (or having the potential
to cause) adverse impacts.
The following Land Use Standards shall govern all Land Use Permits issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board.
In review applications submitted pursuant to this Ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer
or the Planning Board shall consider the following performance standards and make written
findings that each applicable standard has been met prior to issuing final approval. In all
instances the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.
A. GENERAL STANDARDS
1. ACCESSORY USES
An accessory use shall not include any use injurious or offensive to the neighborhood
as initially determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
All road entrances, curb cuts, and driveways shall be designed considering land
topography, street design, and existing and expected traffic patterns, so as to promote
to the greatest extent possible, safe pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to protect
public safety. All applicants must adhere to Title 17, Chapter 299 for all entrances,
curb cuts, and driveways that are to be constructed on a State Roadway. All such
construction on a town way shall be in compliance with the Town of Newport Street
Opening and Curb Cut Ordinance.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
22
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
2. A. Addiction Treatment Facilities and Marijuana Dispensing Facilities: To
insure the health, safety and welfare of the general public, users of such facilities and
neighboring properties, the following requirements shall be met:
a. Facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any school or daycare center;
b. The Facility shall serve no more than one patient per 25 square feet of building
area of the principal building;
c. The Facility must meet the following off street parking requirements: 1 parking
space for every 3 patients, plus one for each employee based on the average employee
occupancy;
d. The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing before acting on any application
for such a facility.
3. AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
Agricultural practices shall be conducted in such a manner to prevent soil erosion,
sedimentation, and contamination or nutrient enrichment of surface waters. All
spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the
"Maine Standards for Manure and Manure Sludge Disposal on Land" published by the
University of Maine and Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission in July
1972, and as this may be amended or superseded.
4. AIR POLLUTION
It shall be unlawful within the Town of Newport for any person to discharge into the
atmosphere soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or
radioactive substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter or other
materials, in such a manner as to constitute atmospheric pollution in excess of the
performance standards as established by the Maine State Department of
Environmental Protection as may be amended from time to time.
5. BUFFERS
Buffer strips may be required for the following areas and/or purposes:
a. Along the property line where the reviewing authority (Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board) determines it desirable and necessary to
accomplish the following:
a. To shield incompatible uses from one another;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
23
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
b. To block prevailing winds to stop wind borne debris from leaving
development site;
c. To prevent any proposed lighting from interferring with residential
properties or with safe driving;
d. gravel extraction operations, utility buildings and structures,
automobile salvage and junkyards, parking areas, garbage collection
areas, and loading and unloading areas.
6. CONFORMANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
All proposed development shall be inconformity with the Comprehensive Plan and
Policy Statements of the Town contained within the Plan and with the provisions of
all pertinent local ordinances and regulations, State, and Federal laws and regulations.
7. CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
When any part of a development is located in a Flood Hazard Area as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and locally adopted Floodplain
Management Ordinance, the plan shall indicate that all principal structures on lots in
the development shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement,
at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
8. CONVERSIONS
Conversions of existing structures into multi-family units, in Districts permitting
multi-family dwellings, may be permitted provided that:
a. Off-street parking for two(2) vehicles per dwelling unit plus maneuvering space
will be provided;
b. Approval of conversion plans by the fire, electrical, and plumbing inspector(s) is
required prior to issuance of land use permit;
c. Each dwelling unit shall be at least three hundred and fifty (350) square feet in
area for one (1) bedroom units plus one-hundred and fifty (150) square feet for
each additional bedroom; and
d. Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet and kitchen facilities and no dwelling
unit will share these facilities with any other dwelling unit.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
24
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
9. DUST, FUMES, VAPORS, GASES, ODORS, GLARE, AND EXPLOSIVE
MATERIALS
a. Emission of odors, dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which could damage
human health, animals, vegetation, or property must comply with State and Federal
standards.
b. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce a strong, dazzling light or
reflection of that light beyond it lot lines into neighboring properties or onto any
town way so as to impair the vision of the driver of any vehicle upon that town way.
c. No highly flamable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground, unless they are stored in compliance with the requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Section 30, 58 and 59A.
d. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce noise levels beyond its lot
lines as to cause adverse impact upon the neighboring properties.
10. EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS
The following measures relating to conservation, erosion, and sediment control shall
be included where applicable as part of all projects submitted for review and approval
under this Ordinance.
a. the procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan, prepared
and submitted by the applicant, shall be implemented during the site preparation,
construction, and clean- up stage; and
b. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be
minimized by employing the following best management practices:
1. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal and re-grading or other development
shall be done in such a way as to minimize erosion;
2. Development shall preserve outstanding natural features, keep cut-fill
operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with topography so as to
create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the volume and
velocity of surface water runoff;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
25
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
3. The development shall not unreasonably increase the rate or volume or
surface water runoff from the proposed site;
4. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented;
5. The disturbed are and the duration of exposure shall be kept to the practical
minimum;
6. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
7. Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect disturbed areas
during development;
8. Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures in
accordance with the provisions of the Department of Environmental
Protection’s Best Management Practices for Erosion and Sedimentation
Control or the Mine soil and Water conservation Commission shall be
installed as soon as practicable after construction ends;
9. Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other
acceptable methods;
10. The top of the cut or bottom of a fill section shall not be closer then ten (10)
feet to an adjacent property, unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
11. During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed
wherever practicable
12. Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation, re-regrading or
other development, it shall be the responsibility of the developer causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair and damage at his expense as quickly as possible;
13. Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and completely
on private property is the responsibility of the owner to the point of open
discharge at the property line or at a communal watercourse within the
property.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
26
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
11. HOME OCCUPATIONS
a. The purpose of the Home Occupation provision is to permit the conduct of those
businesses which are compatible with the districts in which they are allowed.
home occupations are limited to those uses which may be conducted within a
residential dwelling without substantially changing the appearance or condition of the
residence or accessory structure;
b. Any home occupation or profession which accessory to and compatible with a
residential use may be permitted if:
(1) It is carried out in a dwelling unit or in a structure customarily accessory
to a dwelling unit;
(2) It is conducted only by a member or members of the family residing in the
dwelling unit; and
(3) It does not materially injure the usefulness of the dwelling unit or
accessory structure for normal residential purposes.
c. All home occupations shall conform with the following conditions:
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the dwelling or
accessory structure;
(2) The home occupation shall be conducted only by a member or members
of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
(3) There shall be no exterior display, no exterior signs other than those
permitted in Section V, no exterior storage of materials, and no other
indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential
character of the principal building;
(4) Objectionable conditions such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical
disturbance, odor, heat, glare, or activity at unreasonable hours, shall not
be permitted;
(5.) The traffic generated by such home occupation shall not increase the
volume of traffic so as to create a traffic hazard or disturb the residential
character of the immediate neighborhood;
(6.) In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the normal
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
27
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
requirements of the dwelling, adequate off –street parking shall be
provide for the vehicles of the maximum number of users the home
occupation may attract during peak operating hours;
(7.) The home occupation may utilize:
a. Not more than twenty (20%) percent of the dwelling unit floor
area, provided that for the purpose of this calculation, unfinished
basement and attic spaces are not included;
b. Unfinished attic and basement spaces; and
c. One accessory structure. The floor are utilized in the accessory
structure shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area
of the dwelling unit.
12. INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following provisions shall apply to all permitted industrial uses:
a. Danger
No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire hazard,
chemical hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured,
processed or assembled except in accordance with applicable State and
Federal codes and regulations.
b. Vibration
With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the construction or
demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be transmitted outside the lot where
it originates
c. Wastes
No wastes shall be discharged or dumped into any river, stream, watercourse,
storm drain, pond, lake, or swamp. Industrial waste water may be discharged
to municipal sewers only and in such quantities and quality as to be
compatible with commonly accepted municipal sewage treatment operations
subject to the approval of the appropriate entity. The disposal of industrial
waste waters by means other than the municipal sewage system must comply
with the laws of the State of Maine; and
d. Those standards of Subsection 10 of this Section regarding Dust, Fumes, Vapors,
Gases, Odors, Glare and Explosive Materials.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
28
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
13. JUNKYARDS
No junkyard as defined in this Ordinance shall be established, operated or maintained
without first obtaining a not-transferable land use permit issued in accordance with
State licensing and local requirements, and the following provisions:
a. Junkyards shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the edge of
the right-of-ways; and shall be setback one hundred (100) feet from all sides and
rear lot lines;
b. Junkyards shall be located a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any
public park, facility, or grounds; and
Junkyards shall be entirely screened from view by earth berms or fences which
shall be well constructed and properly maintained at a minimum height of six (6)
feet and sufficient to accomplish the complete screening from ordinary view.
In addition, the following provisions apply to the operation of junkyards:
c. Upon arrival at the junkyard, all petroleum and other hazardous fluids shall be
drained from all vehicles, and appropriate safety precautions, such as the removal
of door and truck locks, shall be taken to avoid injury and accidents;
d. Tires shall be remove and disposed of within 60 days at a duly licensed disposal
or transfer facility. Proof of disposal shall be provided to the Code Enforcement
Officer upon request.
e. The complete processing of vehicles into salvage materials shall be accomplished
within six (6) months;
f. All junk and salvage materials shall be stored within the screened/fenced areas
and the operation shall be conducted in such a manner as to prevent unsightliness
to the adjacent area;
g. No open burning of salvage materials or junk shall be permitted on the premises.
Waste fluids and unusable materials shall be disposed of in a duly licensed
disposal facility.
h. The Planning Board and/or Code Enforcement Officer may recommend the
application of more stringent restrictions and/or limitations, and stipulate
reasonable conditions which shall be attached to the permit covering the operation
and use of the junkyard prior to the Selectmen’s issuance of a permit.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
29
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
14. LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS
Statement of purpose: ensure appropriate outdoor lighting by addressing the issues of
safety, efficiency, the environment and aesthetics.
All development approval under this section shall be provided with adequate outside
area, or the outside of any building, shall be directed into the property served by such
lighting so that no undesirable illumination or glare will be produced on adjacent
streets or lots occupied by residential, institutional or public uses.
A. Performance Standards
(1) Regulations- Unless determined to be a safety hazard or in violation of any
state or federal law, all outdoor lighting installed in the Town of Newport
shall comply with this section, except for the following: lighting installed and
maintained for public safety by municipal, state or federal government;
approved signs; external illumination of flags; approved lighting for athletic
fields; temporary outdoor lighting; holiday lighting; luminaries with lamp or
lamps rated at a total of 2,000 lumens or less.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a lumen is a unit of lumens flux. One
foot-candle is equal to one lumen per square foot. The lumen-output values
shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
a) No luminaries shall produce a stray, dazzling light or reflection onto
neighboring residential properties, or onto any public road so as to
impair the vision of any driver.
b) Luminaries shall be shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements
are not exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians, or from
adjacent buildings. No luminaries shall emit any direct light above its
horizontal plane. The Planning Board may grant exceptions for lights
that are aesthetically consistent with decorative streetlights and located
on parcels adjacent to such streetlights.
c) No flood or spot luminaire of any lumen output rating shall be
aimed, directed or focused toward any adjacent or nearby residential
parcel.
d) Rather than leaving security lights on, the use of motion sensors is
encouraged.
e) Direct or indirect illumination shall not exceed ½ foot-candle upon
abutting residential properties.
f) Luminaire height, including the base, shall not exceed 25 feet.
Exceptions may be granted only when it can be demonstrated that the
intent of this section will still be substantially met.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
30
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont).
(3) Existing nonconforming luminaires
a) The continued use of nonconforming luminaires legally existing as
of the effective date of this section shall be permitted unless
determined to be a safety hazard.
b) Nonconforming luminaires replaced or moved after the effective
date of this section shall comply with the provisions of this section.
15. LOT SIZE, SETBACK AND COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS
See Section V: Land Use Standards B. Dimensional Requirements
16. MANUFACTURED HOUSING
a. Intent: It is the intent of this Ordinance to provide a variety of housing
alternatives to all economic levels within the community, while continuing to
insure the minimum standards of health, safety and welfare of the community. To
this end, this ordinance allows the siting of all types of manufactured housing
within designated areas of the Town regardless of their construction date or
compliance with all the standards of the Manufactured Home and Construction
Safety Standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, adopted in 1975.
The Town does hereby require however, that all manufactured housing sited within the Town
of Newport meet certain minimum safety and design criteria;
b. Minimum Safety Standards: All manufactured housing as defined in this
ordinance, regardless of date of manufacture, and sited within the Town of
Newport after the effective date of this ordinance, shall meet or exceed the
following minimum standards before a “Certificate of Occupancy” shall be issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer in conformance with Section VI.H of this
Ordinance.
c. HUD Approval Sufficient: All manufactured houses constructed after 1975 and
bearing the seal of the Department of Housing and Urban Development which
certifies the Manufactured Home was built pursuant to the provisions of the
Manufactured Homes Construction and Safety Standards as revised shall be
deemed to have fulfilled the requirements of this section.
d. Minimum Electrical Safety Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet the
following minimum safety requirements for electrical installation and maintenance
as provided for by the National Electrical Code as said code pertains to the
following:
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
31
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
(1) 100 Ampere Entrance required;
(2) Copper wiring required;
(3) Two means of grounding required
(4) Ground faulting receptacles required
In addition, all electrical installation or modifications to existing manufactured
housing shall be inspected by and certified by and electrician licensed by the State of
Maine or the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer if duly appointed as electrical
inspector.
e. Minimum Fire Prevention Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet the
following minimum fire safety requirements as provided for by the National
Electrical Code and the Manufactured Housing Construction Standards of 1975
established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
16. MANUFACTURED HOUSING (cont.)
(1) All homes shall contain at least one operable fire extinguisher which is
readily accessible at all times;
(2) All homes shall have at least one operable AC smoke detector centrally
located within the home and one operable smoke detector in each of the
bedrooms as well as one Carbon Monoxide (CO Detector) Detector
located in the hallway leading to bedrooms
(3) The installation and maintenance of all heating systems including vents,
chimneys, and encompassing secondary and tertiary as well as primary
heating sources, shall meet the standards of NFPA 211. In addition, no
wood stove shall be used for heating purposes in a manufactured home in
the Town of Newport without first being inspected and approved by the
Newport Fire Department for safe installation;
(4) All automatic dryers, whether electric or gas, must meet the venting
requirements of the Manufactured Home Construction Standards of 1975
as established by HUD; and;
(5) All manufactured homes must meet the egress requirements of the
Manufactured Home Construction Standards of HUD, towit, all
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
32
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
manufactured homes shall provide for at least two means of egress from
each bedroom, one of which must be directly to the outside of the home
and may be accomplished by way of a window with a minimum clear net
opening of 5.7sq. ft. which can be opened easily without tools, and two
doors exiting directly to the outside of the home separate by distances as
established by the standards.
f. Minimum Plumbing Standards: All manufactured housing shall meet the
minimum standards of the Maine Plumbing Code as amended.
g. Minimum Design Standards: All manufactured housing will be sited and
maintained in such a manner as to blend harmoniously with other residential
structures in close proximity, to this end all manufactured housing located within
the Town of Newport after the effective date of this ordinance shall:
(1) Have and maintain external siding which is residential in appearance for
the manufactured home as well as any additions thereto or accessory
structures located on the same lot;
(2) Be located on a permanent foundation as required by the duly adopted
Building Code of the Town of Newport;
(3) Permanent skirting shall be installed within thirty (30) days of siting;
(4) Provide a safe means of egress and ingress to and from the manufactured
home including stairs with handrails when applicable.
h. No manufactured housing unit may be placed or stored on any lot in the Town of
Newport for more than thirty (30) consecutive days while site work necessary for
installation of the unit is being conducted on the lot upon which the unit is being
stored. For purposes of this subsection, site work shall include construction of a
foundation, installing municipal or private water and sewer disposal for the lot,
and other work such as the installation of driveways, culverts, and finish grading.
This subsection does not apply to lots used by Manufactured Housing Dealers, licensed by
the State of Maine, for display and sales of manufactured homes.
17. MINERAL EXPLORATION AND EXTRACTION
The following requirements for mineral exploration and extraction activities shall
apply in all Districts:
(1) All exploration/extraction activities, including test pits and holes, shall be
promptly capped, refilled, or secured by other equally effective measures
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
33
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
so as to reasonably restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health
and safety;
(2) No portion of any ground is to be disturbed by the extraction activity shall
be closer than 100 feet from an public roadway;
(3) Within 250 feet of any water body the extraction areas shall be protected
from soil erosion by ditches, sedimentation basins, dikes, dams or such
other control devices which are effective in preventing sediments from
being eroded or deposited into such water body.
(4) A natural vegetative screen of not less that 50 feet in width shall be
retained from any facility intended primarily for public use, excluding
privately owned roads; and
(5) If any mineral extraction operation located within 100 feet of any
property line or public roadway or facility intended primarily for public
use, excluding privately owned roads, is to be terminated or suspended for
a period of one year or more, the site shall be rehabilitated by grading the
soil to a slope of 2 horizontal and 1 vertical or flatter.
(6) Extraction operations (gravel pits, etc.,) shall not be permitted within
hundred (100) feet of any property lines without a written agreement of
consent between property owners.
A. Performance Guarantee
No approval for excavation, removal or fill of land shall be issued by
the Planning Board/Code Enforcement Officer until a surety bond, or
other security acceptable to the Planning Board is posted by the owner
of the land on which the excavation, removal or fill of land will take
place. Such performance guarantee shall be made payable to the Town
of Newport in the amount of $2000 per acre of land projected for
excavation, removal or fill. The purpose of the bond or other surety is
to insure compliance with all permit conditions imposed by this
ordinance.
18. MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance relation to bulk, and use, the
Planning Board in reviewing submitted plans for proposed mobile home parks, may
modify said provisions related to space, bulk and use to permit innovative approaches
to environmental design in accordance with the following standards;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
34
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
a. there shall be compliance with all State and local codes and ordinances;
b. All utilities shall be installed underground wherever possible. All transformer
boxes, substations, pumping stations, and meters shall be located and designed so
as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public;
c. No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street or
adjacent mobile home;
d. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot, such access
shall have a minimum of fifty (50) foot right-of-way and a twenty (20) feet road
width. All park streets shall be well drained, maintained in good condition, and
adequately lighted at night;
e. Dead end streets shall be limited in length to one thousand (1000) feet and at the
closed end shall be provided with a turn around having a minimum radius of sixty
(60) feet;
e. Off-street parking in all mobile home parks shall be furnished at the rate of at
least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home located on the mobile home lot.
f. Mobile home lots shall provide an adequate foundation for the placement of a
mobile home; such foundation shall meet the requirements of the duly adopted
Building Code of the Town of Newport; and
g. All individual mobile homes shall be equipped with skirting within thirty (30)
days of siting.
19. OFF-STREET PARKING
a. Off-street parking, either by means of open air spaces or by garage space, in
addition to being a permitted use, shall be considered as an accessory use when
required or provided to serve conforming uses located in any District;
b. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided;
c. The following minimum off-street parking requirements shall be provided and
maintained in case of new construction, alterations and changes of use;
(1) Dwellings – Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit;
(2) transient Accommodations:
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
35
(a) Bed and Breakfast accommodations and motels, hotels, boarding
houses, and inns with ten (10) rooms or less – Two (2) parking spaces
plus one (1) space for each guest room; and
(b) Motels, hotels, boarding houses and ins with more than 10 rooms--
One (1) parking space for each guest plus one (1) space for each 3
employees;
( 3) Schools – Five (5) parking spaces for each classroom plus one (1) space
for each four (4) employees;
( 4) Hospitals (bed facilities only) – one (1) parking space for every three (3)
beds, plus one (1) for each employee based on the expected average
employee occupancy;
(5) Theaters, churches, and other public assembly places – one (1) parking
space for every four (4) seats or for every one hundred (100) square feet
or major fraction thereof of assemblage space if no fixed seats;
(6) Retail Stores – one (1) parking space for every four hundred (400) square
feet of retail area, plus one (1) space for every three (3) employees, unless
public parking is provided;
(7) Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments – one (1) parking space
for every four (4) seats, plus one (1) space for every three (3) employees,
unless public parking is provided;
(8) Professional Offices and public buildings – one (1) parking space for
every four hundred (400) square feet of gross leasable area, exclusive of
cellar and bulk storage areas, unless public parking is provided;
(9) Marinas – Minimum of one (1) parking space for each docking and
mooring space;
(10) Other commercial Recreation Establishments (mini golf courses, ect.) –
The number of spaces deemed appropriate by the Planning Board; and
(11) Industrial – one (1) parking space for each one and a half (1.5)
employees, based on the highest expected average employee occupancy, plus
visitor and customer parking to meet the needs of specific operations.
20. OFF-STREET LOADING
Adequate off-street loading areas shall be provided for appropriate land uses.
Loading areas cannot be included as parking spaces when meeting parking
requirements.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
36
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
21. OIL AND CHEMICAL STORAGE
a. All storage of petroleum or liquid petroleum products shall be in conformance
with the provisions of Title 38 MRSA, Section 560 et seq., which among other
things establishes a ten (10) year compliance schedule for the discontinuance and
removal of nonconforming underground oil storage facilities and requires
qualified personnel to oversee the removal of certain underground facilities; and
compliance with duly adopted building Code of Newport and NFPA provisions.
b. When applicable, the applicant shall have the burden of proof to assure the
Planning Board or code Enforcement Officer that all provisions of the above
statutes have been met before the issuance of any permits may take place.
22. PESTICIDE APPLICATION
Pesticide application in any of the Districts shall not require a permit provided such
application is in conformance with applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations.
Any pollutant introduced into soil on the site shall not exceed a concentration in the
ground water that is greater than the guideline established for it in the Safe Drinking
Water Standards, EPA Health Advisory, or NAS Health Advisory. Any violation of
this standard shall be cause to order the immediate stop of the use or activity
responsible for the contamination. The landowner shall be responsible for the cost of
all remedial actions.
23. REFUSE DISPOSAL
The applicant shall provide for the disposal of all solid and liquid wastes on a timely
basis and in an environmentally safe manner. The impact of particular industrial or
chemical wastes or by-products upon the sanitary facilities (in terms of volume,
flammability or toxicity) shall be considered and the applicant may be required to
dispose of such wastes elsewhere, in conformance with all applicable state and
federal regulations. The applicant may be required to specify the amount and exact
nature of all industrial or chemical wastes to be generated by the proposed operation.
24. SEWAGE DISPOSAL
a. Subsurface Sewage Disposal
No permit shall be issued for a project with subsurface sewage disposal
unless:
(1) there is an area of suitable soils according to the Subsurface Waste Water
Disposal rules of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed system;
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
37
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
(2) An acceptable plan to construct the absorption area is prepared in
accordance with the Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules; and
(3) In lieu of (1) and/or (2) above, the applicant demonstrates that any
deficiencies of the soil for purposes of sewage disposal can and will be
overcome by a suitable engineering solution;
No development shall be permitted which utilizes, for on-site subsurface sewage disposal
purposes, any soil listed in the Soil Suitability Guide as having a very poor rating for the
proposed use, unless the proposed sewage disposal system is approved under the Subsurface
Waste Water Disposal Rules.
b. Sewage Sludge Disposal
The following requirements shall apply to sewage sludge disposal wherever
allowed: All septic sludge disposal shall conform with the “Town of
Newport’s Sludge Storage and Spreading Ordinance”
25. SIGNS
a. Conformance of Signs
No sign shall be hereafter erected, altered or maintained within the limits of
the Town of Newport, Maine except in conformance with the provisions of
this section.
b. Signs Prohibited
No sign, whether new or existing, shall be permitted within the Town of
Newport, Maine which causes a sight, traffic, health or welfare hazard, or
results in a nuisance, due to illumination, placement, display, or obstruction or
existing signs.
c. Temporary Signs
The following temporary signs are permitted provided said signs conform to
all standards of this section and all other municipal, federal and state
ordinances, statutes and/or retulations:
(1) Temporary Signs Giving Notice
Signs of temporary nature, such as political posters, advertisements or
charitable functions, notices of meetings, other non-commercial signs
of a similar nature, are permitted for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days, provided that the persons who posted the signs shall be
responsible for their removal.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
38
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
(2) Temporary Yard Sale Signs
Temporary yard sale signs are permitted provided they do to exceed
the size standards of Subsection e and provided they are removed
within twenty-four (24) hours of the completion of the sale. Yard
sales which extend for more that four (4) consecutive days are
considered commercial use.
d. Sign Requirements
All signs within the limits of the Town of Newport shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) No sign shall project over a walkway or interfere in any way with the
normal flow of foot or vehicular traffic. All free standing signs shall be
set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from property lines in all districts;
(2) No sign shall contain, include, or be illuminated by flashing, blinking,
intermittent, or moving light;
(3) No sign shall exceed twenty five (25) feet in height;
(4) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded non-flashing lights so as to
effectively prevent beams of light from being directed at neighboring
residential properties or any portion of the main traveled way of a
roadway, or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause glare or
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise interfere
with the operation thereof.
(5) Roof signs shall to extend more than ten (10) feet above the roof line;
(6) Signs in Commercial and Commercial/Industrial District. No more than
two (2) free standing signs per use. Signs may be double faced. No larger
that one hundred (100) square feet in area and no higher than twenty-five
(25) feet height.
(7) Signs in Industrial District. No more than two signs per use. no sign shall
be greater than 100 square feet in area and no higher than 25 feet in height.
(8) Signs involving Home Occupations shall not exceed four (4) sq. ft. and not
more than one per lot.
e. Off-Premise Signs
No off premise sign shall be erected or maintained in the Town of Newport
except in conformity with MRSA Title 23, Section 1901-1925, The Maine
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
39
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
Traveler Information Services Law. Off premises official business directional
signs may be located in the Town of Newport in such manner as allowed
under MRSA Title 23, Section 1901-1925 and under the rules and regulations
of the State of Maine Department of Transportation.
f. Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this section except as
otherwise provided for herein:
(1) Traffic control signs, signals, and/or other devices regulating or enhancing
public safety erected by a governmental body.
26. SITE CONDITIONS
a. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a safe and
sanitary manner, and any condition which could lead to personal injury or
property damage shall be immediately corrected by the developer upon order by
the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized personnel. The developer shall
make provision for disposal of oil and grease from equipment and the site area
should be regularly treated to control dust from construction activity.
b. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead
and dying trees, roots and debris, an excess or scrap building materials shall be
removed or destroyed immediately upon the request of and to the satisfaction of
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to issuing an occupancy permit; and
c. No changes shall be made in the elevation or contour of the lot or site by the
removal of earth to another lot or site other than shown on an approved site plan.
Minimal changes in elevations or contours necessitated by field conditions may
be made only after approval by the Code Enforcement Officer.
27. SOILS
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental
impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, and water pollution, whether
during or after construction. Proposed use requiring subsurface waste disposal, and
commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land use, shall
require a soils report, prepared by a duly licensed individual as appropriate for the
project.
28. TEMPORARY STORAGE
Portable or mobile trailers, vans and similar vehicles or temporary buildings may be
used for storage, only upon approval of the Code Enforcement Officer and only for a
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
40
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
temporary period not to exceed six (6) months. Such approval may be granted by the
Code Enforcement Officer and may be extended for successive periods of six (6)
months each, if a finding can be made that the use:
a. Does not diminish area requirements as set forth for the District in which
it is located;
b. There is a valid temporary need which cannot be met within the principal
structure and that adequate economic hardship can be shown;
c. The initial approval, or any renewal, of the use will not in any way be
detrimental to the neighboring properties including aesthetic appearance;
d. The use is not intended as a permanent or long term use;
e. The use is not intended to circumvent building area limitations for the
District in which it is located or prolong the use of facilities which have
been outgrown;
f. Will be adequately screened from neighborhood properties and the street;
g. Will not be used as or intended for advertising for on or off premises
purposes; and
h. Is not intended for retail sales.
The above provisions do not prohibit the use or such temporary facilities as
construction or job site office or equipment storage facilities during construction
provided that no advertising other than the contractor’s name shall be permitted and
that such signs meet the sign requirements of this Ordinance.
29. TOPSOIL AND VEGETATION REMOVAL
a. Topsoil shall be considered part of the development and shall not be removed
from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building
excavations;
1. Except for normal thinning, landscaping, cutting of trees to provide access to
direct sunlight, existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion. The
Planning Board shall require a developer to take measures to correct and prevent
soil erosion in the proposed development.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
41
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
30. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: “BED AND BREAKFAST”
“Bed and Breakfast: accommodations shall be permitted in the private, year-round
residence of the host family who live on the premises provided that:
a. The “Bed and Breakfast” operation shall not have any adverse effect on
neighbors.
31. TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS: “RENTAL CABINS AND COTTAGES”
To insure the health, safety, and welfare of guests and the occupants of neighboring
properties, the following requirements shall be met:
a. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of off-street parking plus
maneuvering space shall be provided for each cabin or cottage;
b. Each cabin or cottage shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
exterior lot lines;
c. Each cabin or cottage shall be provided with a safe and adequate means of
sewage, garbage and rubbish disposal, water supply and fire protection;
d. Adequate storm water drainage shall be provided for each cabin or cottage
site; and
e. Each cabin or cottage site shall be appropriately landscaped
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
All structures and uses shall meet or exceed the following dimensional requirements:
Mixed (MR1) (MR2)
Residential District Mixed Mixed
Dimensional Residential Residential
Requirements District District
_____________ ______________ ________________
Minimum Lot size
Municipal Sewer 20,000 Sq. Ft. 1 Acre*
Subsurface Disposal 30,000 Sq. Ft. 1 Acre*
* Multi-family developments in MR 2 District shall meet the following requirements: 1 acre for a
one family dwelling, 1.5 acres for a two family dwelling, 2 acres for a three family dwelling, 2.5
acres for a four family dwelling. NOTE 1: each building shall be limited to no more than 4 units
NOTE 2: all acreage required for multi-family in the MR2 District must be classified as
buildable. Easement areas, freshwater wetlands and other unusable areas shall not be classified
as buildable.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
42
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (cont.)
Mixed (MR1) (MR2)
Residential District Mixed Mixed
Dimensional Residential Residential
Requirements District District
_____________ ______________ ________________
Minimum Lot size
per Dwelling Unit
Municipal Sewer 20,000 Sq.Ft. 1 Acre
Subsurface Disposal 30,000 Sq. Ft. 1 Acre
Minimum Road Frontage 100 feet 150 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback Variable* 50 feet
From edge of traveled way
Minimum Side Yard Setback
Principal Structures 15 feet 15 feet
Accessory Structures Frontage Setback
>100’ - 15’
75-100 - 10’
<75’ - 5’
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
Principal Structures 15 feet 15 feet
Accessory Structures Frontage Setback
>100’ - 15’
75-100 - 10’
<75’ - 5’
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structures 35 feet 35 feet
Accessory Structures 35 feet 18 feet
? Variable setback designation indicates that the setback shall be established at provided in
Section V, C
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
43
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (cont.)
Village District (V)
Dimensional Village
Requirements District
_________________ __________________
Minimum Lot Size 20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Size 4,000 sq. ft.
per Dwelling Unit
Minimum Road Frontage 75 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback variable*
from edge of traveled way
Minimum Side Yard Setback
Principal Structures 15 feet
Accessory Structures Frontage Setback
>100’ - 15’
75-100 - 10’
<75’ - 5’
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
Principal Structures 15 feet
Accessory Structures Frontage Setback
>100’ - 15’
75-100 - 10’
<75’ - 5’
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structures 35’
Accessory Structures 18”
? Variable setback designation indicates that the setback shall be established as provided in
Section V, C.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
44
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (cont.)
Commercial/Industrial (C) (I)
Districts Commercial Industrial
Dimensional District District
Requirements
__________________ __________ ____________
Minimum Lot Size
Municipal Sewer 80,000 sq. ft. 80,000 sq. ft.
Subsurface disposal
Minimum Road Frontage 200 feet 200 feet
Minimum Front Yard 75 feet 75 feet
Setback from edge of
Traveled Way
Minimum Side Yard
Setback
Principal Structures 25 feet 25 feet
Accessory Structures 25 feet 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard
Setback
Principal Structures 25 feet 25 feet
Accessory Structures 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum Building *
Height
Principal Structures 35 feet 35 feet
Accessory Structures 35 feet 35 feet
? Height limitations shall apply to building not essential services associated with the
development.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
45
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (cont.)
Rural (R)
District Rural
Dimensional District
Requirements
_______________ _______________
Minimum Lot Size
Municipal Sewer
Subsurface Disposal 1.5 Acres
Minimum Lot Size per
Dwelling Unit
Municipal Sewer
Subsurface Disposal 1 Acre
Minimum Road Frontage 200 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 60 Feet
From edge of traveled way
Minimum Side Yard Setback
Principal Structures 25 Feet
Accessory Structures to include
attached garages 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
Principal Structures 25 Feet
Accessory Structures 25 feet
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structures 35 feet
Accessory Structures 35 feet
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
46
B. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS (cont.)
Water (WD)
District Water
Dimensional District
Requirements
__________________ ________________
Minimum Lot Size 2 Acres
Minimum Lot Size
per Dwelling Unit 1 Acre
Minimum Road Frontage 200 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback
From edge of traveled way 100 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
Principal Structure 50 feet
Accessory Structures 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
Principal Structures 50 feet
Accessory Structures 25 feet
Maximum Building Height
Principal Structures 35 feet
Accessory Structures 35 feet
? All Development Proposals within this identified district shall be provided to the
Newport Water District
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
47
SECTION V: LAND USE STANDARDS –(cont.)
C. VARIABLE SETBACKS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall establish the minimum front yard setback from
edge of the traveled way in the Mixed Residential 1 District and Village District in
the following manner:
1. When both adjoining lots have existing dwellings located on them, the setback for
the proposed new development shall be the average setback of the adjoining
dwellings from the edge of the traveled way.
2. When only one of the adjoining lots has an existing dwelling located on it, the
back for the proposed new development shall be the average setback of the three
dwellings in the closest vicinity to the proposed development.
3. Maximum required setback shall not be over 50’
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
48
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Section Uses Guide: This section contains provisions for the administration of
this Ordinance including specific provisions for certificates of compliance,
conditions of approval and public hearings.
A. CREATION OF ADMINISTERING BODIES AND AGENTS
1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny those applications on which
he/she is employed to act as provided in this Ordinance. Approval shall be granted
only if the proposed use is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board of the Town of Newport is hereby designated as the Planning
Board heretofore, established in accordance with Article VIII, Pt. 2, Section 1 of the
Maine Constitution and Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3001. The Planning Board shall
be appointed by the Selectmen of the Town of Newport.
The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny those
applications on which it is empowered to act as stated in the Ordinance. Approval
shall be granted only if the proposed use is in conformance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
3.BOARD OF APPEALS
The Board of Appeals for the Town of Newport is hereby designated as the Board of
Appeals heretofore, established in accordance with Article VIII, Pt. 2, Section 1 of
the Maine Constitution and with Title 30-A, MRSA. Section 4353. The Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Selectmen of the Town of Newport.
B. APPROVAL REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no person shall engage in any activity
requiring a permit under this Ordinance without first obtaining the approval of the
Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as provided within.
C. APPLICATION NEEDED
Applications for approval shall be submitted in writing, on forms provided, to the
Code Enforcement Officer who shall oversee the permitting process and record
keeping. The Code Enforcement Officer may require the submission of additional
information deemed necessary to determine conformance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
49
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
D. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER PERMIT
A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required before beginning
or undertaking any of the following activities:
A. ACTIVITIES REQUIRING A PERMIT
1. FLOOD HAZARD AREAS: All construction or earth moving activities or
other improvements within the 100-year flood plain designation of the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agcy.
2. NEW CONSTRUCTION: New construction of buildings or structures
3. ALTERATION: Alteration of a building, structure, or land, or parts thereof
including, but not limited to:
a. Interior renovations for change in use;
b. Removal of interior walls to create new rooms;
c. Enclosing open frame porch, for the creation of additional sleeping
space or any activity which increases the existing amount of water
used daily;
4. PLACEMENT OF SIGNS: Placement of signs except temporary signs.
5. MOVING OR DEMOLITION: All buildings or structures that are
removed from or moved onto, or moved around within a lot, or demolished.
Any person, corporation, or other entity moving a building or structure must
obtain a permit before undertaking such activity.
Manufactured Housing Dealers or Manufactured Housing Transporters must
obtain a permit, from the Town of Newport, before moving a manufactured
home from on location to another within the Town of Newport.
This subsection does not apply to Manufactured Housing Dealers, licensed
by the State of Maine, for display and sales of manufactured homes.
6. CHANGE OF USE: The change of any premises from one category of land
use to any other land use.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
50
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
7. Any activity requiring a Land Use Permit in accordance with the Land Use
Ordinance Schedule of Uses.
B. PROCEDURE
1. APPLICATION: All applications for a Code Enforcement permit shall be
submitted, with appropriate fee, in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer
on forms provided.
2. SUBMISSIONS: All applications for a Code Enforcement Officer Permit
shall be accompanied by a sketch plan, accurately drawn to scale and showing
actual dimensions or distances, and showing: Items listed below shall be
required at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer
a. The actual shape and dimensions of the lot for which a permit is
sought;
b. The location and size of all buildings, structures, and other
significant features currently existing on the lot, as well as all
water bodies and wetlands within two hundred fifty feet (250’)
of the property lines;
c. The location and building plans of new buildings, structures or
portions thereof to be constructed;
d. The existing and intended use of each building or structure;
e. Where applicable, the location of soil test pits, subsurface
sewage disposal system, parking lots and driveways, signs,
buffers, private wells, and;
f. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Code Enforcement Officer to provide for the administration and
enforcement of this Ordinance.
3. TO WHOM ISSUED: No permit shall be issued except to the owner of
record or his authorized agent. Written proof of authorization shall be
required.
4. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND USE ORDINANCE: All activities
undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under this Section shall comply with
all applicable standards set forth in Section V of this Ordinance.
5. DEADLINE FOR DECISION: The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of an application, issue the permit, if all proposed
construction and uses meet the provisions of the Ordinance, refer the
application to the Planning Board for their review, or deny the application. All
decisions of the Code Enforcement officer shall be in writing.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
51
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
6. COPIES: One (1) copy of the application, with the permit or other written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be returned to the applicant,
and one (1) copy, with a copy of the permit or written decision shall be
retained by the Code Enforcement Officer as a permanent public record.
7. POSTING: The applicant shall cause any permit issued to be available at
the site on which the activity will occur.
8. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK: Construction and
alteration activities of projects for which a permit has been granted under this
Section shall commence within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the
permit and shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months of that date.
Activities which are not commenced or completed within the time limits
provided above shall be subject to new application and the permit issued
under this Section shall be considered void.
Activities may be extended for up to twelve (12) months by the Code
Enforcement Officer, for good cause, if an application for an extension is
submitted not later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the prior permit.
9. APPEALS: Appeals from decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer may
be taken pursuant to the provisions of the Ordinance.
E. PLANNING BOARD PERMIT REVIEW
The Planning Board shall review all applicable Land Use Permit applications
to Section IV, F, Schedule of Uses.
1. APPLICATION: All applications for a Planning Board Permit shall be submitted
with applicable fee, in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided.
2. SUBMISSION: All applications for a Planning Board Permit shall be accompanied
by a sketch plan, accurately drawn to scale and showing actual dimensions or distance
and showing: Items listed below shall be required at the discretion of the Planning
Board:
a. Map drawn to scale.
b. Name of applicant
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
52
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
c. Boundaries of the tract of land.
d. Location of existing and proposed buildings and other structures,
including use and proposed use thereof.
e. Location of buildings on abutting properties or within 300 feet of the
property line of the proposed development.
f. Location of existing public streets.
g. Location of proposed access drives to the lot from public streets.
h. Location and arrangement of proposed off-street parking and loading
areas and their appurtenant drives and maneuvering areas
i. Location of existing and proposed pedestrian walkways.
j. Location of existing and proposed utilities and easements therefore,
including sanitary sewerage, water and electricity.
k. Location of existing natural drainage ways and proposed storm
drainage facilities, including dimensions of culverts, pipes, etc.
l. Location, intensity, type, size and direction of all outdoor lighting.
m. Location and proposed use for areas proposed for outdoor recreation.
n. Location and type of existing and proposed fences, hedges, and trees
12 inch diameter and over a point 4.5 feet above ground level or filled.
o. Contour lines at appropriate intervals to show the effect on the land of
existing and proposed grades for areas proposed to be excavated or
filled.
p. Location and size of signs and all permanent outdoor fixtures.
q. Zoning district classification
r. Setback dimensions from property lines and edge of driveway.
3. TO WHOM ISSUED: No permit shall be issued except to the owner of record or
his authorized agent. Written proof of authorization shall be required.
4. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND USE ORDINANCE: All activities undertaken
pursuant to a permit issued under this Section shall comply with all applicable
standards set forth in Section V of this Ordinance.
5. PUBLIC HEARING DEADLINE: Within a maximum of forty-five (45) days
after the filing of an application for a Land Use Permit, and before taking action
thereon, the Planning Board may hold a public hearing on the application. Notice
of said hearing shall be published in a local newspaper at least ten (10) days in
advance of said hearing. A notice of said hearing shall be mailed to each landowner
abutting the parcel involved. Land owners shall be considered to be those against
whom property taxes are assessed. Failure of any land owner to receive a notice of
public hearing shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action of the
Planning Board. Responsibility for such notification shall be assumed by the
Code Enforcement Officer. The applicant shall bear all associated costs of
advertisements and notifications. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
53
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
receive input from the general public relative to the applicable sections of the
review standards.
6. PLANNING BOARD REVIEW AND ACTION: Within thirty (30) days after the
public hearing, if one is held, or thirty (30) days from the date of the Planning Board
meeting in which the permit application is reviewed, the Planning Board shall
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. The Board
shall limit its review to the criteria and standards established within this
Ordinance. The Board shall inform the applicant of its decision in writing, and in
cases of disapproval or approval with modifications, reasons for such action shall
be stated. A copy of the Board’s decision shall be retained on file with the Code
Enforcement Officer. A Land User Permit shall not be issued unless approval of the
application has been granted.
7. COPIES: One (1) copy of the application, with the permit or other written decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be returned to the applicant, and one (1) copy
with a copy of the permit or written decision, shall be retained by the Code Officer
as a permanent public record.
8. POSTING: The applicant shall cause any permit issued to be available at the site
on which the activity will occur.
.
9. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK: Construction and
alteration activities on projects for which a permit has been granted under this Section
shall commence within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the permit and shall
be completed within twenty four (24) months of that date.
Activities which are not commenced or completed within the time limits provided
above shall be subject to new application and the permit issued under this section
shall be considered void.
Activities may be extended for up to twelve (12) months by the Code Enforcement
Officer, for good cause, if an application for an extension is submitted not later than
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the prior permit.
10. APPEALS: Appeals from decisions of the Planning Board may be taken pursuant
to the provisions of this Ordinance.
F. OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED BEFORE APPROVAL
Applications for approval under this Ordinance will not be considered complete for
processing until all other required local, state, and federal permits have been secured
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
54
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
and evidence that they have been secured has been provided unless state or federal
regulations require local approval first.
G. POSITIVE FINDINGS REQUIRED
Approval shall be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, after
receipt of a complete application, only upon a positive finding by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board that the proposed use:
a. is a permitted use in the district in which it is proposed to be located;
b. is in conformance with the applicable performance standards of Section V of this
Ordinance
c. will not result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
d. will not result in undue land, water or air pollution;
e. will not result in undue erosion or sedimentation
f. Will avoid problems associated with development in flood hazard areas;
g. Will not result in damage to spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird and other
wildlife habitat;
h. Will conserve significant natural, archaeological, and historical resources;
i.The impact of the proposed use on transportation facilities;
j.The impact of the proposed use on local water supplies;
k. Be consistent with the long range goals of the Comprehensive Plan, other adopted
plans of the town, and the goals and purposes of the established districts.
H. VIOLATIONS
Violations of the terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall be corrected within
thirty (30) days of receipt of Notice of Violation, unless an extension of time is
granted by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, said Violation may void
all permits
I. COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF WORK
Construction and alteration activities for which approval has been granted under this
Ordinance shall commence within six (6) months of the date of permit issuance and
shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months of the date of permit issuance.
J. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED
After a building, structure, or part thereof has been erected, altered, enlarged, or
moved, pursuant to approval under this Ordinance, a Certificate of Occupancy shall
be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer for the proposed use before the same
way be occupied or used. A Certificate of Occupancy is required for the following:
1. Activities granted approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Change in occupancy of rental or leased units.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
55
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
K. ENFORCEMENT
1. NUISANCES
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary
to correct the violation, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings,
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be
maintained as a permanent record.
3. LEGAL ACTIONS
When the above does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or
nuisance condition, the Town Manager, upon notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer, are hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and
the impositions of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of the Ordinance in the name of the municipality.
4. FINES
Any person who continues to violate any provision of this Ordinance after receiving
notice of such violation shall be liable for civil penalty of a minimum of one hundred
($100.00) dollars and up to Twenty five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars for each
violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
5. CONTRACTOR LIABILITY
Any contractor involved in any activity regulated by the provision of this Ordinance
may be held liable for violation this Ordinance if the necessary permits for said
activity have not been obtained or if work performed by the contractor does not
conform to all conditions of approval of the permit or the terms of this Ordinance.
L. APPEALS
1. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
any error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to
act by, the code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board in the administration of
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
56
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
this Ordinance. Where errors of administrative procedures or interpretation are
found, the case shall be remanded to the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning board
for correction
2. VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals shall authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations
set forth in this Ordinance.
a. Dimensional variances may be granted only from dimensional
requirements including frontage, lot area, lot width, height, and setback
requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any use otherwise
prohibited by this Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
1. The proposed structure or use would meet the performance standards
of this Ordinance except for the specific provision which has created
the non-conformity and from which relief is sought; and
2. The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in an
undue hardship.
The term “undue hardship” shall mean all of the following:
a. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
of the locality; and
c. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or
a prior owner.
d. The Board may grant a variance to a property owner for the purpose of
making that property accessible to a person with a disability who is living
or regularly visits the property. The Board shall restrict any variance
granted under this Sub Section solely to the installation of equipment or
the construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the
property by the person with the disability.
e. The Board may grant a variance to a property owner from the setback
requirement only when strict application of the zoning ordinance to the
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
57
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
petitioner and the petitioner’s property would cause undue hardship. A
variance under this section may not exceed 20% of a set-back requirement and
may not be granted if the variance would cause the area of the dwelling to
exceed the maximum permissible lot coverage (if applicable). If the petitioner
has obtained the written consent of an affected abutting landowner, the 20%
limitation may be extended. The term “undue hardship” for this section
means:
A. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
B. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality;
C. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner;
D. The granting of the variance will not substantially reduce or impair
the use of abutting property; and
E. That the granting of a variance is based upon demonstrated need,
not convenience, and no other feasible alternative is available.
3. APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT
An appeal may be taken within thirty (30) days after any decision is
rendered by the Board of Appeals, by any party to Superior Court in
accordance with State Law.
M. VARIANCES RECORDED
If the board grants a variance under this section, a certificate indicating the name
of the current property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last
recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a variance, including any
conditions on the variance, has been granted and the date of the granting, shall be
prepared in recordable form. This certificate must be recorded in the local registry of
deeds within 90 days of the date of the final written approval of the variance or the
variance is void. The Applicant shall be responsible for the recording of any variance.
A variance is not valid until recorded as provided in this section. The date of the final
written approval shall be the date stated on the written approval.
A. FEE SCHEDULE
All applications fees for permits shall be paid to the Town of Newport in accordance
with the fee schedule as established by the Selectmen of the Town of Newport. Fees
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
58
SECTION VI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT-(cont.)
shall be for the cost of processing the permits and shall not be refundable regardless
of the final decision issue or deny a permit. Advertising costs, technical or legal
assistance and associated costs deemed necessary by the Town of the review of
application shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
1. PLUMBING PERMITS
Fees for Plumbing Permits shall be pursuant to the established fee schedule of
the Town of Newport.
2. Fees for Land Use Permits shall be pursuant to the established fee
schedule of the Town of Newport.
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS
A. CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
1. In this Ordinance, certain terms or words should be interpreted as follows:
a. The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual;
b. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes
the plural and plural includes the singular;
c. The word “shall” is mandatory;
d. The word “may” is permitted;
e. The words “used” or “occupied” includes the words “intended”,
“designed”, or “arranged to be used or occupied”; and
f. The word “dwelling” includes the word “residence”
2. Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary meaning.
3.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
59
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
A. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of interpreting this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
ABUTTING: Having a common border with, or being separated form such common borders
by an alley or easement.
ACCESS: A means of approach or entry to or exit from property
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See Structural Terms
ACRE: A measure of land containing forty-three thousand, five hundred and sixty (43,560)
square feet.
AGGRIEVED PERSON: A person whose interest are damaged or adversely affected by a
decision, an action, or the failure to act by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer.
ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY: Any building, structure or space whose principal
or primary function is the outpatient treatment (no residency or overnight treatment) of
chemically dependent persons, and which by the dispensing or sale of synthetic narcotics
attempts to control, suppress and/or eliminate a person’s mental or physical dependence on
any illegal or harmful substance. These facilities have no retail sales component associated
with the use. Typical uses include methadone clinics and other similar uses.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY: Land clearing, tilling, fertilizing, including spreading and
disposal of animal manure and manure sludge, liming, planting, pesticide application,
harvesting of cultivated crops, pasturing of livestock and other similar or related activities,
but not the construction, creation or maintenance of land management roads.
ALTERATION: As applied to building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side
or by increasing height; or moving from one location or position to another.
APPEAL: A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination, order or failure to act
pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance as expressly authorized by this Ordinance.
ATTIC: That part of a building which is immediately below, and wholly or partly within, the
roof framing
AUTOMOBILE SALES: A lot arranged, designed, or used for the storage and display for
sale of any motor vehicle and where not repair work is done except minor incidental repair of
automobiles or trailer displayed and sold on the premises.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
60
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICE: A place where, with or without the attendant sale of
engine fuels, the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or
fender straightening and repair; over-all painting and undercoating of automobiles.
BASEMENT: The substructure of a building that is partially or wholly below ground level
which may or may not be used for living spaces
BED AND BREAKFAST: Accommodations provided for compensation as a business in the
private year-round residence of the host family, consisting of a maximum of four (4) guest
rooms and ten (10) guests at any one time. Breakfast is the only meal, if any, to be provided
for compensation.
BUFFERS: Units of land, together with specified types and amounts of planting thereon and
any structures which may be required between land uses to eliminate or minimize conflicts
between them.
BUILDING: A roofed structure. See Structural Terms
BUILDING AREA: Total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main finished grade
level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches,
terraces and steps. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces or walls.
BUILDING FRONT LINE: Line parallel to the front lot line transecting that point in the
building face which is closest to the front lot line. This face includes perches whether
enclosed or unenclosed but does not include steps.
CAMPGROUND: Any land area specifically designed and developed, containing two (2) or
more individual campsites which accommodate that segment of the traveling public seeking
temporary camping accommodations for tents, recreation vehicles and/or towed travel trailers
for compensation. Accessory uses include campers services and facilities such as shower and
laundry facilities, electricity, fresh water, propane and gas sales, ice, outlet for camping
supplies and equipment, recreational services etc.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: Official certification that a premises conforms to
provisions of the Land Use Ordinance (and building code, electrical code and plumbing
code) and may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted for new construction or for
alteration or additions to existing structures. Unless such a certificate is issued, a structure
cannot be lawfully occupied.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: The development, according to an approved plan, of a large
tract of land where three (3) or more buildings are constructed on lots smaller than normally
required in the district where located, provided the overall density of the development of the
tract does not exceed the density or requirements of the district; and land not built upon is
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
61
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
permanently preserved as common “open space”. The term also refers to a Planned Unit
Development.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A person appointed by the municipal officers to
administer and enforce this Ordinance.
DAY CARE CENTER: As defined in Title 22, MRSA, Section 1673, as a house or other
place in which a person or combination of persons maintains or otherwise carries out a
regular program, for consideration, for any part of a day, providing car and protection for
three (3) or more children under the age of 16 unrelated to the operator, not to include
nursery schools, summer camps, formal public or private schools, and further defined by the
Department of Human Services as follows:
Day Care Center: A Day Care Facility as defined in State statures for thirteen (13) or more
children on a regular basis; and
Day Care Home: A Day Care Facility as defined in State statures for three (3) to twelve (12)
children on a regular basis.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or parcel of any land proposed for
inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase.
DISTRICT: A specified portion of the Town, delineated on the Official Zoning Map, within
which certain regulations and requirements of various combinations thereof, apply under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
DRAINAGE: The removal of surface or ground water from land by drains, grading or other
means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation
during and after development, and includes the means necessary for water-supply
preservation or alleviation of flooding.
EASEMENT: Legally binding authorization by a property owner of the use by another and
for a specified purpose of any designated part of his property.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS: Emergency operations shall include operations conducted
for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as protection or resources from
immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings and
livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
ENLARGEMENT OR TO ENLARGE: An “enlargement” is an addition to the floor area of
an existing building, an increase in the size or any other structure, or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. To “enlarge” is to make an
enlargement.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
62
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The construction, alteration maintenance of gas, electrical,
communication facilities, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection
supply or disposal systems. Such systems include tower, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar
accessories. These systems are exempt from definition of a structure.
EXTENSION OR TO EXTEND: An increase in the amount of existing floor areas used for
an existing use within an existing building. To “extend” is to make an extension.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or guardianship,
or not more that five (5) persons mot so related occupying a dwelling unit and living as a
single housekeeping unit; such a group to be distinguished from a group occupying a
boarding house, lodging house, club, or fraternity, or hotel.
FOREST MANAGEMENT TERMS:
1. Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource
evaluation activities, management planning activities, insect and disease control,
timber stand improvement, pruning, timber harvesting and other similar
associated activities but not the construction or creation of roads.
2. Timber Harvesting: the cutting and removal of trees from their growing sites, and
the attendant operation of harvesting machinery, but not the construction of roads.
Timber harvesting does not include the clearing of land for approved construction.
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL: An accessory building for parking or temporary storage of
automobiles of residential occupants of the premises, or a part of the residence usually
occupying the ground floor area of principal one-or-two family dwellings, not more than one
(1) space may regularly be used by the private passenger automobile or a persons not resident
on the premises.
GROCERY STORE: A small neighborhood establishment retailing food and related
commodities, as distinguished from a supermarket, defined as a “Major Retail Outlet”.
GUEST ROOM: A room in a hotel, motel, tourist home, or “Bed and Breakfast” residence
offered to the public for compensation in which no provisions is made for cooking.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or
support and located entirely within a residential building or a structural accessory thereto,
which use is accessory, incidental and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling
purposes, and does not change the residential character or appearance of such buildings.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical
or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
63
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities and staff offices.
INDUSTRY: Use of a premises for assembling, fabricating, manufacturing, packaging, or
processing. These include but are not limited to assembly plants, laboratories, power plants,
pumping stations and repair shops.
IN-LAW APARTMENTS: See Structural Terms
JUNKYARDS:
Automobile Graveyards: A yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for three (3)
or more unserviceable, discarded, worn out or junked automobiles.
Junkyard: A yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for discarded worn-out or
junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, furniture, scrap and junked lumber,
old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rages, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste and scrap
iron, steel and other ferrous and non-ferrous material including garbage dumps, waste dumps
and sanitary landfills.
Auto Recycling Business: An automobile recycling business is a business which purchases or
acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts,
rebuilding or repairing salvage vehicles for resale.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any place in or at which any number of dogs or cats are kept
for the purpose of sale or in connection with boarding, care, training, or breeding, for which a
fee is charged.
KENNEL, NON-COMMERCIAL: An accessory building to a residence designed of used for
the accommodation of dogs or cats owned by the occupants of the residence.
LAND USE PERMIT: A permit for proposed land use activity as defined in this Ordinance
and issued by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
LICENSED FIREWORK SALES: The sale of consumer fireworks as defined by 8 MRSA
sec. 221-A(1-A) by a person licensed by the State in accordance with 8 MRSA sec. 223-A(3)
to conduct such sales.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING: The fabrication or processing of materials into finished
product. Fabrication relates to the stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping the processed
materials into useful objects/products. Light manufacturing does not include the refining or
other initial processing of basic raw materials such as metal ore, lumber or rubber.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
64
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, ally or other
appropriate means of access.
LOT: A parcel of land undivided by any street or public road and occupied by, or designated
to be developed for, one (1) building or principal use and the accessory building or uses
incidental to such building, use or development, including such open spaces and yards as are
designed, and arranged or required by this Ordinance for such building, use or development.
LOT AREA: The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured
within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE: Lot width measured at the street lot line. When a lot has more than one
(1) street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width required by the
Ordinance shall be provided, on at least one (1) street.
LOT LINE: A line bounding a lot which divides one (1) lot from another, or form a street or
any other public or private space, as defined below:
Front Lot Line: In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the street line
separation such lot form such street; in the case of a double
frontage lot, each street line separation such lot from a street
shall be considered to be the front lot line, except where the
rear yard requirements is greater that the front yard
requirements in which case one of two opposing yards shall be
a rear yard. In the case of a lot with not road frontage, the front
lot line shall be considered to be the line parallel to the front of
the building.
Rear Lot Line: That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front
lot line of the lot; in the case of an irregular, triangular, or goreshaped
lot, a line twenty (20) feet in length, entirely within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from, the
front lot line shall be considered to be the lot line. In the case
of lots which have frontage on more than one road or street, the
rear lot line shall be opposite the lot line along which the lot
takes access to a street.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
65
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
LOT OF RECORD: Any validly recorded lot which at the time of its recordation complied
with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
LOT STANDARDS: The combination of controls which establishes the maximum size of a
building and its location on the lot. Components of lot standards, also known as “space and
bulk” regulations in size and height of building; location or exterior walls at all levels with
respect to lot lines, streets and other buildings; building coverage; gross floor area of
buildings in relation to lot area; open space (yard) requirements; and amount of lot area
provided per dwelling unit.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING: a structural unit or units designed for occupancy, and
constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by the use of its own chassis, or
places on an independent chassis, to a building site.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, three (3) types of manufactured housing will be referred
to:
1. NEWER MOBILE HOME: Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, which
the manufactured certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development standards and complies with the
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, et. seq.,
which in the traveling mode are fourteen (14) body feet or more in width and are
seven hundred and fifty (750) or more square feet and are constructed on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without
permanent foundation;
2. OLDER MOBILE HOMES: Those units constructed before June 15, 1976, and
not in compliance with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974, which are constructed on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, but
does not include those smaller units commonly called “travel trailers”.
3. MODULAR HOMES: Those units which the manufacturer certifies are
constructed in compliance with the State’s manufactured Housing Act and
regulation, meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections, which are
not constructed on a permanent chassis and are designed to be used as dwelling s
on foundations when connected to required utilities, including the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained herein.
MARIJUANA DISPENSING FACILITY: Any dispensary registered and operated under
22 MRSA § 2428 whose function, in whole or part is to grow or dispense medical marijuana
or marijuana products.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
66
MARINA: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water within the Town
and providing for hire off-shore mooring or dock facilities for boats and accessory services
and facilities such as: boat sales, rental and storage, marine supplies and equipment, marina
engine and hull repairs, construction and outfitting for pleasure craft, fuel and oil, electricity,
fresh water, ice, shower and laundry facilities and on-premise restaurant.
MEDICAL CLINIC: An office building used by members of a medical profession for the
diagnosis and out-patient treatment of human ailments.
MINERAL EXTRACTION: The removal of sand, gravel, bedrock or soil form its natural
site for geologic deposition or formation; the screening, sorting, crushing or other processing
of any part of the geologic material so removed; the storage of sand, gravel, crushed stone, or
soil in stock piles or other forms.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the Town of
Newport for placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and designed for carrying persons
or property or which is used for the transportation of persons.
MOTOR VEHICLE, UNSERVICEABLE: Any motor vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled,
cannot be operated legally on any public highway, or which is not being used for the
purposes for which it was manufactured.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES: Buildings or land which is owned by a Public entity and
operated under its supervision for a public purpose.
NON-CONFORMING USE: See USE TERMS
NORMAL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: Any work necessary to maintain an
improvement or structure in its original or previously improved state or condition. Normal
maintenance and repair shall not include reconstruction, change in design, change in
structure, change in use, change in location, change size or capacity.
OWNER: The person or persons having the right of legal title to, beneficial interest in, or a
contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land.
PARCEL: The entire area of a tract of land before being divided by a development.
PARKING LOT: An open area other than a street used for the parking of more than four (4)
automobiles and available for public use whether free, for compensation, or an
accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one
(1) automobile together with a driveway connection the parking space with a street, road or
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
67
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
alley and permitting ingress and egress of that automobile without the necessity of moving
any other automobile.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: A criterion established to control the use of land and
structures. The purpose of performance standards is to provide detailed regulations and
restrictions by means of minimum criteria which must be met by uses in order to protect
neighbors form adverse impacts of adjoining land uses and to protect the general health,
safety and welfare of citizens of Newport.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: An office of a professional such as an architect, accountant,
dentist, doctor of medicine, lawyer, etc., but not including any manufacturing, commercial or
industrial activity.
RESTAURANT: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or
beverages to consumers in a ready-to-consume state, and whose principal method of
operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:
(1) Customers normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and
beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which the food
and beverages are consumed; or
(2) A cafeteria type operation where food and beverages generally are consumed
within the restaurant building.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT: Any business, housed in a permanent structure, engaged
primarily in the sale of goods and services to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption
and/or use, but not for resale.
ROAD: A thoroughfare or way consisting of a bed or exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt,
or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized
vehicles.
Private Road: A thoroughfare of way designated for private use and maintained by a
property owner or group of property owners.
Public Road: A public thoroughfare, way, or easement permanently established for
passage of persons or vehicles.
SETBACK: The minimum distance from the edge of the traveled way or lot line to the
nearest part of a structure.
SIGN ITEMS: Device, model, banner, pennant, insignia, flag, or other representation which
is used as, or is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or direction.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
68
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
SIGNS:
Free Standing: A sign supported by one (1) or more uprights or braces
permanently affixed into the ground.
Portable: A sign not designed or intended to be permanently affixed into the
ground or to a structure.
Roof: A sign which is attached to a building and is displayed above the eaves
of such building.
Temporary: A sign of a temporary nature, erected less than ninety (90) days,
exemplified by the following: political poster, charitable signs, construction
signs, carnival signs, garage sale signs, lawn sale signs, rummage sale signs,
and all signs advertising sales of personal property, and for rent signs.
Wall: Any signs painted on, or attached parallel to, the wall surface of a
building and projection therefrom no more than six (6) inches.
Window: Any on-premise, non-temporary sign visible from the exterior of the
building or structure which is permanently painted, attached, glued, or
otherwise affixed to a window.
Area of a Sign: The exposed surface of the sign including all ornamentation,
embellishment, background, and symbols, but excluding the structure which
does not form a part of the message of the sign measured in square feet.
STRUCTURAL TERMS:
Building: Any structure, maintained, or intended for use as a shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind. This term is
inclusive of any thereof. Where independent units which separate
entrances are divided by walls, each unit is a building.
Building, Accessory
A building which one (1) is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to
the principal building or use served, (2) is located on the same lot as
the principal building or use served except as otherwise expressly
authorized by the provisions of this Ordinance, and three (3) is
customarily incidental to the principal building or use. Any portion of
a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory
use is not an accessory building.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
69
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
Building, Principal
A building (structure) in which is conducted or in which is intended to
be conducted, the main or primary use of the lot on which it is located.
Dwelling
A building or portion thereof, used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multiply family
dwellings.
Dwelling Unit/Apartment
A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use
as living quarters for only one (1) family, including provisions for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached
A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) family
and having no roof, wall or floor common with any other dwelling
unit. The term shall include manufactured and prefabricated homes.
Dwelling, Two Family
A detached or semi-detached building used for residential occupancy
by two (2) families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Multiple Family
A building or portion thereof used for residential occupancy by three
(3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their
own cooking in the building, including apartments, group houses and
row houses.
In-Law Apartments
A separate dwelling unit which is located within and subordinate to a
single family detached dwelling and which is occupied by a person or
persons related to the owner and principal occupant of the dwelling
unit by blood, marriage or adoption, whether or not said person or
persons pay rent or share expenses with the owner thereof.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
location on, above or below the surface of the land, including a patio
or deck. (See Essential Services)
TRANSIENT: A non-resident person residing within the Town of Newport less than thirty
(30) days.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
70
SECTION VII: DEFINITIONS (cont.)
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon is designed, arranged, or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
1. Accessory Use: A use subordinate to a permitted use located on the same lot,
and customarily incidental to the permitted use.
2. Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
3. Conforming (permitted) Use: A use which may be lawfully established in a
particular district, provided in conforms with all
the requirements, standards and regulations of
such district.
4. Non-Conforming Use: A use which does not conform to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
5. Open Space Use: A use which does not disturb the existing state of the land except
to restore this land to a natural condition.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such a variance would not
be contrary to the pubic interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Ordinance would
result in unnecessary or undue hardship.
WAREHOUSE AND STORAGE FACILITY: A structure for the storage of merchandise or
commodities, including bulk storage and bulk sales outlet.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: Any business, housed in a permanent
structure, engaged in the sale of goods in large amounts to retailers or jobbers, rather than
directly to consumers.
YARD: The are of land on a lot not occupied by building.
Front Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal
building between the front lot line and the nearest part of any building
on the lot, and extending the entire width of the lot.
Rear Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal
building between the rear lot line and the nearest part of any building
on the lot, and extending the entire width of the lot.
Side Yard: The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal
building between a side lot line and the nearest part of any building on
the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear line.
LAND USE ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF NEWPORT
71
Accepted by vote of Town Meeting March 12, 2011
Land Use Ordinance/pas
Immaterial corrections 12/9/2014




TOWN OF NEWPORT
MASS GATHERING ORDIANCE
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR MASS GATHERINGS
Section 1 Purpose and Authority:
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule powers under the Maine
Constitution and 30-A l\1R.SA Sec. 3001.
WHEREAS, the inhabitants of the Town of Newport are concerned that public health and
safety problems may result when crowds assemble for any event.
WHEREAS, matters relating to waste disposal, potable water, first aid, public sanitation,
traffic safety, law enforcement, adherence to alcohol and controlled substance laws,
obstruction and damage to public and private ways, and destruction of public and private
property are a concern to the citizens of Newport.
Section 2. Administration of Ordinance'
The Town of Newport Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
Section 3 Permit Issued by the Municipal Officers Required:
No person, corporation, partnership, association or group of any kind shall sponsor,
promote or conduct any pageant, festival, concert, parade, amusement show, theatrical
performance, or other outdoor event where more than 1000 people gather for three (3) or
more hours up to a maximum of 24 continuous hours without first obtaining an assembly
permit, hereafter referred to as permit, from the Municipal Officers.
Section 4. Application'
Any person or entity seeking issuance of an assembly permit must make an application to
the Code Enforcement, hereafter referred to as CEO, on a form (s) provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer, that contains plans and documentation relating to all items in
applicable Sections below no later than forty (40) days prior to the event. The CEO shall
accept the application as complete or reject the application within 21 days from date of
filing of application.
Section 5 Permit Fees'
The applicant must pay a $500.00 fee when submitting the application for permit plus all
costs for advertising and technical and professional review deemed necessary by the
Town.
Section 6 Contents of the Application'
A. The applicant shall furnish a plan accurately drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions, and distances from each, of each separate area to be used with designated
locations for drinking water, toilet and sanitation facilities, waste containers, first aid
'--
.,
I
facilities, parking areas, placement of any stages or entertainment areas, seating areas,
food service areas and sleeping and/or camping areas if an overnight event is proposed.
B. The applicant shall provide a detailed plan for seating the estimated number of
attendees. The plan shall include methods to be used to discourage the presence of
persons not holding tickets or invited to attend. The applicant shall further provide
assurances that all event promotion and publicity will immediately cease when all tickets
have been sold.
C. The applicant shall provide assurances and detail methods to be used to insure that
individuals not invited or holding tickets will not be permitted to use parking, toilet, or
camping facilities under the control of the applicant and that no food or beverage will be
sold to non-ticket holders or non-invited individuals on premises under the control of the
applicant except persons employed or authorized to provide support service for the event.
D. Applicant shall submit to the CEO in writing detailed assurances relating to each
standard in Section 7 below.
Section 7 Standards for Permit Issuance:
The Municipal Officers shall issue a permit to the applicant upon finding that the applicant
has the ability and financial resources to comply with and complies with the following
standards, considering the size, duration and nature of the proposed event: These
standards shall be met for each separate location at which the event or parts thereof take
place:
A. Adequate supplies of potable water shall be available and reasonably spaced
throughout the event area;
B. Adequate toilet and sanitation facilities shall be available and reasonably spaced
throughout the event area;
C. The area to be used is adequately equipped with suitable containers for disposal of
solid waste and/or garbage and that provisions are made for the removal and disposal and
recycling of such waste and garbage;
D. Adequate first aid facilities and qualified medical personnel shall be provided;
E. Adequate parking facilities are available in the area in which event is to be held;
F. The event will not impair the safety and orderly flow of traffic on public ways and that
adequate provision has been made for the control of traffic before, during and after the
event; and
G. Adequate police protection by state certified officers be provided;
H. Adequate fire protection is provided;
1. Adequate sleeping and/or camping areas are provided if an overnight or continuous
event;
J. Adequate seating capacity for maximum attendance and/or number of tickets to be
sold;
K. Impose any condition reasonably necessary to insure that the event complies with the
standards set forth above for issuance of the permit as of the date of the event.
Section 8 Number of Tickets Sold'
No more than the number of tickets specified in the application shall be issued for a single
event. A "ticket" includes any receipt or token of eligibility to attend the event whether or
not a piece of paper or other physical evidence of payment is issued to the attendee.
Persons not holding valid tickets for an event for which tickets have been sold or given
away shall not be permitted to attend. Promptly after all the tickets have been sold or the
occurrence of the event, which ever occurs first, the applicant shall furnish to the CEO a
sworn statement as to the number of tickets sold or otherwise distributed.
Section 9 Public Hearing'
No permit shall be granted by the Municipal Officers unless the applicant satisfies the
Municipal Officers that proper facilities will be available for the proposed event in the
areas to be used and that adequate precautions have been taken to ensure the public
health, safety and welfare of attendees and the general public.
Within 21 days of the determination by CEO that the application is complete the
Municipal Officers shall hold a public hearing on the completed application after
advertising in a newspaper (s) having general circulation in the Town, no less than five (5)
days in advance of the public hearing. The Municipal Officers shall issue the permit when
satisfied that adequate provisions have been made to protect the health and safety of the
residents of the Town and the persons attending the event. All assurances made and
obligations assumed by the applicant in the application shall be deemed to be conditions
upon issuance of the permit. In issuing the permit, the Municipal Officers may impose
such additional conditions as may be reasonably required to assure compliance with the
terms of the application or the provisions of this ordinance. The Municipal Officers may
decline to issue the permit if the event is scheduled on a holiday when so many nonresidents
will be present in Town for reasons having nothing to do with the event that the
public and private facilities will be insufficient to meet the needs of persons attending the
event as well as other persons who are present because of the holiday. The Municipal
Officers shall issue or deny the permit not more 35 days after the application is deemed
complete by the CEO. If permit is denied, the reasons will be given to the applicant in
writing.
Section 1 Q, Variance:
In any case in which strict compliance with the terms of this ordinance will cause the
Applicant to suffer undue hardship and the Municipal Officers have reasonably determined
that waiving strict compliance with the terms of this ordinance will not compromise its
enforcement or the accomplishment of its purposes, they may issue a variance specifying
in writing its terms and why it has been granted,
Section 11 Liability Insurance'
Prior to receiving a valid permit from the CEO the applicant shall furnish to the CEO a
Certificate of Insurance, issued by a company licensed by the State of Maine, with the
Town of Newport named as co-insured providing coverage of at least $600,000,00 with
respect to the death or injury of one or more persons in connection with the event. Such
insurance policy shall also provide coverage for property damage in the amount of at least
$100,000,00, The insurance policies in question shall contain a provision requiring at least
ten (10) days notice be given the Town prior to cancellation of all or part of the policy, If
such cancellation occurs prior to the event, the permit issued by the Town is void,
Section 12 Security Bond'
Prior to receiving a valid permit from the CEO, the applicant shall file with the CEO a
surety bond issued by a company licensed by the State of Maine in an amount equal to
$50,000.00. Cash or negotiable securities acceptable to the Town Treasurer may be
pledged to satisfy the provisions of this section. The bond shall be used to satisfy any
valid claims for damage to real or personal property caused by the permittee, his/her
agents and/or employees or by persons attending the event and to reimburse expenses
incurred in cleaning up or otherwise incurred as a direct result of the mass gathering for
which the permit was issued. The permittee shall make an irrevocable designation of an
agent within the State of Maine to receive notices in connection filing of claims against the
security bond or to receive notices of permit issuance or revocation, Any person,
including the Town, having such a claim shall file notice of a claim upon the bond with the
applicant or his/her agent within 90 days after the claim arose.
Section 13. Private Landowner Authority'
In the event that private property is to be used in connection with such event, the applicant
shall file with the CEO a notarized affidavit signed by the land owner (s) that applicant has
authority to use such private property and that police officers are authorized to enter
property owned or under the control of the applicant in the vicinity of the event at
reasonable times.
Section 14: Duties of Permute
The Permute shall comply with all conditions of any permit issued and with all applicable
local, state and federal laws and ordinances as well Maine Department of Health and
Human Services rules and regulations and further insure that attendees and/or vendors
comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
Section 15. Violations and Penalties'
A. Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance or fails to comply with any stated
permit condition or restriction shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,500
to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the Town of Newport. Each days violation
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition the Town may seek an injunction when
necessary to prevent the applicant from promoting, publicizing or conducting the event.
B. If the Town is the prevailing party in any action brought to enforce this ordinance, the
Town must be awarded reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness fees, and costs.
Section 16 Revocation'
The CEO shall have the authority to revoke any license issued hereunder in consequence
of a violation of any conditions of the permit or any noncompliance with the standards for
issuance of permit.
Section 17. Savings Clause:
If any section or part thereof of this ordinance shall be held invalid the remaining
provisions thereof shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 18. Effective Date:
This ordinance shall become effective on adoption by the Newport Town Meeting.
Certified: The Newport Board of Selectmen being the Municipal Officers hereby certify
to the Municipal Clerk that this is a true copy of the Mass Gathering Ordinance of the
Town of Newport, Maine.
Signed February 21, 1996
,
ATTEST: A true copy of an ordinance entitled "Mass Gathering Ordinance of the Town
of Newport" as certified to me by the municipal officers on the 21st day of February 1996.
Signed, February 22, 1996
Deanna M. Morse, Clerk.













1
Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
for the
Town of Newport, Maine
Section 1. Purposes
The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird, and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and land from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; freshwater wetlands; to control building
sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as
well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and
open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in
shoreland areas.
Section 2. Authority
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38
Sections 435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
Section 3. Applicability
This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 1000 feet horizontal distance of
the normal high-water line of Nokomis Pond; within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland rated moderate to
high value by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW);
within 75 feet ,horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland
that has not been rated by IFW as moderate to high value; and within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, including outlet
streams from freshwater wetlands. This Ordinance also applies to any structure
built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf, or pier, or other structure extending
below the normal high-water line of a body or within a wetland.
Section 4. Effective Date
A. This Ordinance, which was adopted by the municipal legislative body on
March 13, 2010 and shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified
copy of the Ordinance. Attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be
forwarded to Commissions of Environmental Protection for approval. If the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection fails to act on this Ordinance
within forty-five (45) days of this/her receipt of this Ordinance is hall be
deemed approved. Upon approval of this Ordinance, the Shoreland zoning
2
ordinance previously adopted on is hereby repealed. Any application for a
permit submitted to the municipality within forty-five (45) day period shall be
governed by the terms of this Ordinance if the Ordinance is approved by the
Commissioner.
B. Repeal of Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation. The municipal regulation
of timber harvesting activities is repealed on the statutory date established
under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), at which time the State of Maine
Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber
harvesting standards in the shoreland zone. On the date established under 38
M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), the following provisions of this ordinance are
repealed:
* Section 14- Table of Land Uses # 3 Forest management activities and # 4
Timber Harvesting
* Section 15 – Land Use Standard 15.(O) Timber Harvesting
* Section 17 Definitions, the definitions of “forest management activities”,
residual basal area”, “skid trail, and “slash”.
Section 5. Availability
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and
shall accessible to any member of the public at reasonable cost at the expense of
the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
Section 6. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decisions shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the
Ordinance.
Section 7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or
statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 8. Amendments
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body. Copies
of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection following
adoption by the municipal legislative body and shall not be effective unless
approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails act on any amendment
within forty-five (45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is
automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the
3
municipality within forty-five (45) day period shall be governed by the terms of
the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
1. Initiation of Amendment-an amendment to is ordinance may be initialed by:
a. The planning board provided a majority of the board has so voted;
b. Request of the Selectmen to the planning board; or
c. Written petition of 10% of the registered voters of the town.
2. Adoption – All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board
for their recommendation. The planning board may hold a public hearing on
the proposed amendment. Within 30 days of receiving a proposed
amendment, the Planning Board shall make their recommendation known to
the Selectmen and the Town. After receiving the recommendation of the
Planning board, the amendment may be adopted or rejected by majority vote
of the Town at Town Meeting.
Section 9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby divided into the
following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map (s) which is
(are) made a part of this Ordinance.
1. Resource Protection
2. Limited Residential
3. Limited Commercial
4. General Development
5. Stream Protection
6. Nokomis Pond Water District
B. Scale of Map
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less that 1’’
inch = 2000 feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend
indication the symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map
The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be certified by the attested signature of
the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map
4
If amendments, in accordance with Section 8, are made in the district boundaries
or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, such changes
shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days after
the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
Section 10. Interpretation of District Boundaries
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, District
boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads, and rights of
way, and the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where
uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district boundary lines, the Board of
Appeals shall be final authority as to location.
Section 11. Land Use requirements
Except as herein after specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter by
used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be created
except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
Section 12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
non-conforming conditions that existed before the effective date of the Ordinance
or amendments thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements
set forth in Section 12. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a nonconforming
condition shall not be permitted to become more non-conforming.
B. General
1. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may
be transferred and the new owner may continue the non-conforming
use or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot, subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the
normal upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and
structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve
expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other
changes in non-conforming use or structure as federal, state, or local
building and safety codes may require
5
Note: See Section 17 for the definitions of non-conforming conditions, nonconforming
lots, non-conforming structures, non-conforming uses.
C. Non-conforming Structures
1. Expansions: A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after
obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new
structure, if such addition or expansion does not increase the non-conformity
of the structure and is in accordance with Section 12( C)(1)(a)and (b) below.
Further Limitations:
a. After January 1, 1989 if any portion of a structure is less than the required
setback for the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or
upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the structure shall not be expanded in
floor area or volume, by 30% or more, during the lifetime of the structure. If a
replacement structure conforms with the requirements of Section 12(C)(3),
and is less than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream or
wetland, the replacements structure may not be expanded if the original
structure existing on January 1, 1989, had been expanded by 30% in floor area
and volume since that date.
b. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a
non-conforming structure the structure and new foundation must be placed
such the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its decision on the
criteria specified in Section 12 (C)(2)., Relocation, below; if the completed
foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure,
except for expansion in conformity with Section 12(C )(1)(a) above, and the
foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3)
additional feet as measured from the uphill side of the structure (from the
original ground level to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be
considered to be an expansion of the structure.
2. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundary
of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the
present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State Law
and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a
new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no
case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more
non-conforming.
6
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of
the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the
property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other
on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to
be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area
in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native
vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which
the relocated structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall
be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one
native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees
are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of
trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or
wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least
the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed,
damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The
vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or
ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of
the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses,
shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
3. Reconstruction or Replacement: any non-conforming structure which is located less
than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed
regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of the structure before
such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that
a permit is obtained within one year of the date of said damage, destruction, or
removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with
the setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case
shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. If
the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required setback it shall not
be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section
12(C)(1) above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume of the
reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor
area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond
the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall
be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a
structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(2) above.
7
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a
water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the
market value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the
structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if
a permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of such
damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback
to the greatest practical extent the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in
addition to the criteria in Section 12(C)(2) above, the physical condition and type of
foundation present, if any.
4. Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure
The use of a non-conforming structure may not be changed to another use unless
the Planning Board after receiving a written application determines that the new
use will have no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream or
wetland or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than the existing
use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall
require written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects
on public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and
wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to
waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and other functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Uses
1. Expansions: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that
non conforming residential uses may, after obtaining a permit for the Planning
Board, be expanded within existing residential structures or within expansions of
such structures as permitted in Section 12(C)(1)(a) above.
2. Resumption prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a nonconforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is
superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a non-conforming
uses except that the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant,
grant up to one year extension to the time period. This provision shall not apply
to the resumption of a use or a residential structure provided that the structure has
been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5)
year period.
3. Changes of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another
non-conforming use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact
8
on the subject and adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse
impact shall be made according to criteria listed on Section 12 (C)(4) above.
E. Non-conforming Lots
1. Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date
of this Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a
variance, provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with
any other lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance
except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relation to
setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width and shore frontage
shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or parts of the
lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal or
structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or
together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections
4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the
effective date of this ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that
the above referenced law and rules are complied with. When such lots are
divided each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
3. Contiguous Lots – Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or
parcels are in a single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption
or amendment of this Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if
one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structures the lots shall
be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
Section 13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District
The Resource Protection District includes areas in which development would
adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic
and natural values. This district shall include the following areas when they occur
within the limits of the shoreland zone, exclusive of the Stream Protection
District, except that areas which are currently developed and areas which meet the
criteria for the Limited Commercial or General Development Districts need not be
included within the Resource Protection District.
9
1. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater
wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated
"moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&W) that are depicted on
a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either
MDIF&W or the Department as of December 31, 2008. For the purposes of
this paragraph “ wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers shall mean
areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that
are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or
below the water level of the great pond or rivers during the period of normal
water. “Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be
part of that great pond or river.
2. Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds
along rivers, defined by the 100 year floodplain as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the Flood of Record, or in the absence of
these, by soil type identified as recent floodplain soils.
3. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or
greater.
4. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater, defined, and which are not
surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
NOTE: These areas usually consist of forested wetlands abutting water
bodies and non-forested wetlands
5. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or
riverbed movement.
B. Limited Residential District
The Limited Residential District includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which are used less
intensively than those in Limited Commercial District or the General
Development District.
C. Limit Commercial District
The limited Commercial District includes areas of mixed, light commercial and
residential used, exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be
developed as intensively as the General Development District. This district
includes areas of two or more contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of
10
residential and low intensity business and commercial uses. Industrial uses are
prohibited.
Limited Commercial District, commencing at the northwesterly corner of Lot 29,
Map 17 of the Town of Newport Tax maps (1994) and extending northerly and
northwesterly along the shore of Sebasticook Lake to the easterly bound of Lot
19, Map 20 of the Town of Newport Tax maps (1994) ( This can only be created
by a vote at Town Meeting).
D. The General Developmet District
1. Existing areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to retail trade, service
activities, or other commercial activities and industrial activities.
2. Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial,
industrial and recreational uses.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential
development. However, no area shall be designated a General Development
District based solely on residential use.
In areas adjacent to great ponds and adjacent to rivers flowing to great ponds the
designation of an area as General Development District shall be based upon uses
existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance. There shall be no newly
established General Development Districts adjacent to great ponds and adjacent to
rivers which flow to great ponds.
3. General Development District, commencing at the northwesterly corner of Lot
29, Map 17 of the Town of Newport Tax Maps (1994) and extending
southeasterly along the shore of Sebasticook Lake to the North Street Dam to
Main Street Dam only. (1994) and further extending southerly along the western
shore of the East Branch of Sebasticook River to Interstate 95. (1994)
E. Stream Protection District
The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those
areas within 1,000 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
Nokomis Pond; within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a great pond, or river; within two-hundred and fifty (250)
feet horizontal distance of the upland edge of a wetland rated moderate or high
value; or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of the upland edge of a
wetland not rated moderate or high value. Where a stream and its associated
shoreland zone are located within the shoreland zone of the above water bodies or
wetlands that land area shall be regulated under terms of the shoreland district
associated with that water body or wetland.
11
F. Nokomis Pond Water District
This as overlapping protection zone, much like the Shoreland Zone, intended to
protect the Nokomis Pond water reservoir. This zone extends 1,000 feet from the
normal high-water line of Nokomis Pond. Any development within this area,
besides falling under appropriate review procedures by the Town of Newport, must
be reviewed by the Newport Water District. This will help to ensure the continued
protection of the Town’s water supply from possible ground water contamination.
All development in this zone must be setback 150 feet from the normal high
water line of Nokomis Pond
Section 14. Table of Land Uses
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone,
shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The
district designated for a particular site shall be determined from the Official
Shoreland Zoning Map.
Yes – Allowed (no permit required by the use must comply with all
applicable land use standards.)
No – Prohibited
PB – Requires permit issued by the Planning Board
CEO – Requires permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI – Requires permit issued by Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP – Resource Protection
LR – Limited Residential
LC – Limited Commercial
GD – General Development
SP – Stream Protection
NP – Nokomis Pond Water District
12
SECTION 15 - TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
TABLE OF LAND USES SP RP LR LC GD NPWD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not
requiring structures such as hunting,
fishing and hiking
Yes yes Yes Yes yes yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing
roads and trails
Yes yes Yes Yes yes yes
3. Forest management activities except
for timber harvesting
Yes yes Yes Yes yes yes
4. Timber harvesting Yes CEO1 Yes Yes yes CEO 1
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for
activities other than timber harvesting
CEO CEO1 Yes Yes yes CEO1
6. Fire prevention activities Yes yes Yes Yes yes Yes
7. Wildlife management practices Yes yes Yes Yes yes Yes
8. Soil and Water conservation practices Yes yes Yes Yes yes Yes
9. Mineral exploration No no No No no No
10. Mineral extraction including sand and
gravel extraction
No no No No no No
11. Surveying and resource analysis Yes yes Yes Yes yes Yes
12. Emergency Operations Yes yes Yes Yes yes Yes
13. Agriculture Yes PB Yes Yes yes No
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB Yes yes No
15. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential
including driveways
PB4
No 9
CEO
PB
PB
CEO
B. Multi-unit residential No No PB PB PB No
C. Commercial No8 No8 No PB PB No
D. Industrial No No No No PB No
E. Governmental and Institutional No No No PB PB PB
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB CEO CEO PB PB
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and
other structures and uses extending over
or below the normal high-water line or
within a wetland
a. Temporary
b. Permanent
CEO
PB
CEO
PB
CEO
PB
CEO
PB
CEO
PB
CEO
PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to
year-round residences
LPI No LPI/CEO LPI/CEO LPI/CEO No
19. Home occupations PB No PB PB PB No
20. Private sewage disposal systems for
allowed uses
LPI No LPI No LPI LPI
21. Essential services PB5 PB5 PB PB PB PB5
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed
uses
Yes Yes Yes Yes yes Yes
13
23. Public and private recreational areas
involving minimal structural
development
PB PB PB PB PB No
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO PB
25. Campgrounds No no6 PB PB PB No
26. Road construction PB no7 PB PB PB No7
27. Parking facilities No no6 PB PB PB No
28. Marinas PB No PB PB PB No
29. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic
yards
CEO CEO Yes Yes yes CEO
30. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic
yards
PB PB CEO CEO CEO PB
31. Signs Yes Yes Yes Yes yes Yes
32. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
33. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO
permit
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB
permit
PB PB PB PB PB PB
35. Sand / Salt Storage NO NO NO CEO CEO NO
Notes: The following notes are applicable to the Land use table listed above.
1. In RP not allowed within 75 feet of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety
hazards.. In NWPD not allowed within 150 feet of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except
to remove safety hazards. Timber Harvesting in the NPWD must be done under the supervision of a
Licensed Maine Forester.
2. Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total,
is disturbed.
3. In RP not permitted in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4. Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5. See further restrictions in Section 15(L)(2)
6. Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a permit is
required from the PB.
7. Except as provided for in Section 15(H)(3)
8. Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in Table, such as campgrounds and marinas, that are
allowed in the respective districts.
9. Single Family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to provisions of
Section 16-E
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over
or adjacent to any freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and operates in such a
manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure
Section 15. Land Use Standards.
14
All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the following
provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
1. Minimum Lot Areas Minimum Shore
(Sq. ft.) Frontage (lin. Ft.)
Residential per dwelling unit 40,000 200
Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial or Industrial per 60,000 300
principal structure
Public and Private Recreation Facilities 40,000 200
New lots within 500 feet of Nokomis Pond 100,000 400
2. Land below the normal high-water line of a body or upland edge of a wetland
and land beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included
toward calculation minimum lot area.
3. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered
each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the
owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a
lot with the proposed use.
5. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is
constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall
be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one
hundred (100) feet horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of great
ponds and rivers that flow to great ponds and seventy-five (75) feet horizontal
distance from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams,
or the upland edge of a wetland. Except that in the General Development District
the setback from the normal high-water line shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet.
In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement shall be 250 feet,
horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or other regulated
15
objects specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements
specified above shall apply.
In addition:
a. The water body, tributary stream or wetland setback provision shall neither
apply to structures which require direct access to the water body, tributary stream
or wetland as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and retaining walls,
no to other functionally water-dependent uses.
b. On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists,
and it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water
body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may
issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the
storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory structure shall not
exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in height, and shall be
located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all
other applicable standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing
limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or
tributary stream than the principal structure.
2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which
are permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, Limited
Commercial, and Stream Protection Districts, Nokomis Pond Water District shall
not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to
structures such as transmission towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures
having no floor area.
3. The first floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year
flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by the
soil types as recent floodplain soils.
4. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetation surfaces,
within the shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a
portion thereof, located within the shoreland zone, including land area previously
developed, except in the General Development District adjacent to rivers which
do not flow to great ponds, where lot coverage shall not exceed (70) percent.
5. Not withstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures
may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided; that the
structures is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the structured
does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or
upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection Act. Title 38, Section
16
480-C): and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative
exists on the property. 1994
C. Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges, and other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
below the Normal High-Water Line of w Water Body or Within a Wetland
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and
constructed so as to control erosion.
2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the
activity and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A
temporary pier, dock or wharf shall not be wider than six feet for non commercial
uses.
5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock, or
other structure extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or
within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to water body or
wetland as an operational necessity.
6. New permanent piers and docks shall not be permitted unless it is clearly
demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible,
and a permit has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection,
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
7. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf, or other
structure extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
8. Except in the General Development District, structures built on, over, or
abutting a pier, wharf, dock, or other structure extending below the normal highwater
line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed (20) feet in height
above the pier, wharf, dock, or other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or
over water bodies shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act,
Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 480-C. Permits may also be required from the
Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters
D. Campgrounds
Campground shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
17
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square
feet of land, not including road and driveways, for each site. Land
supporting wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line
of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
2. The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent, or
shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of
one hundred (100) feet horizontal distance from the normal high-water
line of a great pond or river flowing to a great pond and seventy-five (75)
feet horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
3. No Attached Permanent Structures
4. No Recreation Vehicles will be allowed on any site for more than 180
days out of a year.
E. Individual Private Campsites
Individual, private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed
provided the following conditions are met:
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or
thirty (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever
is less, may be permitted.
2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100)
feet from the normal high-water line of a great pond or river flowing to a
great pond and seventy-five (75) feet from normal high-water line of other
water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
3. Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure(s) except for a canopy
shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
4. The clearing of vegetation for the sitting of the recreational vehicle,
tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to
one thousand (1000) square feet.
5. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and
location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall
be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site,
written authorization from the receiving facility or landowner is required.
18
6. When a recreational vehicle, tent, or similar shelter is placed on-site for
more than one hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements
for residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal in compliance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal unless served by public sewage facilities.
7. Accessory structures shall be permitted in accordance to Section 15
(B)(1)
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses
The following new commercial and industrial uses are prohibited within
the Shoreland Zone adjacent to great ponds, and rivers and streams which
flow to great ponds:
a. Auto washing facilities.
b. Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body
shops.
c. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
d. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers
other than amount normally associated with individual households or
farms.
e. Commercial painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping.
f. Dry cleaning establishments
g. Electronic circuit assembly
h. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
i. Metal planing, finishing, or polishing.
j. Petroleum or petroleum storage and/or sale except storage on same
property as use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with
marinas.
k. Photographic processing.
l. Printing.
G. Parking Areas
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback
requirements for structures for the district in which such areas are located. The
setback requirements for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in
Districts other than the General Development, may be reduced to not less than
fifty (50) feet horizontal distance from the normal high-water line or upland edge
of a wetland if the Planning Board finds no other reasonable alternative exists.
2. Parking areas shall be adequately size for the proposed use and shall be
designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body or
tributary stream or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
19
3. In determining the appropriate size proposed parking facilities, the following
shall apply:
a. Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty
(20) feet long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer
shall be forty (40) feet long.
b. Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of road and/or driveways
and drainage systems, culverts and other related features:
1. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond or a river that
flows to a great pond and seventy-five (75)feet, horizontal distance from the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland
edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or
driveway setback requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal
distance, upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be
used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. The setback to the Nokomis Pond will be increased to 500 feet.
No variance will be allowed
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway
setback shall be increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five
(5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent.
Section 15 (H)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads
or driveways that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located
nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity,
excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways
providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply
fully with the requirements of Section 15(H)(1) except for that portion of the
road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way
regardless of its setback for a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
20
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District and
Nokomis Pond Water District except to provide access to permitted uses within
the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by the Planning Board in
Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route
or location is available outside the district. When a road or driveway is permitted
in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far
as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper that a slope of two (2) horizontal
to one (1) vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the
provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in Section 15(Q).
5. Road grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for short segments
of less than two hundred (200) feet.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering
water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be
designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at
least (50) feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed
to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration
of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer
strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be
installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips
before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or
ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be
spaced along road and driveways at intervals no greater than indicated in the
following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21+ 40
21
b. Drainage dips may be use in place of ditch relief culverts only where the road
grade is ten (10) percent or less.
c. On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts
shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order
to allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be
stabilized with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff
control installations associated with road shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
I. Signs
The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection,
Stream Protection, Nokomis Pond Water, Limited Residential and Limited
Commercial Districts :
1. Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed,
provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not
exceed two (2) signs per premises. In the Limited Commercial District, however,
such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. Signs relating to
goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
2. Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in
area relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
3. Signs relation to trespassing and hunting shall be permitted without
restriction as to number provided that o such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet
in area.
4. Signs relating to public safety shall be permitted without restriction.
5. No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
6. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm
water run-off from the site in excess of the natural pre-development conditions.
Where possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales,
22
terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and
encourage infiltration of stormwaters.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure
proper functioning.
3. Drainage Improvements
a. Removal of Spring and Surface Water – The applicant may be required
by the Planning Board to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring,
surface or storm water that may exist either previous to or as a result of the
development. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street rightof-
way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of
appropriate width.
b. Drainage Structures to Accommodate Potential Development Upstream
a culvert or other drainage facility shall be large enough to accommodate
potential run-off from its entire upstream drainage area, where inside or
outside the development. The facility shall be designed based on
anticipated run-off from a “ten year” storm under conditions of total
potential development permitted in the watershed by the Zoning
Ordinance.
c. Responsibility for Down Stream Drainage – If requested by the
Planning Board, the applicant engineer shall study the effect of the
proposed development on the existing down-stream drainage facilities
outside the areas of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the
additional run-off incident to the development will overload an existing
down-stream drainage facility during a storm with recurrence interval of
five years, the Planning Board shall notify the Selectmen of such potential
condition. In such case the Planning Board shall not approve the
subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said
condition.
d. The Planning Board shall require that easements for drainage be turned
over to the town.
e. Phosphorous control – The subdivider shall incorporate whatever storm
water runoff controls or treatment measures as necessary to prevent
additional phosphorous loading to Sebasticook Lake.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
A. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and
any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet,
23
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the
upland edge of a wetland and
b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland
zone.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems,
excluding fill extensions, to be constructed no less than one hundred (100)
horizontal feet from the normal high-water line of a perennial water body. The
minimum setback distance for a new subsurface disposal system may not be
reduced by variance. Within the Nokomis Pond Water District the setback will
be 150 feet from Nokomis Pond.
L. Essential Services
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing
public ways and existing service corridors.
2. The installation of essential services is not permitted in a Resource Protection,
Nokomis Pond or Stream Protection Districts, except to provide services to a
permitted use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrated that
not reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such structures and facilities
shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and
resources, including visual impacts.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
There will not be any exploration and extraction of minerals anywhere in the
shoreland zone or the resource protection areas.
N. Agriculture
1. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance
with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of
Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7
M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209)
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within the shoreland zone. Existing
storage or stockpiles within the shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such
that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated stormwater.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil within the shoreland zone are
allowed provided that the following is complied with
NOTE: Assistance in preparing a conservation plan may be available
through the local Soil and Water Conservation District Office.
24
a. There shall be no new tiling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands.
Operations in existence on the effective date of this ordinance and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained.
b. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet in surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a
Conservation Plan to be filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the
provisions of said plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
4. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within the
shoreland zone. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and
which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue,
provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan.
O. Timber Harvesting shall conform with the following provisions and the State Forestry
Guidelines and Practice
1. In a Resource Protection abutting a great pond, timber harvesting shall be
limited to the following
a. Within the strip of land extending one hundred (100) feet inland from
the normal high-water line of a great pond there shall be no timber harvesting,
except to remove safety hazards.
b. Except in areas as described in Section 15 (O)(1)(a) above, timber
harvesting is permitted in accordance with Section 15 (O)(2) below, except that in
no case shall the average basal area of trees over 4 inches in diameter at 4 ½ feet
above ground level be reduced to less than 30 square feet per acre.
2. Except as provided in Section 15 (O)(1) above, timber harvesting shall conform
with the following provisions:
a. Selective cutting of no more than forty (40) inches or more in diameter
assured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level on any lot in any ten (10) year
period is permitted. In addition:
i. Within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance of the normal
high-water line of a great pond or river flowing to a great pond and within
seventy (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
other water bodies, tributary steams, or the upland edge of a wetland, there
shall be no clear-cut openings and a well-distributed stand of trees and
other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
This will be increased to 150 feet in the Nokomis Pond Water District.
25
ii. At distances greater than one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond or river flowing to a great pond, and greater than
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
other water bodies, tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland,
harvesting operations shall not create single clear-cut openings greater
than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet in the forest canopy. Where such
openings exceed five-thousand (5000) square feet, there shall be at least
one hundred (100) feet apart. Such clear-cut openings shall be included in
the calculation of total volume removal. For the purposes of these
standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area. This
will be increased to 150 feet in the Nokomis Pond Water District.
b. No accumulation of slash shall be left within one hundred (100) feet of the
normal high-water line of a great pond or river, nor within seventy-five feet of the
normal high-water line of a stream. In all other areas slash shall either be
removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part
thereof extends more than four (4) feet above the ground. Any debris that falls
below the normal high-water line of a water body, or tributary stream shall be
removed.
c. Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes
except when:
i. Surface waters are frozen; and
ii. The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
d. All water crossings shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas with low
banks and channel beds that are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface
with would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
e. Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to
prevent water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream.
Upon completion of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be
removed and areas of exposed soil revegetated.
f. Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operations of
machinery used in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil shall
be located such that and unscarified strip of vegetation of at least seventy-five
(75) feet horizontal distance in width for slopes up to ten (10) percent shall be
retained between the exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water line of a
water body or upland edge of a wetland. Fore each ten (10) percent increase in
slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by twenty (20) feet horizontal
26
distance. The provisions of this paragraph apply only to a face sloping toward the
water body or wetland, provided however, than to portion of such exposed
mineral soil on the back face shall be closer than twenty five (25) feet horizontal
distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland.
P. Clearing or removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
1. Within a shoreland area zoned for Resource Protection abutting a great pond,
there shall be no clearing or removal of vegetation within the strip of land
extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line,
except to remove safety hazards. Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District
or Nokomis Pond Water District the clearing or removal of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
2. Except in areas as described in Section 15 (P)(1), above, and except to allow
for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a
great pond or a river and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip
of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the
forest canopy, or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is
not present as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured
between tree trunks and / or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared
line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided
that a well distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is
maintained. For the purposed of this section a “well-distributed stand of
trees ” adjacent to a great pond or a river or stream flowing to a great pond
shall be defined as maintaining a rating scored of 12 or more in any 25-
foot by 25-foot square (625 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet
Above Ground Level (inches) Points
2 < 4 in. or less 1
4 < 12 in. or less 2
12 in. or greater 4
27
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a welldistributed
stand of trees” is defined as maintaining a minimum rating
score of 8 per 25-foot by 25- foot square area.
Note: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot x 25-foot plot
contains three (3) trees between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, three trees
between 4 and 12 inches in diameter and three trees over 12 inches in
diameter, the rating score is:
(3x1) + (3x2) + (3x4) = 21 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 25-foot plot contains trees worth 21 points. Trees
totaling 9 points (21-12 = 9) may be removed from the plot provided that
no cleared openings are created.
For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at
least five (3) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet
above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 3
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Not withstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above the ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under
three (3) feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest
duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath
or other permitted uses as described in Section 15(P) paragraphs (2) and (2)(a)
above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
e. In order in maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of stormdamaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared
openings, these openings shall be replanted with native trees species unless
existing new tree growth is present.
The provisions contained in Section 15 (P)(2) does not apply to those portions of
public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as long as cleared
areas are limited to the minimum areas necessary.
3. At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from a
great pond or a river and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland
28
edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten (10) year period,
selective cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the volume of trees four
(4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. Tree
removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included
in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the purpose of these standards volume
may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, 25% of the lot areas within the shoreland zone or ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously
developed. This provision shall not apply to the General Development District.
4. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance
may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
Ordinance.
5. Fields and other cleared openings that have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees,
or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15
(P).
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar
activities which result in unstabilized soil condition and which required a permit
shall required a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan
shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include,
where applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed
to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high
cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural
contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
3. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the
proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all
stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction
shall be minimized to reduce potential for erosion.
29
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within
one (1) week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod,
seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization
shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale
per five hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable
methods may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measured shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid
siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay
bales and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected
from erosion form water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed
and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm or
greater and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
R. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse
environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper
drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed
uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a soils report
based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals.
Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered
Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who
have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties.
The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of
ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems
appropriated. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use
to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
S. Water Quality
No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the
waters of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other
30
activities or substances will impair designated uses or the water classification of
the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
T. Archaeological Sites
Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National
register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for
review and comment, at least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the
permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comment received
from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
Section 16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
1. Code Enforcement Officer
A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
2. Board of Appeals
A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of M.R.S.A. Title 30-A Section 2691.
3. Planning Board
A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of State law.
B. Permits Required
After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first obtaining a
permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace
an existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A
person who is issued a permit pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the
permit on site while the work authorized by the permit is performed. Any permit
required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit required by
other law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
31
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application,
including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality, to the
appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can
show evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an agent,
representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner with authorization from
the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the information
in the application is complete and correct
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriated, shall note upon each application the
dated and time of its receipt.
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit
or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site
evaluation approved by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted
whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use would require the
installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits
Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the Planning
Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall
notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a completed
application, or if the application is incomplete, that specified additional
materials is needed to make the application complete. The Planning Board
or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriated, shall approve, approve
with conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within 35 days
of receiving a completed application. However, if the Planning Board has
a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur
within 35 days after the first available dated on the Planning Board’s
agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within 35 days
of the public hearing, if one is held. Permits shall be approved if the
proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes
and provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use
activity is in conformity with purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the
Board shall approve an application or approve it with conditions if it
makes a positive finding based on the information presented that the
proposed use;
32
1. Will maintain safe and healthy conditions;
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface water;
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4. Will not have adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish,
aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points
of access to inland waters;
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated
in the comprehensive plan;
7. Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development
and use; and
8. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land use
Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as
well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted
for an application involving a structure if the structured would be located
in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local ordinance,
regulation or statue administrated by the municipality.
E. SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING - RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT
In addition to the criteria in Section D above, the Planning Board may
approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a Resource
Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following conditions are met:
A. There is no location on the property, other than the location
within the Resource Protection District, where the structure can
be built.
B. The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped
and was established and recorded in the Penobscot County
Registry of Deeds before the adoption of the Resource
Protection District.
C. The proposed location of all buildings, sewage disposal
systems and other improvements are:
1) Located on natural ground slopes of less than
20%; and
2) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year
floodplain along rivers, based on detailed flood
insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps; all buildings, including basements, are
elevated at least one foot above the 100-year
floodplain elevation; and the development is
33
otherwise in compliance with Article 7. If the
floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Maps, it is deemed to be 1/2
the width of the 100-year floodplain,
D. The total ground-floor area of all principal and accessory
structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This
limitation shall not be altered by variance.
E. All structures, except functionally water-dependent
structures, are set back from the normal high water line or
upland edge of a wetland to the greatest practical extent, but
not less than 75 feet. In determining the greatest practical
extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot,
the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and
amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed building
site's elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its proximity to
moderate-value or high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit
Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial start is not
made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a
substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the
applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project, at which time the
permit shall expire.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of
any kind may install services to any new structure located in the shoreland
zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of
all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance, has been
issued by the appropriated municipal officials. Following installation of
service, the company or district shall forward written authorization to the
municipal officials, indication that installation has been completed.
H. Appeals
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
34
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on
an appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or
failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this
Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo
basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by,
the Code Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on a
permit application under this Ordinance. Any order, requirement, decision
or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of this
ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the
limitations set forth in this Ordinance
2. Variance Appeals
Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements
including but no limited to, lot width, percent of lot coverage, and
setback requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses
otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(1) The proposes structure or use would meet the provisions of
Section 15 except for the specific provision which has created the
non-conformity and from which relief is sought; and
(2) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would
result in undue hardship.
The Term “undue hardship” shall mean:
(i) That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted:
35
(ii) That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood.
(iii) That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
(iv) That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
1. Accessibility- Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii)
above, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance to an
owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making
that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who
resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The board shall
restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to
the installation of equipment or the construction of structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the
person with the disability. The board may impose conditions
on the variance, including limiting the variance to the
duration of the disability or to the time that the person with
the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling" shall
include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety
or effectiveness of the structure.
d. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as
strictly as possible in order to insure conformance with the
purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest extent
possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance
as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance shall
comply with any conditions imposed.
e. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all
supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded
by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days prior to action by
the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be
made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the
Board of Appeals.
36
3. Appeal Procedure
a. Making an Appeal
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals
by an aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the
Planning Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16
(G)(1)(a) above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date
of the official, written decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the
Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
(2) Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice
of appeal which includes:
(i)A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why
the appeal or variance should be granted.
(ii) A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing
buildings and structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to
the relief sought.
(3) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the
Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed
from.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or
a request for a variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a complete
written application, unless this time period is extended by the parties.
b. Decision by Board of Appeals
1. A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
2. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
3. The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals
within thirty five (35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a
written decision on all appeals.
4. The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision,
including a statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the
Board. The Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or
37
hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of Environmental
Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision. Copies of written
decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board,
Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
4. Appeal to Superior Court
Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section
2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court
in accordance with State laws within forty-five (45) days from the date of any
decision of the Board of Appeals.
5. Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the
Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its
prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision must be filed
within ten (10) days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to
reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be
completed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original
decision. Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote of the
majority of the Board members originally voting on the decision, and proper
notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code enforcement
officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who testified
at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and
receive additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen (15)
days after the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
1. Nuisances
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find
that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall
notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indication the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or
work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement
of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the
municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent record.
38
b. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to
ensure compliance with all applicable laws and conditions attached to
permit approvals. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all
complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all
essential transactions of the office, including applications submitted,
permits granted or denied, variance granted or denied, revocation actions,
revocation of permits, appeals court actions, violations investigated,
violations found, and fees collected. On an biennial basis, a summary of
the record shall be submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land and
Water Quality within the Department of Environmental Protection.
3. Legal Actions
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of
the violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice
from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any
and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including
seeking injunction of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the
name of the municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized
agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative consent
agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and
recovering fines without court action. Such agreements shall not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing
evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a
direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official
and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public
health and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
4. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent
or a contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this
Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, Maine
Revised Statutes Annotated, Subsection 4452.
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500
per violation for each day that the violation continues. However, in a resource
protection district the maximum penalty is increased to $5,000 ( Title 38,
M.R.S.A. section 4452)
39
Section 17. Definitions
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE - a use or structure on the same lot which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or similar extension
of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a
common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
AGGRIEVED PARTY - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly
affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person
whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other
person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the
granting or denial of such permit or variance.
AGRICULTURE- the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants
and / or animals, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed
crops, dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits
and vegetables and ornamental and green house products. Agriculture does not include
forest management and timber harvesting activities.
AQUACULTURE - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or
marine plant or animal species.
BASAL AREA- the area of cross-section of a tree at 4 ½ feet above ground level and
inclusive of bark.
BASEMENT - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more
and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY - a facility designed primarily for the launching and
landing of watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking
spaces for vehicles and trailers.
CAMPGROUND - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in
temporary living quarters, including, but not limited to, tents, recreational vehicles or
other shelters.
CANOPY- the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded
area.
COMMERCIAL USE -the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home
occupation", defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of
income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of
residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
40
DBH- the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
DEVELOPMENT – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or
vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally
occurring.
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS - numerical standards relating to spatial
relationships including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
DISABILITY- any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect
or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect,
environmental conditions or illness; and also includes the physical or mental condition of
a person which constitutes a substantial handicap as determined by a physician or in the
case of a mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or
sensory impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or related
services.
DRIVEWAY- a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving
two single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS - operations conducted for the public health, safety or
general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law
enforcement, and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the
threat of destruction or injury.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES - gas, electrical or communication facilities (not otherwise
defined in this section); steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution
lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines,
collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops
or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE - an increase in the floor area or volume of a
structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached decks, garages,
porches and greenhouses.
EXPANSION OF USE – the addition of one or more months to a use’s operating
season, additional hours of operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area
devoted to a particular use.
FAMILY- one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
41
FLOODWAY- the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the 100- year flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation by more than one foot in height.
FLOOR AREA- the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by
exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as
porches and decks.
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES - timber cruising and other forest resource
evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities,
timber stand improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or
associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
FORESTED WETLAND - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is
six (6) meters tall (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
FOUNDATION - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure including,
but not limited to, basements, slabs, sills, posts or frost walls, or other base consisting of
concrete, block, brick or similar material
FRESHWATER WETLAND - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas,
other than forested wetlands, which are-
1. Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) contiguous acres
and adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such
that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for
duration to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a
prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that
do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES - those uses that require for their
primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location
in, coastal or inland waters and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses
include, but are not limited to, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities,
excluding recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish
storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port
facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or
requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that can not reasonably be located
or operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public access to
coastal or inland waters.
42
GREAT POND - any inland body of water, which in a natural state, has a surface area in
excess of ten (10) acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased,
which has a surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this
Ordinance, where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely
surrounded by land held by a single owner.
GROUND COVER- small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially
decayed organic matter of the forest floor.
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior
to construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the
structure, excluding chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances which have
no floor area.
HOME OCCUPATION - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted
on or in a residential structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and
compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses; and
2) shall not employ no more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in
the home.
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE - any change in a structure
or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the
nonconformity such as, but not limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or
wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure.
Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or
which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing
structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no
increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or
tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than
does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be
expanded laterally from any portion of the existing structure to fill in the space left by an
L or U shaped structure, provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body,
tributary stream or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that
water body, tributary stream or wetland. Similarly, there is no increase in nonconformity
with the height requirement if the expansion increases the height of the structure no
further than the highest point of the existing nonconforming structure.
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITE - an area of land which is not associated with a
campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to
exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements which may include,
but not be limited to gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
INDUSTRIAL - the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or
processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
43
INSTITUTIONAL- a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church,
library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building,
structure or land used for public purposes.
LOT AREA - the area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land
below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas
beneath roads serving more than two lots.
MARINA - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its
principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and
which may also provide accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and
construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle
shops and marine fuel service facilities.
MARKET VALUE - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and
under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer,
both conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
MINERAL EXPLORATION - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of
determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance
to the land and which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original
condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which
removes more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel,
clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and to transport the
product removed, away from the extraction site.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH -the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
When only two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be
considered to be side lot lines
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL - a residential structure containing three (3) or more
residential dwelling units.
NATIVE- indigenous to the local forests
NOKOMIS POND WATER DISTRICT- Nokomis Pond serves as Newport’s Water
Supply
NON-CONFORMING CONDITION- non-conforming lot, structure or use which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendment took effect.
44
NON-CONFORMING LOT - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width
requirements of the district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE - structure which does not meet one or more of
the following dimensional requirements- setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is
allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments took effect.
NON-CONFORMING USE - use of buildings, structures, premises, land, or parts
thereof, which is not permitted in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed
to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or
subsequent amendments took effect.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly
terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested
vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level
of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of
the river or great pond.
PERSON - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest or
other legal entity.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARVES, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND
USES EXTENDING OVER OR BELOW THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE
OR WITHIN A WETAND -
TEMPORARY- structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven
(7) months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
PERMANENT- structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7)
months or more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE – a building other than one which is wholly or incidental or
accessory to another use on the same premises.
PRINCIPAL USE - A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to
another use on the same premises.
PUBLIC FACILITY - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property,
recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by
a governmental body or public entity.
45
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS - the following soil series as described and identified
by the National Cooperative Soil Survey-
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewel Medomak Ondawa
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
RECREATIONAL FACILITY - a place designed and equipped for conducting sports,
leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding
boat launching facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be
towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons,
and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and
motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must
remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of
Motor Vehicles.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM - a system intended to replace-
1. An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no
significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT- a room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one
family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall
include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities
regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling
units
RESIDUAL BASAL AREA- the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a
harvested site.
RIPRAP- rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for
erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units
horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less.
RIVER - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from
that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles
to its mouth.
ROAD - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or
other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized
vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
46
SERVICE DROP - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any
portion of a water body provided that-
1. In the case of electric service
a. The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located
entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a
roadway right-of-way; and
b. The total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. In the case of telephone service
a. The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
b. The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
SETBACK- the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated objects or area.
SHORE FRONTAGE - The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland
measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
SHORELAND ZONE – This Ordinance applies to all land areas with 1,000 feet
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of Nokomis Pond; within two hundred
and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond
or river; within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the upland edge of a freshwater
wetland rated high to moderate value by the Maine Department of Fisheries and Wildlife
(IFW); or within 75 feet of a freshwater wetland that has not been rated by IFW as having
moderate to high value; and within seventy-five (75) feet of the normal high-water line
of a stream, including outlet streams from freshwater wetlands.
SHORELINE- the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
SKID TRIAL- a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag
forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires
minimal excavation.
SLASH- the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
STREAM - A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the
confluence of two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a
United States Geological Survey 7.5 Minute Series Topographic Map, or if not available,
a 15-Minute Series Topographic Map, to the point where the body of water becomes a
river or flows to another water body or wetland within the shoreland area. Stream shall
include outlet stream, which is any perennial or intermittent stream as depicted on the
most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 Minute Series Topographic
Map, or if not available, a 15-Minute Series Topographic Map, that flows from a
freshwater wetland.
47
STRUCTURE - Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
goods or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences, and poles, wiring ad other aerial
equipment normally associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors.
The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios
and satellite dishes.
SUBSTANTIAL START - Completion of thirty percent (30%) of a permitted structure
or use measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM – any system designed to dispose if
waste or waste water on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to
septic tank, disposal fields; grandfathered cesspool, holding tanks, pretreatment filter,
piping, or an other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not
include any discharge system licensed under Title 38 MRSA, Section 414, any surface
wastewater disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water
treatment system.
SUSTAINED SLOPE - A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is
substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
TIMBER HARVESTING- the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of
selling or processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland
zone on a lot that has less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be
considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated
pursuant to Section 15 (P) Clearing or removal of Vegetation Activities Other Than
Timber Harvesting.
TRIBUTARY STREAM - a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of
upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid
of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock,
and which flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not include
the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion
of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or
wetland.
UPLAND EDGE - The boundary between upland and wetland. For the purpose of a
freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support growth of
wetland vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters ( approximately
twenty (20) feet) tall or taller.
48
VEGETATION - All live trees, shrubs and other plants including without limitation,
trees both over and under four (4) inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 above ground
level.
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE - The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by
roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
WATER BODY - Any great pond, river, or stream.
WATER CROSSING - Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a
river, tributary stream, wetland or stream, whether under, through, or over the water
orwetlands. Such projects include, but may not be limited to, roads, fords, bridges,
culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well as maintenance work on these
crossings. This definition includes crossing for timber harvesting equipment and
related activities.
WETLAND- a freshwater wetland
WOODY VEGETATION- live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Accepted by vote of Town meeting March 12th, 2011



























1
TOWN OF NEWPORT
STREET OPENING & CURB CUT ORDINANCE
Sec. 1.1. PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any excavation within the Town’s streets, sidewalks, esplanades or other public right-of -
way shall only be permitted in accordance with this ordinance.
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person or utility shall make any
excavation, modify, or fill any excavation excluding previously permitted locations in
any public place without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Town. The granting of
said permit shall cover all required activities to conform to this ordinance.
Sec. 1.2. APPLICATION
a. No street opening permit shall be issued unless a written application for a street
opening permit is submitted to the Town on a form provided by the Town. The written
application shall contain such information as reasonably required by the public works
authority.
b. In order to obtain a permit, the applicant must be current on all of its financial
obligations to the Town or have entered into an agreement to bring any outstanding
obligations current. Financial obligations include, but are not limited to real estate and
personal property taxes, transfer station fees, and any other licenses and permits that are
due and payable.
c. The applicant, who shall be the contractor, shall submit with the permit
application, a written cost estimate, covering all work covered by the permit. The
Director of Public Works may reject an estimate if, in his or her discretion, the estimate is
not reasonable given the work proposed.
d. In the event that a street opening is necessary on an emergency basis, the party
conducting the work shall file for a permit after-the-fact as soon as practical under the
circumstances.
Sec. 1.3. GENERAL CONDITIONS
a. Permits shall be granted only if the applicant has properly notified all utilities,
contacted “Dig-Safe”, and obtained an authorization number to proceed. The applicant
must provide necessary authorization from the utilities in question. Any conflicts with
utilities shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant and shall be resolved to the
utilities’ satisfaction.
2
b. The contractor doing the actual work, and the owner for whom the work is being
done are joint and severally responsible for obtaining the permit and complying with all
permit obligations and conditions.
Sec. 1.4. ANNUAL WORK PROGRAM TO BE SUBMITTED BY UTILITIES
Each year on or before March 31st, each utility shall submit to the public works authority
it’s planned work program for the ensuing year, which shall not include emergencies
defined in Section 1-1 and normal house service lines. Thereafter, the Town shall have
the right to deny permit applications for excavations not contained within each utility’s
respective planned work program, without cause except for emergencies and house
service lines.
Sec. 1.5. DURATION
Excavation work must be started no later than thirty (30) days from the date of issue of
the street-opening permit. After the expiration of this thirty (30) day period, such permit
shall become null and void unless renewed prior to expiration of the permit. Permits can
be extended up to a maximum of one year but in no case shall a permit extend beyond
one year. Dig Safe permits and assigned numbers automatically expire at the end of 30
days. In the event that a Dig Safe permit has expired, applicants must reapply and obtain
a new authorization.
Sec. 1.6. FEES AND CHARGES
Fees and charges, as fully described in Section 1.7 shall be adopted by the Selectboard as
a part of the Fee Schedule for the Town of Newport
Sec. 1.7. BONDS
a. If the estimated cost of the work to be covered by the permit exceeds $10,000.00
an applicant shall be required to post a performance guarantee equal to the total
anticipated cost(s) of the work to be covered by the permit prior to being issued any
permit. The performance guarantee may be in the form of bonds, irrevocable letters of
credit, or cash deposits.
b. If the estimated cost of the work to be covered by the permit is less than
$10,000.00 an applicant shall be required to provide a cash deposit with the Town in the
amount of 10% of the total anticipated costs(s) as guarantee, provided that in no case
shall this deposit be less than $500.00.
c. The Town shall retain the guarantee for one year from the date of completion of
the work to assure that the construction standards have been adhered to. Deposits will
3
only be refunded upon approved inspection by a town official, making certain all work is
completed in accordance to this ordinance and municipal standards.
d. In the event the Director of Public Works determines, in his or her sole discretion,
that the work for which the guarantee was posted is inadequate, fails to meet the
applicable standards, or latent defects surface in the one-year period following
completion of the work the Director may, after notice to the applicant, use the guarantee
to repair the work to his or her satisfaction.
Sec. 1.8. PERMIT EXCEPTION
State and State Aid roads are exempt from the Town of Newport’s permit process but do
require a MDOT permit Application(s) and information can be obtained through the
MDOT office in Bangor at the following address/phone number:
Maine DOT
PO Box 1208
Bangor, Me. 04401
207-941-4500
Sec. 1.9. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
This ordinance authorizes the Town of Newport Selectboard to draft and enact
construction standards. Oversight of standards will be under the direction of the Newport
Public Works Department.
1. The Contractor is responsible for all construction and restoration of disturbed
areas for the entrance within the limits of the right-of-way.
2. The entire portion of any entrance within the limits of the right-of-way shall be
constructed with a minimum 15-inch well-graded gravel base course. (MDOT Type C)
3. If the entrance grade within the right-of-way exceeds five (5%) percent slope,
then the entrance shall have a paved surface within the limits of the right-of-way.
4. When sidewalk or curb exists at the proposed entrance the contractor shall remove
and replace such materials at the contractor’s expense. Any granite curb must be
reinstalled. If removed by the contractor, it will remain the property of the Town.
5. Where a granite curb exists, curb tip-downs shall be provided at each side of a
new entrance.
6. Where sidewalk is removed to accommodate a new entrance, a new walk surface
or equal type construction is to be provided. The sidewalk area at all entrances is to meet
4
handicap accessibility requirements and conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act
guidelines. In general sidewalks shall meet the following criteria:
a. The maximum sidewalk longitudinal transition slope is not to exceed 1”
vertical to 12” horizontal.
b. The maximum sidewalk cross-slope is not to exceed 2%.
c. No abrupt changes in grade are permitted and the maximum curb reveal
crossing a walkway is ½ inch or less.
Sec. 2.1. PURPOSE
This division provides for the review of any entrance onto a public way for compliance
with sound construction and design practices to ensure that traffic safety, drainage and
public improvements are not adversely affected.
Sec. 2.2. PERMIT REQUIRED
a. No driveway, entrance or approach or other improvement within the limits of the
right-of-way for any public road may be constructed, altered or relocated except in
accordance with an Entrance Permit issued by the Town upon application.
b. The Selectboard will adopt all fees pursuant to this permit.
c. The entrance permit shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of
original issue.
d. The owner is responsible for future maintenance of the entrance within the limits
of the right-of-way and shall maintain the entrance in accordance with the approved
permit.
e. Applicants who desire an entrance permit on a State Highway need to contact
MDOT Bangor Division and are responsible to adhere to any State criteria for the
issuance of said permit. The Town of Newport will not require an application for, nor
will it issue permits for Public ways defined as State Aid and State Highways.
Sec. 2.3. TOWN HELD HARMLESS
a. The applicant shall hold harmless the Town and its duly authorized agents and
employees against any action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason
of the exercise of an Entrance Permit.
5
Sec. 2.4. APPROVAL CRITERIA
a. General: Entrance should be designed and constructed to provide safe access to
the public way. Any driveway or approach constructed shall be for the bonafide purpose
of securing access to the owner’s property and not for the purpose of parking or servicing
vehicles on the right-of-way.
b. Geometry:
1. The entrance shall be designed such that the angle into the right-of-way does
not exceed 10%.
2. For uncurbed public ways, the entrance shall in general, slope away from the
road surface at a rate of not less than a quarter inch per foot, no more than one
inch per foot for a distance not less than the prevailing width of the existing
shoulder but in no case less the four (4) feet from the edge of the pavement.
3. The entrance should intersect the traveled way at a horizontal angle of 90
degrees but in no case shall the horizontal angle be less than 75 degrees.
4. No part of the entrance shall extend beyond the property lot frontage for the lot
being served.
5. The entrance shall not be located close to an intersection. Entrance shall be
placed a minimum of 50 feet from an intersection if possible.
d. Drainage:
1. Existing roadside drainage in gutter or ditch lines shall not be altered or
impeded by the applicant. The applicant must provide at his/her expense suitable
and approved drainage structures at all entrances.
2. Surface drainage shall be provided so that all surface water on the areas
adjacent to the road shall be carried away from the roadway.
3. Where a drainage culvert is required to maintain roadside drainage, the Town
must approve the pipe diameter and length and the type of pipe material prior to
installation. In any case, the pipe size shall be no smaller than 12 inches in
diameter.
4. For all new construction, home or business owners are responsible for the
purchase and installation of their culverts after coordinating with the Public
Works Department.
6
DEFINITIONS:
Applicant: The contractor performing the work.
Bituminous Asphalt:
Concrete:
Contractor: A professional construction service provider who is
bonded and insured.
Current Cost:
Dig Safe:
Emergency: An unforeseen circumstance.
Excavated area:
MDOT Type C:
Owner: Owner of the property being serviced.
Pavement Cutter: A hand held cutting device or machine operated
cutting wheel.
Right-of-Way: All land owned by the Town of Newport
(.i.e. sidewalks, ditches, traveled way, etc…)
Utilities: Newport Sanitary District, Newport Water District.
7
“Attest, a true copy of an ordinance entitled Town of Newport Street Opening and Curb
Cut Ordinance, as certified to me by the municipal officers of the Town of Newport,
Maine and adopted by the Town meeting on the 6th day of March, 2004.”
Date: 08/31/2012 Signature: _____________________
8
POLICY REGARDING ROAD OPENING PERMITS
(Included as an addendum to the Road Opening Ordinance)
? Pavement will be cut with a pavement saw, or any device that results in a straight cut,
prior to excavation.
? Undermining during excavation will require a pavement cut one foot beyond top
outer ledge of construction area.
? Backfill will be placed in 8 inch or less lifts, thoroughly compacted at each lift with
the removed material, or like material.
? All backfill shall be suitable material consistent with good engineering practices.
? The final base shall consist of 15 inches of gravel with allowance made for a final
patch of 4 inches of bituminous asphalt with a minimum overlay of 1½ inches of
binder.
? Upon completion of back filling, the excavated area shall be maintained by adding
gravel as needed, as determined by the Newport Public Works Director.
? A temporary patch of 2 inches of bituminous asphalt must be placed within five (5)
days of back-filling and maintained until the permanent patch is placed within 90
days, weather permitting.
? At the time of the final patch, the temporary patch will be cut out and removed to
allow for 4 inches of bituminous asphalt. The Public Works Director must be
notified before the permanent patch is placed.
? The contractor working within the Town’s right-of-way is responsible for
maintenance of the area for a period of one (1) year from final surfacing. The
contractor shall adhere to all OSHA standards and shoring or sheeting must be
provided in a roadway where depths exceed standard un-shored depths. Cutting back
on a slope will not be allowed.
? All sidewalks, curbing, tree belts, etc. shall be returned to their original state.
NOTICE TO ALL PERSONS SECURING ROAD OPENING PERMITS:
Persons securing road-opening permits are responsible for insuring safety of the public in
the excavated area.
9
Adequate safety and warning devices must be place at appropriate locations to adequately
warn and protect the motoring and pedestrian public, in accordance with Work Zone
Safety Standards.
Such devices might include, but not necessarily be limited to reflective signs, barricades,
and barrels along with lights.
Any liability arising from improper safeguards shall be borne by the applicant.
The Town of Newport is not responsible for providing devices mentioned above to
persons performing the excavation.
THE DEADLINE FOR HIGHWAY OPENING IS NOVEMBER 1ST. THE
FOLLOWING WINTER CONDITIONS, WHICH SHALL BE IN ADDITION TO
OTHER RULES AND CONDITIONS APPLICABLE, WILL APPLY TO ALL
PORTIONS OF THE WORK BEGUN AFTER NOVEMBER 1ST:
1. The permit holder must maintain all trenches and other disturbed areas until the
frost is out of the ground in the spring.
2. At the option of the permit holder, permanent pavement may be placed until and
including November 14th, however, no permanent pavement shall be placed over frozen
material. After and including November 15th, the permit holder must apply temporary
pavement at least three inches thick to all trenches and disturbed areas subjected to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. This temporary pavement must be maintained, as indicated
in (1) above, until the frost is out of the ground in the spring, after which it shall be
removed and replaced with the appropriated depth of permanent pavement.
3. Prior to November 30th when snowfall of sufficient measure to require plowing is
predicted, all excavations shall be back filled at the end of the day.
4. No frozen material shall be included in any back fill, nor shall any back fill be
placed on frozen material.
5. In the event that conditions become such that the operation becomes a hazard to
the traveling public, installation work shall be halted until all safety standards are met.


SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
OF THE
TOWN OF NEWPORT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I-PURPOSE PG 3
ARTICLE 2-AUTHORITY & ADMfNISTRA TION PG 3
ARTICLE 3-PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW PG 3
ARTICLE 4-IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES PG 15
ARTICLE 5-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS & DESIGN STANDARDS PG 19
ARTICLE 6-WAIVER & MODIFICATION OF THESE REGULATIONS PG 27
ARTICLE 7-REPEAL OF PREVIOUS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE PG 28
ARTICLE 8-AMENDMENTS PG 28
ARTICLE 9-APPEALS PG 28
ARTICLE IO-DEFINITIONS PG 28
2
ARTICLE 1- PURPOSE
The purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be to assure the comfort, health, safety
and general welfare of the people to protect the environment, to provide for the orderly
development of a sound and stable community and to uphold the State Subdivision Law
(MRSA Title 30, Sec. 4956).
ARTICLE 2 - AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2.1 Authority
2.1.1 This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with Title 30, MRSA
Section 4956.
2. 1.2 This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of
the Town of Newport".
2.2 Administration
2.2. l The Planning Board of the Town of Newport, with the assistance of the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Selectboard (as specified in the Ordinance)
shall administer this ordinance.
2.2.2 The provisions of this ordinance pertain to all land proposed for
subdivision, as herein defined, within the boundaries of the Town of Newport.
2.2.3 No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease, develop,
build upon or convey for consideration, offer or agree to sell, lease, develop, build
upon or convey for consideration any land in a subdivision in the Town of
Newport which has not been approved by the Planning Board of the Town of
Newport and recorded in the Penobscot County Registry of Deeds nor shall such
person, firm, corporation or other legal entity sell or convey any land in such
approved subdivision unless a pennanent marker is set at all comers of the lot
sold or conveyed.
ARTICLE 3- PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW
3.1 Introduction- Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed in the Town of Newport,
the subdivider or his duly authorized agent shall apply in writing for approval of such
proposed subdivision in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 of this
ordinance.
3 .2 Pre-application meeting and submission of a sketch plan-
3
3.2. l The subdivider shall submit seven copies of a sketch plan application to the
Planning Board either at or prior the meeting in which the proposal is scheduled
for discussion and the subdivider or his authorized agent shall be present at the
meeting to discuss the proposal with the Planning Board.
3 .2.2 The purposes of this pre-application conference between the subdivider and
the Planning Board are:
1. To classify the subdivision as a major or a minor subdivsion;
2. To provide an opportunity for the subdivider and the Planning Board to
informally review the subdividers ideas for use of the land;
3. To discuss procedures for subdivision review and approval;
4. If road construction is involved in the proposal, the Planning Board
shall classify the road as either minor or collector;
5. To discuss any apparent potential problems associated with the
subdivision;
6. To arrange for on-site inspection of the subdivision site; and
7. In case of minor subdivisions (as defined) to vote whether to waive the
requirement for preliminary review.
3.2.3 The sketch plan shall consist of an outline of the proposed subdivision,
drawn on a map, showing the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan shall be a written application
which includes a description of existing covenants and easements and shoreland
zoning, medium intensity soils survey information; information about available
community facilities and utilities on or near the site; information describing the
subdivision proposal including the number of residential lots, typical lot width,
and depth, plans regarding sewer and water service and road construction, and any
proposed non-residential lots, typical lot width, and depth; plans regarding sewer
and water service and road construction, and any proposed non-residential areas.
3.2.4 Other than the classification of the subdivision and the roads (if necessary)
and the establishment of review procedures to be used, no binding commitments
shall be made between the subdivider and the Board at this stage.
3.2.5 The subdivider shall notify the Board Chair at least 7 days prior to the
meeting date in which he intends on bringing a sketch plan before the board. The
Planning Board shall act on the sketch plan within 45 days of the time of
submission of the sketch plan and shall notify the subdivider of its action, in
writing, within 15 days of its action.
4
3 .2.6 Inspection of Site- In order for the Board to be more fully informed about
the site of the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall arrange for an inspection
of the site with the Board or an inspection of the site with the Board or an
individual appointed by the Board to act as its representative for the inspection.
Unless the Board has voted a waiver of inspection, the pre-application phase of
the review process shall not be considered complete until such inspection has
been made.
3.3 Preliminary Plan Phase
3 .3 .1 Purpose- The purpose of Preliminary Plan Review is to give the Planning
Board an opportunity to review the subdivider's proposal while it is in the planning stage
and to make recommendations to the subdivider as seems appropriate based on date and
local laws and regulations. The intent is that all major issues relative to the design of the
subdivision will be identified and resolved prior to the submission of the final plan.
3.3.2 Procedure
3.3.2.1 Application: Within six months after the classification of the
sketch plan by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an
application for the consideration of a Preliminary Plan. Failure to do so
may require re-submission of the sketch plan to the Planning Board for
reclassification. The Preliminary Plan shall substantially conform to the
layout shown on the sketch plan plus any recommendation made by the
Planning Board. If the subdivision is classified as a Preliminary Plan
requirement, all procedures in Section 3.3 may be by-passed in the
review process.
3.3.2.2 The application for approval of the Preliminary Plan shall be
accompanied by fee of $250.00 payable by check to the Town of Newport.
3.3.2.3 The subdivider or his duly authorized representative, shall attend
the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the Preliminary Plan.
3 .3 .2.4 Ten copies of the application for the Preliminary Plan shall be
provide 15 days prior to the meeting date.
3.3.2.5 Public Hearing - The Planning Board may hold a public hearing
on the Preliminary Plan. If it determines that a public hearing shall be
held, it shall be held within 30 days of the time of submission of the
preliminary plan. Said hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation in Newport at least two times, the date of the first
5
publication to be at least 7 days prior to the hearing. The purpose of the
public hearing shall be for the Planning Board to receive testimony from
the public relative to any municipal or state ordinance, standard, or
regulation which is applicable to the proposed subdivision and the
relationship of the subdivision to the ordinance, standard or regulation.
3.3.2.6 Within 30 days after the public hearing, or within 60 days of the
date of submission of the plan if no public hearing is held, the Planning
Board shall take action to give preliminary approval, with or without
modifications, or to disapprove such Preliminary Plan. The reasons for
approval, for any modification required, or the grounds for disapproval
shall be stated in the records of the Planning Board. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the required time limit shall constitute
approval.
3.3.2.7 When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board
shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to: ( 1 ) the
specific changes which it will require in the final plan; ( 2 ) the character
and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been
requested and which in its opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the
public health, safety and general welfare. The Planning Board shall notify
the subdivider, in writing, of its decision and any conditions and reasons
associated with it.
3.3.2.8 Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the
Final Plan but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the
design submitted on the Preliminary Plan as a guide to the preparation of
the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be submitted for approval of the
Planning Board and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these standards and the conditions of the preliminary approval, if any.
3.3.3 Submissions-Ten copies of the Preliminary Subdivision Plan shall be submitted. It
may be either printed or reproduced on paper. The Preliminary plan shall be not less that
8.5" by 11" and not more than 24" by 36". The plan shall be drawn to scale in which one
inch equals no more than 100 feet. The Preliminary Plan and supporting data shall
include the following information:
3.3.3.1 Information about the Applicant
1. Name of owner
Information to be
on the Plan
x
6
Written information
to accompany Plan
x
2. Name of applicant x
(If not owner)
3. If applicant is a corporation,
licensed to do business in Maine,
attach a copy of Secretary of
State's Registration ce1tificate.
4. Name of applicant's authorized
representative
5. Name, address and number of x
Registered Professional Engineer
or Land Surveyor who prepared
plan.
6. Address to which all
correspondence should be sent.
7. What interest does the applicant
have in the parcel to be
subdivided.
8. What interest does applicant x
have in any abutting property.
9. State whether preliminary
plan covers entire contiguous
holdings or applicant or not.
3.3.3.2 Information about Parcel to be Subdivided
1. Location of property:
Registry of Deeds Book and Page numbers,
Town tax map and lot numbers.
2. Map survey of parcel
to be subdivided, certified
by a Registered Land
Surveyor tied to establish
reference points. (attach)
3. Acreage of parcel to
be subdivided
7
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
4. A soils report, identifying soil x
types and location of soil test
areas. Evidence of soil suitability
as per the Maine Plumbing Code
shall be presented if subsurface
sewage is proposed. There shall
be one soil test per lot if subsurface
sewage disposal is proposed.
5. Nam es of abutters of parcel to be x
subdivided, and any on the
opposite side of any road from
parcel to be subdivided.
6. Indicate the nature of any restrictive x
covenants to be put on the deeds.
7. Shoreland Zoning if applicable x x
3.3.3 .3 Information on Subdivision
1. Proposed Name x x
2. Number of lots, and their sizes. x x
3. Date, north point, graphic scale x
map.
4. Proposed lot lines with approximate x
dimensions and suggested locations
of buildings, subsurface sewage
disposal systems and wells.
5. Location of all parcels to be x x
dedicated to the public use and the
conditions of the dedication.
6. A location map, showing the x
relation of the proposed subdivision
to adjacent properties and to the
general surrounding area. The
location map shall show all the
area within 2000 feet of any
8
property line of the proposed
subdivision.
7. Location and size of existing
watercourse, and other essential
existing physical features including
wetlands and flood plains.
8. Location and size of existing sewers
and water mains, and culverts and
drain on the property.
9. Location, names and widths of
existing and proposed streets,
highways, easements, building
setback lines, parks and open spaces.
10. Contour lines at an interval of not
more than 5 feet in elevation, unless
otherwise specified by the Board.
All elevations shall be referred to USGS.
x
x
x
I 1. Typical cross-sections of proposed X
grading for roadways and sidewalks,
including materials to be used on
roadways and sidewalk.
12. Storm drainage plan indicating the X
approximate location and size of
proposed lines and means of disposal
and the effect of the drainage on the
property.
13. The approximate location and size of X
all proposed water and sewer lines,
valves, pump stations and hydrants.
Also connections to existing sewer
and sewage disposal shall be shown.
If the subdivision is to utilize the
facilities of the Newport Water District,
the subdivider shall provide a letter from
the superintendent of the appropriate
district saying he has reviewed the
preliminary plans and approves the design
as proposed or that he requires vaii ous
modifications of the plans.
9
x
14. Location of all other existing and X
proposed utilities.
15. Location and type of landscaping X
including natural growth to be left in
place and nursery stock to be planted.
This information may be indicated on
a preliminary plan.
16. If the application covers only a part of X
the subdivider's entire holding, a map
of the entire tract, drawn at a scale of one
inch equals not more than 400 ft., showing
an outline of the plated area with its
proposed streets and an indication of the
probable future street system
in the remaining portion of the tract.
The part of the subdivider's holding
submitted shall be considered in light
of the entire holding.
17. If the preliminary application covers
more area that the final plan will cover,
a map showing the phasing of the entire
project, drawn at a scale of one-inch equals
not more than 400 ft., and indicating the
proposed timing of each phase.
18. Other reasonable infonnation not indicated
above, as specified by the Board.
3 .4 Final Plan
3.4.1 Procedure
x
x
x
x
1. Within 6 months of the date of the Planning Board action on the
Preliminary Plan or, if the Preliminary Plan requirement has been waived,
with 6 months of the Planning Board's vote to waive a requirement, the
subdivider shall submit the final plan within the designated time period
may require resubmission of the Preliminary Plan if such was required or
of the sketch plan if the Preliminary Plan was not required. However, the
subdivider may submit a final plan for only part of the subdivision
approved in the Preliminary Plan. In that case, each successive phase shall
be submitted within two years of the preceding phase. The final plan shall
consist of two original transparencies, of the one or more maps or
10
drawings and ten copies of all items, including maps, drawing and written
information) necessary to complete the submission.
2. The appl ication for approval of the Final Plan shall be accompanied a
fee for $10.00 per lot payable by check to the Town of Newport, Maine.
3. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the
meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the Final Plan.
4. The time submission of the Final Plan shall be the date of the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Board, at least fifteen days prior to
which the complete application, accompanied by the required fee, has
been filed with the Chairman of the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall issue the subdivider a dated receipt for the Final Plan at the time for
submission of the Final Plan.
5. Within 30 days from the receipt of a Final Plan, the Planning Board
shall notify the subdivider in writing either that the application is a
complete application or, if the application is incomplete, the specific
additional material needed to make a complete application. After the
Planning Board has detennined that a complete application had been fi led,
it shall notify the subdivider and begin its full evaluation of the proposed
subdivision.
6. Prior to submitting the final plan, the subdivider of a major sub-division
involving construction ofroads or the extension of the public water or
sewer systems shall file all improvement guarantees in accordance with
Article 4.
7. Public Hearing-The Board may vote to hold a public hearing on the
proposed subdi vision. If so, such hearing shall be held within 30 days of
having received a complete final plan (as determined under section 3.4.5)
The Planning Board shall advertise the public hearing in the manner
described in Section 3.3.2.5 of this ordinance. The purpose of the public
hearing shall be for the Planning Board to receive testimony from the
public relative to any municipal or state ordinance, standard, or regulation
which is applicable to the proposed subdivision and the relationship of the
subdivision to the ordinance, standard, or regulation.
8. Review and Action on Final Plan-The Board shall, within 30 days of a
public hearing or within 60 days for having received a complete
application, if no public hearing is held; or within such other time limit as
may be mutually agreed to by the Board and the subdivider, review the
application and deny or grant approval of the proposed subdivision, or
grant approval on such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable to
satisfy the criteria cottoned in this ordinance and state law and to preserve
11
the public health safety and general welfare. In all instances, the burden of
proof shall be upon the subdi vider. In issuing its decision, the Planning
Board shall make findings of fact establishing that the proposed
subdivision does or does not meet the provisions of these regulations and
State Subdivision Law.
9. Upon approval of the plan, at least a majority of the Board members
present and eligible to vote shall sign both transparencies. The date and
any conditions of approval shall be written in both transparencies. One
signed transparency shall be returned to the sub-divider for filing at the
Registry of Deeds and one signed transparency shall be retained by the
planning board. The Planning Board shall maintain a permanent record of
their action on the final plan.
10. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revision shall be made in any
subdivision plan after approval has been given by the Planning board and
endorsed, in writing on the plan, unless the plan is first re-submitted to the
Planning Board and the Board approves the modifications. In the event
that any such subdivision plan is recorded without complying with this
requirement, the same shall be considered null and void, and the Board
shall institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records of the
Registry of Deeds.
11. The subdivider shall file a signed subdivision plan at the Penobscot
County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date of approval. Any
plan not filed with ninety days will be considered null and void unless the
particular circumstances of said subdivider or subdivision warrants the
Planning Board to grant an extension, which shall not exceed two
additional ninety-day periods. Within seven days of the filing of the
subdivision plan, the subdivider shall give the Chairman of the Planning
Board written notification of the date of the filing and the Registry of
Deeds file number assigned to the plan.
12. If the Planning Board fails to take action with 60 days of the time of
submission of a complete final plan, or within the mutually agreed to time,
as specified above, the subdivision plan shall be deemed disapproved.
13. Approval of a subdivision plan does not imply that any road in the
subdivision will be accepted by the town. A road can only be accepted as
a public way by the legislative body of the Town of Newport: Town
Meeting.
3.4.2 Submissions- The Final Plan shall be submitted in the appropriate number of
paper and transparent copies. The Final Plan shall not be less 8 and one half by
11 " and not more than 24" by 36". The plan shall be drawn at a scale in which 1
12
inch equals no more than 100 feet and shall be oriented so the north direction is
the same on all sheets.
In addition to all items required on the Preliminary Plan unless otherwise
indicated by the Planning Board, the following items shall be required as part of
the Final Plan submission:
Information to be
on the Plan
1. Registered Land Surveyor or
Engineer-The name, registration
number, seal and signature of the
land surveyor and/or engineer whom
prepared the plan. This information
shall be on all sheets including
cross section and profile sheets.
2. Street- The names and lines,
lengths of all straight lines, the
deflection of angles, radii, length
of curves, and central angles of
all curves, and tangent distances
and bearing (shown on plan)
3. Street Profiles- Profiles of
proposed new streets on sheets
separate from the plat, at a
horizontal scale of one inch
equals 40 feet; profiles of all
proposed sewers shall be shown
on street profiles, when
applicable, at the same scale. All
elevations shall refer to datum.
4. Street Cross Section-Cross section
of 50 feet horizontal intervals of
proposed new streets on sheets
separate from the plat, plotted at a
scale of one inch equals 5 feet. All
elevations shall refer to USGA datum.
13
x
x
x
x
Written infonnation
to accompany Plan
5. Sewer Profiles of sanitary sewer, if X
not shown on street profiles, on sheets
separate from the plat, at the same
scale indicated for street profiles.
I
6.Storm Drainage Plan- Indicating X
the location and size of the proposed
lines and their profiles and means of
disposal.
7. Open Spaces- The designation of X
all easements, areas reserved for or
dedicated to public use, and areas
reserved by the subdivider. If open
space or recreation land is to be
dedicated to the town, accompanying
the plan shall be written copies of any
documents of land dedication and a
letter from the town attorney that they
are satisfied with the legal sufficiency
of the documents conveying such
land dedication.
8. Lots-The location, bearing and length X
of every line, with all lots to be numbered
in accordance with the practice of the
Town of Newport.
9. Permanent Reference Monuments- The X
location of the permanent monuments
and pins, set at all lot comers and identified
as existing or proposed.
l 0. Improvements Guarantee Accompanying X
the plan shall be a letter from the Selectboard
indicating that the form, amount and duration
of the improvement guarantee is sufficient and
that it has been filed with them.
11. Approval Space-Suitable space to record X
on the approved plat plan the date and
conditions of approval, if any. This space
shall be similar to the following example:
14
Approved: Town of Newport Planning Board
12. Accompanying Data-If public water X
is proposed, accompanying the final plan
shall be a letter from the Superintendent of
the Newport Water District stating the
conditions on which the district will supply
water and approving the size and locations
of mains, valves, and hydrants proposed.
If public sewer is proposed, accompanying
the final plan shall be a letter from the
Superintendent of the Newport Sanitary
District stating the conditions on which the
district will provide sewer service and
approving the design and construction plans
for the sewer. Also there shall be a letter
from the Fire Chief approving the design
and approving the design and contruction
plans for the sewer. Also there shall be a
letter from the Fire Chief approving the
number, size and location of hydrants proposed.
ARTICLE 4-IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
4.1 Improvement Guarantees Required- Before the submission of a Final Plan, the
subdivider in all major subdivisions involving the construction or reconstruction of roads
and/or storm drain system(s) and/or the extension of the public water supply system shall
provide the town with improvement guarantees, in form of one or more of the guarantee
options listed below in an amount that will cover at least l 00% of the cost of completing
the improvements, should the subdivider fail to complete the required improvements or
fail to complete them satisfactorily in accordance with the approved final subdivision
plans.
15
4.2 Procedure- The subdi vider shall file with the Selectboard a proposed
improvement guarantee and the Selectboard shall determine whether the form, amount
and the duration of the improvement guarantee are sufficient. In the event of Selectboard
refuse to approve the proposed improvement guarantee as filed by the subdivider, they
shall so inform the subdivider. In the event the Selectboard approve the proposed
improvement guarantee as proposed by the subdivider, they shall notify the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall not grant final approval until it has received such
notification from the Selectboard. The burden of submitting improvement guarantees in
compliance with this ordinance shall at all times remain with the subdivider. In
determining whether the form, amount and fraction of the improvement guarantees are
sufficient, the Selectboard shall consult with appropriate recommendations relative to the
guarantees as they pertain to the water system. The Selectboard may also seek other
technical or legal advice in making their determination.
4.3 Time Limits
4.3.1 Completion Deadline-All required improvements within a
subdivision shall be completed within 2 years of final subdivision
approval. The improvements guarantee must provide performance
protection to the Town during said 2-year period. The additional 6 month
period is required as protection to the Town in the event the subdivider
fails to complete the required improvements or fails to complete the
required improvements or fails to complete the required improvements or
fails to complete the required improvement or fails to complete them
satisfactorily.
4.3.2 Extension- The Selectboard may extend the completion deadline for
two additional years at one-year increments only where the subdivider
presents substantial reason for doing so. No request for extension shall be
considered after the completion deadline. Before extending the initial
deadline or the initial extension, the Selectboard shall require that the
improvements guarantee by extended in duration to cover the extended
period of time plus an additional 6 month period. Before extending the
initial deadline, or the initial extension, the Selectboard shall review the
form and amount of the improvement guarantee to make certain it remains
adequate.
4.4 Inspection
4.4.1 The Selectboard or their duly appointed representative shall
regularly inspect the construction of the required improvements for
defects. The Superintendents of the Newport Water and Sanitary Districts
may also make such inspections. The subdivider shall cooperate with the
Selectboard or their representative who is carrying out these inspections
and with the Water and Sanitary Districts. Upon completion of the
16
improvements the Selectboard shall notify the Superintendent of the Water
District, in writing, that the improvements are complete and request
information from him about whether the water or sewer system has been
satisfactorily completed according to the approved subdivision plan. If
improvements have not been satisfactorily completed, the Selectboard
shall list the defects.
4.4.2 Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file the
following with the Selectboard:
1. A sworn statement from the subdivider's engineer that all
required improvements are completed in strict compliance with all
applicable construction standards and the approved subdivision
plan; and that the engineer knows of no defects from any cause in
the improvements;
2. A sworn statement from the subdivider that the improvements
are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien; and that the
subdivider knows of no defects from any cause, in the
improvements.
4.5 Release of Guarantee- As soon as the Selectboard or their authorized
representative has inspected the improvements and certified that they are
satisfactorily completed as required in 4.4.1 of this ordinance, and the subdivider
has filed the letters required in Section 4.4.2 of this ordinance with the
Selectboard, the Selectboard shall release the previously required improvement
guarantee to the subdivider.
4.6 Reduction of Guarantee- No improvement guarantee shall be reduced in value
until all required improvements are satisfactorily completed.
4.7 Incomplete or Unsatisfactorily Work- If the Selectboard determine, according
to the procedures laid out in Section 4.4.1 of this ordinance, that the
improvements have not been satisfactorily completed according to the accepted
subdivision plan, within the agreed upon time, they shall infonn the subdivider in
writing of the Town's intent to exercise its rights against the improvement
guarantee. They shall exercise any and all such rights; and shall cause the
incomplete or unsatisfactory work to be completed and to be paid from the
improvement guarantee assets. Any guarantee assets unused in the completion of
the unsatisfactory or incomplete work may be returned to the subdivider at the
discretion of the Town.
4.8 Improvement Guarantee Options
17
4.8.1 Perfonnance Bond- Under this improvement guarantee option, the
subdivider shall obtain a subdivision bond from a surety bonding company
authorized to do business in the State of Maine. The bond shall be payable to the
Town of Newport and shall be in the amount sufficient to cover the full cost of all
required improvements as estimated by a registered Professional Engineer and as
approved by the Selectboard. The duration of the bond shall be for a period of
time acceptable to the Selectboard, but in any case shall be for at least 2 years and
6 months and for not more than 3 years, unless the subdivider is granted an
extension in accordance with Section 4.2 of this ordinance. In the event an
extension is granted, the Selectboard shall require the duration of the subdivision
bond to be extended for at least 6 months from the termination of the new time
limit but not for more than l year from the termination of the new time limit.
4.8.2 Property Escrow- Under this improvement guarantee option, the
subdi vider shall provide real estate as a guarantee. The value of such property
shall be an amount sufficient to cover the fu ll cost of all required improvements as
estimated by a registered Professional Engineer and as approved by the
Selectboard.
If property escrow is proposed fo r the improvement guarantee, the subdivider
must comply with the following requirements:
1. The value of the real estate shall be the value as established by the
Town Assessor and, in making his valuation the Town Assessor shall take into
account the possibility of a decline in value during the tenn of the improvement
guarantee.
2. The subdivider shall, at his expense, provide the Town with a title
opinion from an attorney approved by the Town; said title opinion shall establish
that the subdivider has good and clear title to the premises, free of all liens and
encumbrances. However, if encumbrances do exist on said real estate, the
Selectboard may in their sole discretion accept the proposed real estate as
security, provided that they determine that it is in the Town's best interest to do
so.
3. The subdi vider shall enter into an Agreement with the Town and a
mortgage, which mortgage shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds; said
Agreement and mortgage shall provide that the ownership of the property shall be
transferred to the Town, unless the subdivider satisfactorily completes the
required improvements in accordance with this ordinance and with the approved
final subdivision plan. Said agreement and mortgage shall be in such form and
shall contain such additional provisions as may be required by the Selectboard.
4.8.3 Letter of Credit-Under this improvement guarantee option, the
subdivider shall provide as a guarantee an irrevocable letter of credit from
a bank or other reputable institution satisfactory to the Selectboard. The
18
amount of such letter of credit shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the
full cost of all required improvements as estimated by a registered
Professional Engineer and as approved by the Selectboard. The letter of
credit shall be deposited with the Selectboard and shall certify the
following:
1. That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the
costs estimated for the subdivider by a registered Professional
Engineer and approved by the Selectboard of completing all
required improvements;
2. That, in case of failure on the part of the subdivider to complete
the specified improvements satisfactorily within the required time
period, the creditor shall pay to the Town of Newport immediately,
and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance
the proper completion of these improvements, up to the limit of
credit stated in the letter.
3. That the letter of credit is valid for the period of time required
by the Selectboard. The period of time, not less than 2 years and 6
months from the date of subdivision approval, shall be stated in the
letter. During that time the letter may not be withdrawn or reduced
in amount except with the approval of the Selectboard.
4.8.4 Cash Escrow- Under this improvement guarantee option, the
subdivider shall provide as a guarantee cash held in an account at a bank
or other reputable institution subject to the approval of the Selectboard.
The amount of cash shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the full cost
of all required improvements as estimated by a registered Professional
Engineer and approved by the Selectboard. The subdivider shall enter into
an Agreement with the Town that shall stipulate the terms under which the
Town may accept a cash escrow.
ARTICLE 5-GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
5.1 General Requirements
5.1.1 Conformity with Other Laws and Regulations-All proposed
subdivisions shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the
Town of Newport, as amended, and with the provisions of all pertinent
state and local codes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
5 .1.2 Character of the Land-Land to be subdivided shall be of such
character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to
health, or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. The Planning Board shall
not approve such portions of any proposed subdivision that are located on
19
land (below sea level), within the 100 year frequency flood plain, or on
land which must be filled or drained, or on land created by diverting a
watercourse. In no instance shall the Planning Board approve any part of a
subdivision located on filled wetland.
5.2 Lots
5.2. l Lots to be Buildable-The lot arrangement shall be such that in
constructing a building in compliance with the laws and ordinances of the
Town of Newport and the State of Maine, there will be no foreseeable
difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions. Lots should not
be of such dimension as to later encourage the creation of a second
building lot out of the first.
5.2.2 Side Lines-All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight
lines and radial to curved street lines, unless a variance from this rule will
give a better street or lot plan.
5.2.3 Corner Lots-In general, corner lots should be larger than interior lots
to provide for adequate building setback from each street and to provide a
desirable building site.
5.2.4 Frontage-All lots shall have at least 100 ft. of frontage on public
street; lots with on-site sewage disposal shall have 200 ft. of frontage on a
public street.
5.2.5 Frontage on Private Street-Frontage on private streets shall be
deemed acceptable only if such streets are designed and improved in
accordance with these regulations and the frontage meets the requirements
of Section 5 .2.4 of this ordinance.
5.3 Drainage Improvements
5.3.1 Removal of spring and Surface Water-The subdivider may be
required by the Planning Board to carry away by pipe or open ditch any
spring, surface or storm water that may exist either previous to or as a
result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the
street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements
of appropriate width.
5.3.2 Drainage Structure to Accommodate Potential Development
Upstream-A culvert or other drainage facility shall be large enough to
accommodate potential run-off from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. The facility shall be designed
based on anticipated run-off from a ten-year storm under conditions of
20
total potential development permitted in the watershed by the Land Use
Ordinance.
5.3.3 Responsibility for Down Stream Drainage-If requested by the
Planning Board, the subdivider's engineer shall study the effect of the
proposed subdivision on the existing down-stream drainage facilities
outside the area of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the
additional run-off incident to the development of the subdivision will
overload an existing down-stream drainage facility during a stonn with
recurrence interval of five years, the Planning Board shall notify the
Selectboard of such potential conditions. In such case the Planning Board
shall not approve the subdivision until provision has been made for the
improvement of said condition.
5.3.4 The Planning Board shall require that easements for drainage be
turned over to the town.
5.3.5 Phosphorous Control-The subdivider shall incorporate whatever
storm water nmoff controls or treatment measures as necessary to prevent
additional phosphorous loading to Sebasticook Lake.
5.4 Open Space and Recreation Land
5.4.1 Requirement- The Planning Board may require that up to 5% of the
land area of a subdivision with more than 20 acres or 20 lots be set aside
for open space or recreation. The actual amount of land and its location
shall be satisfactory to the Planning Board. In making decisions about land
set aside, the Planning Board shall be guided by the following standards:
1. Any land to be set aside as a requirement of this ordinance shall
be reasonably adaptable for use for active plan and recreation
purposes unless the Planning Board agrees to an open space area
designed primarily for the protection of the natural environment.
The Planning Board may only agree to the designation of such
natural area if it determines that the active play and recreation
needs of the residents of the subdivision will be reasonably met by
other existing facilities. Active play and recreation areas shall be
located so as to be convenient to the people to be served. Factors
used in evaluating the adequacy of proposed park and recreation
areas shall include size and shape, topography, geology, tree cover,
access, location and projected use.
2. In no case shall a subdivider be required to set aside more than
5% of the land area of a subdivision for open space or recreation
purposes without financial compensation.
21
In deciding whether to require land set aside, the Planning Board
shall be guided by the following considerations:
a. Whether the subdivision is already served by adequate
recreational opportunity.
b. Whether the town's adopted Comprehensive Plan calls for a
park to be located in the area of the subdivision.
c. Whether adjacent to the subdivision is a community park or
open space, which would be benefited by the addition of land in
the subdivision.
5.4.2 Provision for Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space or
Recreation Land-If land is set aside under the provisions of 5.4.1 of this
ordinance, the subdivider shall make provisions for the permanent
ownership, protection and maintenance of such land. The Planning Board
shall not approve such provision or the subdivision until it is satisfied that
the land will be protected as open space in the future and that adequate
provision has been made for its ownership and maintenance. The
subdivider shall either:
1. Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
land; or
2. Dedicate such land and property or facilities to public use if the
town or another public agency had indicated it will accept such
dedication; or
3. Provide for or establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space and
property. Such organization shall be either a non-profit
homeowner's association or a community open space trust is
formed, it shall be governed according to the following
regulations:
a. The organization shall be organized by the subdivider and
operating, with financial support by the subdivider, if
necessary, before the sale of any lots within the development.
b. Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers
of lots therein and their successors.
c. The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of
common open space or recreation land. It shall also be responsible
for insurance and taxes on same.
22
d. The members of the organization shall share equitably the cost
of maintaining and developing common open space and recreation
land in accordance with procedures established by them.
e. The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space and
recreation.
5. 5 Street Standards
5.5.1 Layout of Streets-All streets in a subdivision shall be planned so as
to meet the following standards:
1. The proposed streets shall conform, as far as practical, to the
adopted Comprehensive Plan or policy statement of the Town of
Newport.
2. All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so as to provide
safe vehicular travel and, in minor streets, shall be designed so as
to discourage movement of through traffic.
3. The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of arterial and collector streets into adjoining
. unsubdivided land unless topographic or other factors make
continuance impracticable or undesirable. Where a subdivision is
served by a minor street, the Planning Board may require that a
right-of-way or the minor street be projected to adjacent
unsubdivided land when the Board finds that such a projected
street would be in keeping with the land use goals for the area and
with sound planning practice.
4. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
5.lntersections of streets shall be at angles as close to (90) ninety
degrees as possible. In no case shall two street intersect at an angle
of less than (60) sixty degrees.
6. A distance of at least 200 feet shall be maintained between
centerlines of offset intersecting streets.
7. Whenever possible, subdivisions containing fifteen lots or more
shall have at least two street connections with existing public exits,
or streets on an approved Subdivision Plan.
23
Items
8. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road (below
standards set herein) or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates
plans for realignment or widening of a road that would require land
in the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to show areas
for widening or realigning such roads on the preliminary and the
final plan, marked "Reserved for road alignment (or widening)
purposes''. Land reserved for such purposes or for satisfying
setback or yard or area requirements in other land use control
ordinances if such exists.
9. The Planning Board shall determine whether a street shall be
designed and constructed as a collector or minor street.
5.5.2 Design and Construction Standards- All streets in a subdivision
shall be designed and constructed to meet the following standards for
streets according to their classification.
Mandatory design and construction standards for streets: (Note: The
asterisked(*) items may be reduced only if the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection determines that a narrower right-of-way and/or
pavement width would be justified for lower phosphorous loading to
Sebasticook Lake.
Design and Construction Standards for Streets
Collector Minor
1. Minimum Right-of-way width *66' *50'
2. Minimum Pavement Travel surface
3. Minimum Grade
4. Maximum Grade
5. Maximum Grade at intersection: 3% within
6. Minimum centerline radii on curves
7. Minimum tangent length between reserve curves
8. Gravel sub-base
*24'
0.5%
8%
75'
(of intersection)
200'
200 '
18"
*20'
1.0%
8%
50'
(of intersection)
200'
200'
18"
8.1 MDOT Specification 703.06 (b) Type D, maximum stone size of 6"
9. Gravel base 4" 4"
24
9.1 MDOT Specification 703.06 (a) Type A.
10. Road cross slope/foot Yi -W' Y2-1'1"
11. Minimum shoulder width on each 3' 3'
side of road travel surface.
12. Deadend
1. Radii of tum around 66' 66'
at enclosed end of
Right-of-Way boundary
2. Outside pavement radius 47' 47'
3. Minimum Width of Pavement 30' 30'
13. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original relief of the land.
14. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such length and radius
as will provide clear visibility for a distance of 200'.
15. Side slopes shall not be steeper than 3 feet horizontal and 1 foot vertical, graded,
loamed ( 4 inches compacted) and seeded. If the side slope extends outside the required
right-of-way, the subdivider shall expand the right-of-way to include the entire side slope
area.
16. All streets shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to provide for the
removal of storm water to prevent flooding on the pavement and erosion of adjacent
surfaces. Driveway culverts shall be adequate to pass the design flow of the contiguous
ditches, and shall be a minimum of 12-inch diameter.
17. In construction of roads, the paved area, sidewalk and shoulder shall be cleared of all
stumps, roots, brush, perishable material and all trees not intended for preservation. All
loam, loamy material, clay, and other yielding material shall be removed from the
roadway to at least subgrade depth, or as directed by the Selectboard.
18. The roadway area shall be brought to the grade shown on the plan, profile and crosssection.
All gravel shall meet the specifications for Aggregate Subbase Courses as
contained in the current edition of the Standard Specification for Highways and Bridges
of the State of Maine Department of Transportation. The gravel base shall be brought to
within four inches ( 4") of the finish and the top four inches shall be selected materials
suitable for finish grade on gravel roads. All gravel shall be thoroughly compacted and
rolled and the final surface left true to estimated lines and grades.
25
18-A. After the final gravel has been thoroughly rolled, the surface of the roadway shall
be covered with bituminous pavement, to a minimum depth specified by the Planning
Board, consistent with MDOT standards, but in no event less than three inches (3"). This
pavement shall cover the entire width of the Travel Surface, from road shoulder or
esplanade to road shoulder or esplanade.
Items
19. Number of Sidewalks
20. Sidewalks
1. Minimum width
2. Gravel Base Course
3. Surface Bituminous
Collector
5'
6"
2"
Minor
4'
6"
2"
21. Sidewalks: Planning Board may waive the requirements for sidewalks except in
those subdivisions where the Planning Board has made a determination that the volume
of vehicular traffic and or speed limits present a hazard to pedestrians or that the density
of multi-unit housing would create pedestrian traffic greater than what would be
reasonable expected from single family housing on individual lots.
22. The base and sub-base shall be thoroughly machine compacted and fine graded to
cross slop specifications from centerline to outer edge of shoulders.
23. The Planning Board may require curbing of roads.
24. Minimum curb radii at Intersections 20'
5.5.3 Utilities in Streets-The Planning Board shall, wherever possible, require that
underground utilities be placed in the street right-of-way between the paved
roadway and the street line to simplify location and repair of lines when they
require attention. The subdivider shall install underground service connections to
the property line of each lot within the subdivision for such required utilities
before the street is paved.
5.5.4 Street names
1. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from existing
street names so as not to be confused in sound or spelling.
2. If proposed streets are extensions of existing streets they shall carry the
same name.
3. Generally no street should change direction by more than ninety (90)
degrees without a change in street name.
26
4. In general, streets shall have names, not numbers or letters.
5.6 Utilities
5.6. l If public water and/or sewer are proposed, the system shall be designed so
as to accommodate any development that can reasonably be expected to tie into
the system. In determining the amount of reasonably expected development, the
Planning Board shall consider existing land use, shoreland zoning, the character
of the land, topography, and existing constraints to development (such as boggy
areas). The carrying capacity of the land of existing municipal services, and the
Town's comprehensive plan or sewer and water plan.
5.6.2 The subdivider shall install any new public utility system at his own
expense, according to the approved subdivision plan. If either the public sewer or
water system follows a course that is not co-linear with the road network, the
Planning Board shall require that the subdivider provide the Newport Sanitary
District or the Newport Water District with utility easement before granting final
approval.
5.6.3 If Individual wells are proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Board may
require that the subdivider's engineer certify that sufficient water is available for
the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision.
5.6.4 If subsurface sewage disposal is proposed, the Planning Board shall require
that the subdivider provide proof that a subsurface sewage disposal system that is
in conformance with the Maine State Plumbing Code can be installed on every
lot.
5.7 Off-Site Improvements-Where necessary to serve the needs of the proposed
subdivision and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community, the
Planning Board may require that off-site improvements of Newport's Sewer or Water
System be completed at the subdivider expense. Existing unpaved streets shall, whenever
necessary, reasonable, and practical, be improved to the standards required by this
ordinance.
ARTICLE 6-WAIVER AND MODIFICATION OF THESE REGULATIONS
6.1 Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary, and unnecessary hardships may
result from strict compliance with this ordinance; or where there are special
circumstances of a particular plan it may waive any of this ordinance provided that such
waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the purpose of this ordinance, the
Comprehensive Plan, the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, or any other ordinance.
6.2 In granting any waiver, the Planning Board shall require such conditions as will in its
judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so waived.
27
ARTICLE 7- REPEAL OF PREVIOUS SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE, VALIDITY,
EFFECTIVE DATE, CONFLICT OR ORDINANCES AND FILING
7.1 The Town of Newport Subdivision Ordinance, adopted on June 9, 1975 at Town
Meeting is hereby repealed.
7.2 Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such section shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance,
and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
7.3 The effective date of this ordinance is March 5, 1983.
7.4 Except as provided in Section 7 .1 of this ordinance, this ordinance shall not repeal,
annul, or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other rule,
regulation, by-law, permit, or provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a higher
standard for the protection and promotion of health and safety, the provisions of this
ordinance shall prevail.
ARTICLE 8-AMENDMENTS
This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the Town at Town Meeting.
ARTICLE 9-APPEALS
An appeal may be taken, within 30 days from the Planning Board's decision of the Final
Plan, by any party to Superior Court in accordance with Rule 808 of the Rules and Civil
Procedure.
ARTICLE 10- DEFINITIONS
10.1 Words and tenns not defined in Section 10.2 shall have their customary dictionary
meanings.
l 0.2 The following words and terms for the purpose of this ordinance, shall be designed
as follows:
10.2.l Subdivision-is the division of a tract or parcel ofland into 3 or
more lots within any five-year (5-year) period, where accomplished by
1. Sale or lease of land;
2. Offering to sell or lease land;
3. Construction, sale or lease of principal buildings; or
4. Offering to construct, sell or lease principal buildings.
28
In determining whether a tract or parcel ofland is divided into
three or more lots, the first dividing of such tract or parcel, unless
otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the first 2
lots, by whomever accomplished, unless otherwise exempted
herein, shall be considered to create a third lot.
Exemptions-In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is
divided into three or more lots, the following shall not be
considered as lots for the purpose of this ordinance.
1. One lot which the subdivider has used for his principal residence
for a period of at least 5 years immediately prior to the creation of
a subdivision;
2. Any lot containing 40 or more acres;
3. Any lot conveyed as a gift to a person related to the subdivider
by blood, marriage or adoption;
4. Any lot created by devise, condemnation or order of court;
5. Any lot transferred to the owner of land abutting thereon
A mobile home park shall be considered to be a subdivision.
10.2.2 Tract or Parcel of Land-All contiguous land in the same ownership,
provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road
shall be considered each a separate tract of land unless such road was
established by the owner of land on both sides thereof.
10.2.3 Minor Subdivision-A subdivision with less than (6) lots which does
not involve the construction or reconstruction of a street and/or the
extension of public sewer and water lines and/or the construction of a
storm drainage system.
10.2.4 Major Subdivision-A subdivision which is not a minor subdivision.
10.2.5 Street-A street means and includes such ways as alleys, avenues,
boulevards, highways, roads, streets, and other rights-of-way intended for
use of motorized vehicles.
10.2.6 Public Street-Any street which has been officially accepted by the
Town of Newport as a public way.
29
10.2.7 Minor Street-A street which serves primarily as an access to
abutting properties.
August 28, 2013
"Attest, a true copy of an ordinance entitled Town of Newport Subdivision Ordinance, as
certified to me by the municipal officers of the Town of Newport, Maine, and adopted by
the Town meeting on the 23r day of March, 20 13.
Signature: ~.,tJ.d.. U1 .,Je£
Paula A. Scott, Municipal Clerk
Revised May 23, 2013, Special Town Meeting
30






































