1
Chapter 1
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 1. How Code designated and cited.
The provisions embraced in this and following chapters and sections shall constitute and
be designated the “Code of Ordinances for Town of Skowhegan, Maine” and may be so cited.
Sec. 2. Position of administrative assistant established; appointment.
There is hereby established the position of administrative assistant to the Board of
Selectmen to be appointed annually by the board. (Town Meeting, 1-31-70. Art.4, § 1)
Sec. 3. Board of Selectmen to determine powers, duties, wages, conditions of employment
of administrative assistant.
The powers, duties, wages, hours and other conditions of employment of the
administrative assistant shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen. (Town Meeting, 1-31-
70, Art. 4, §2)
Sec. 4. Position of Town Manager established.
Voted to adopt the “town manager plan” form of government set forth in M.R.S.A. Title
30, Section 2311 et.seq. to be effective at the March 7, 1989 Annual Town Meeting.
(Town Meeting, 3/5/88. Article 5.)
ANNUAL TOWN MEETING - MARCH 7, 1981
Art. 44 “No Selectmen shall hold any other town office or town employment except those
specifically authorized by law during the term for which he was elected and no employee
of the town shall be eligible to serve on the Board of Selectmen.”
2
Chapter 2
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Adopted July 16, 1973
Amended March 8, 1999
Section I. In General
Section II. Dogs
SECTION I. IN GENERAL
1. Prohibited in built-up areas.
A. No livestock, fowl, or domestic animals shall be kept within the compact or builtup
area of the Town in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
B. On complaint, a police officer may give notice to any owner, keeper, or person so
keeping the livestock, fowl, or domestic animal to abate the nuisance within ten
(10) days.
C. Any violation of this article after ten days by the owner or person keeping such
livestock, fowl, or domestic animals shall be subject to a civil forfeiture in an
amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day the violation
continues constitutes a separate offense.
D. For purposes of this section, domestic animal does not include either dogs or cats.
SECTION II. DOGS
1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise.
Dog shall mean – An animal, wholly or in part, of the species “canis familaris”.
Wolf hybrid means any canine regardless of generation that has resulted from the
interbreeding of a dog and wolf.
Owner shall mean - Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation,
owning, keeping, harboring or in possession of, or having the control of a dog. “Owner”
shall also be intended to mean and to include the parent or parents or guardian of a minor
who owns, keeps or has in his possession a dog. (Town Meeting, 3-13-71, §1)
3
2. Barking, howling, yelping dogs.
A. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog, which by loud, frequent, or
habitual barking, howling or yelping shall disturb the peace of any person. (Town
Meeting, 3-13-71, §5)
B. Any keeper, holder or owner of a barking, howling or yelping dog
shall be subject to a civil forfeiture in an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each separate violation.
3. Removal and disposal of dog excrement.
A. No person shall cause or permit any dog excrement to be cast or deposited
by the animal upon the premises of any public park, beach, sidewalk, or other
recreational property owned by the Town or upon any property owned by another
individual or business entity.
B. This Section shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped person who,
by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the
requirements of this article.
C. Failing to immediately remove and lawfully dispose of any dog excrement left
upon any public park, beach, sidewalk, or other recreational property owned by
the Town, or upon property owned by another individual or business entity is a
civil violation for which a forfeiture not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
may be adjudged for each offense.
D. This Section shall be enforced by the Animal Control Officer or Skowhegan
Police Department.
301
Chapter 22
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
AN ORDINANCE TO PROHIBIT JUMPING, DIVING, OR SWIMMING FROM SEVERAL
BRIDGES IN THE TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN, PROVIDING PENALTIES THEREOF
Approved Annual Town Meeting, March 9, 1999
ARTICLE I
SECTION 1 Title
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the “Ordinance Prohibiting Jumping,
Diving, or Swimming from Several Bridges in the Town of Skowhegan, Providing Penalties
Thereof” and shall be referred to herein as the “Ordinance”.
SECTION 2 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of
Skowhegan by prohibiting the jumping, diving, swimming or other dangerous acts from several
bridges in the Town where shallow water, hidden obstruction, improper pedestrian use, and / or
boat and vehicle traffic may endanger the safety of the person crossing, standing, jumping,
diving, or swimming from the bridges or the safety of motorist or boaters.
ARTICLE II
SECTION 1 Restrictions
No person shall be permitted to jump, dive, or swim from any of the bridges listed in Article 3
section 1of this Ordinance.
No person shall be permitted to traverse, stand or remain on any of the bridges listed in Article 2
section 1 of this Ordinance in a manner which endangers their health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 2 Penalties
Any person who violates any section of this Ordinance commits a civil violation for which a
forfeiture not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) may be adjudged.
SECTION 3 Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department.
302
ARTICLE III
SECTION 1 Schedule of Bridges
Bloomfield Bridge - Spanning a portion of the Kennebec River between the River View parking
lot and Mt. Pleasant Ave.
Half-Moon Bridge - Spanning the Wesserunsett Stream on the Parkman Hill Road.
North Channel Bridge - Spanning a portion of the Kennebec River on Island Ave.
South Channel Bridge - Spanning a portion of the Kennebec River on Island Ave.
Swinging Bridge - Spanning a portion of the Kennebec River between Alder Street and Weston
Street.
Wesserunsett Bridge - Spanning the Wesserunsett Stream on the Canaan Road.
SKOWHEGAN BUILDING SAFETY ORDINANCE
Adopted: March 10, 1997, Annual Town Meeting
Amended March 9, 1998
Amended March 8, 1999
Amended March 8, 2004
Amended Annual Town Meeting June 11, 2018
(1) PURPOSE: The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health and safety of the
citizens of Skowhegan, and to present in a unified format those State statutes
effecting building safety that the citizens are responsible for complying with. By
combining varied State laws under one local ordinance, the citizens will have a
single document rather than many separate and unconnected statutes.
(2) AUTHORITY: This ordinance is authorized in accordance with Title 30-A MRSA
section 3001. Further authority is derived from Title 25 section 2351.
(3) APPLICABILITY: This ordinance is applicable to all existing and new structures,
both principal and accessory, that are constructed or placed for human habitation or
occupancy.
(4) EFFECTIVE DATE: This ordinance is effective when approved by the voters of the
Town of Skowhegan.
(5) AVAILABILITY: Copies of this ordinance are available free of charge at the
municipal building.
(6) SEVERABILITY: Should any part of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, that decision will not invalidate any other provisions of this ordinance.
(7) CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES: Whenever a provision of this ordinance
conflicts with, or is inconsistent with, the provisions of this or any other ordinance,
the more restrictive provision shall control.
(8) AMENDMENTS: This ordinance may be amended by vote of the legislative body.
Amendments may be proposed by the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO), the Fire
Chief, the Selectmen, or by citizen petition.
(9) NON-CONFORMANCE:
A. Purpose: This section allows the continued use of legal non-conforming
structures that existed prior to the enactment of this ordinance and that are
determined not to be a hazard.
Building Safety Ordinance June 11, 2018
2
B. General: A structure is considered non-conforming if it was
erected, or placed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
without an inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Fire
Chief and for which a Certificate of Occupancy has not been
issued.
C. Non-conforming Structures: Any non-conforming structure can be
used, and occupied, providing it meets, to the greatest extent
possible, the standards of this Ordinance. Non-conforming
structures may be expanded provided that the expansion does not
further increase the non-conformity of the structure. If a nonconforming
structure is destroyed by fire, flood, or other causes it
may be rebuilt provided that the new structure meets the provision
of this ordinance to the greatest extent possible; and provided that
any structure in the special flood hazard area that is destroyed by
50% or greater is elevated at least one foot above the Base Flood
Elevation as is required by the Floodplain Management Ordinance.
D. Non-Conforming Lots: Any non-conforming lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and not
located in the Shoreland Zone, may be used and built upon
provided that all provisions of this ordinance except set-back can
be met.
(10) STANDARDS: All structures constructed, placed, or expanded after the
effective date of this ordinance, shall meet those chapters of the National
Fire Protection Association adopted by the Department of Public Safety,
State Fire Marshall’s Office; the Maine Uniform Plumbing Code; National
Electrical Code; the Skowhegan Flood Plain Management Ordinance; and
the most recent edition of the International Building Codes that has been
adopted by the State of Maine. The structure shall also comply with the
following:
A. Minimum Lot Size: All lots not in the Shoreland Zone (SLZ) and
not served by the Town sewer system, shall be a minimum of
20,000 sq. ft.
In the Shoreland Zone the following minimum lot sizes shall apply:
(1) Served by Town Sewer
(a) Residential 10,000 sq.ft.
(b) Recreational Facilities 40,000 sq.ft.
(c)All others 20,000 sq.ft.
Building Safety Ordinance June 11, 2018
3
(2) Not served by Town Sewer
(a) Residential 40,000 sq.ft.
(b) Recreational Facilities 40,000 sq.ft.
(c)All others 60,000 sq.ft.
B. Set-backs: All new principal and accessory structures, and
expansions of existing structures that do not have common walls,
or firewalls and sprinklers, must be set back a minimum of five feet
from side and rear property lines and from the front line a distance
to be determined by the Road Commissioner, but not less than five
feet.
In the Shoreland Zone all structures must be set back at least 75
feet from the normal high-water mark of rivers and streams and 100
feet from lakes and ponds and, depending on the SLZ district, may
be required to be set back 250 feet. (Because of the complexity of
the setback requirements in the SLZ, anyone contemplating work
within 250 feet of any water body [brook, river, pond, lake, or
wetland] shall contact the Code Enforcement Officer for a specific
setback determination.)
The physical location of the property lines is the responsibility of the
property owner or their agent.
C. Buildings with common walls – Any new principal or accessory
structure that has a common wall with a structure on an adjacent lot
may be constructed without a setback from the property line
provided that the building is a sprinkled structure and/or is fireresistant
construction as determined by the International Building
Codes. All other setbacks must be maintained except for the
common wall(s).
D. Buildings with Fire Walls – Any new principal or accessory
structure, or expansion of an existing structure that has a Fire Wall
as defined in the most recent edition of the State of Maine adopted
International Building Code and is a sprinkled structure may be
constructed without a setback from the rear or side property lines
provided that the construction and the building plans are approved
in writing by the Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief prior to
the start of construction.
Building Safety Ordinance June 11, 2018
4
E. Any building, except a single family residential structure, that has
early detection devices (fire alarms and/or sprinklers) shall have an
emergency access box, approved by the Fire Chief and installed
per manufacturer’s instructions.
(11) ADMINISTRATION:
A. Administering Agents: The following individuals shall be responsible
for the administration of this ordinance:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)
(2) The Fire Chief
B. Notification Required: Anyone constructing, or placing, a new
principal or accessory structure must notify the CEO on forms
provided by the Town.
C. Procedure for Conducting Inspections: The CEO shall be contacted
to schedule any required inspections.
D. Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy: Upon successful completion
of the inspection, the CEO shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy
for the structure inspected.
If an inspection identifies defects or problems, a Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued until the problems or deficiencies
are corrected. In addition, for those ordinances that require legal
action to be taken, such action will commence if the problems or
deficiencies are not corrected within the time-frame established by
this ordinance or the ordinance being enforced, whichever is
shorter.
E. Appeals: The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirements,
decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or Fire Chief on the enforcement or
administration of this ordinance. No administrative appeal shall
be considered a “de novo” action.
2. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal provided
that said variances will protect to the greatest extent possible
the health and safety of the citizens of Skowhegan.
Building Safety Ordinance June 11, 2018
5
(12) ENFORCEMENT:
The CEO will enforce the provisions of this ordinance. When the
CEO finds that this ordinance is being violated, the following
procedure will be used:
(1) An oral notification will be given to the violator, with the
action necessary to correct the problem. The violator will be
given a time frame to complete the correction.
(2) If a correction of the violation does not take place within the
time limit specified by the oral notification, the CEO will notify
the violator in writing. This written notification will specify what
action must be taken to correct the violation.
(3) If the violation is not corrected after the second notification,
the CEO shall inform the Selectmen. The Selectmen are
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violators and
the imposition of fines that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this ordinance in the name of the
municipality.
The Selectmen can authorize the CEO to prepare an
administrative consent agreement for the Town to enter into,
with the violator, for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
ordinance, and recovering fines without court action. Such
agreements shall not allow an illegal structure to continue
unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure was constructed as a direct result of erroneous advice
given by an authorized municipal official and there is no
evidence that the violator acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure will result in a threat or hazard to public
health and safety.
(13) DEFINITIONS: Words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their
customary dictionary meanings unless specifically defined in the individual
standards identified in Section 10.
12
Chapter 4
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
CATV Ordinance
(Adopted: Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 9/25/90)
The Town of Skowhegan, acting by and through its municipal officers, hereby ordains the
following Cable Television Ordinance.
SECTION 1. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the Town regulations and use of the
community antenna television system, including its construction, operation and maintenance in,
along, upon, across, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places, now laid
out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the Town of Skowhegan,
including poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, conductors, and fixtures
necessary for the maintenance and operation in the Town of Skowhegan, of the community
antenna television system, and to provide conditions accompanying the grant of franchise; and
providing the Town regulations of CATV operation.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
A. “C.A.T.V.” shall mean any community antenna television system or facility that, in whole
or in part, receives directly or indirectly, over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies
signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or
originates its own signal or signals produced through any of its community access channels
and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay
for such services, but such terms shall not include any such facility that serves only residents
of one or more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management.
B. “Cable Television Company” shall mean any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling, operation, managing or leasing a CATV system within the Town of
Skowhegan, sometimes referred to as “the company”.
C. “Town” shall mean the Town of Skowhegan, organized and existing under the laws of the
State of Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
SECTION 3. FRANCHISE REQUIRED
No person, firm or corporation shall install, maintain or operate within the Town or any of its
public ways or other public areas, equipment or facilities for the operation of a CATV system
unless a franchise authorizing the use of said public ways or areas has first been obtained
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and unless said franchise is in full force and effect.
13
SECTION 4. FRANCHISE CONTRACT
A. The municipal officers of the Town may contract on such terms, conditions and fees
as they deem in the best interest of the Town and its residents with one or more cable
television companies for the operation of CATV system within the Town, including the
granting of a franchise or franchises for the operation thereof for a period not to exceed
ten (10) years, and said franchise shall contain the following provisions:
(1) The area or areas to be served;
(2) A line extension policy;
(3) A provision for renewal, the term of which shall not exceed ten (10) years;
(4) Procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints by the cable television
company in accordance with 30S M.R.S.A. §3010; and
(5) Such other terms and conditions which are in the best interest of the Town.
B. Applications for a franchise shall pay a non-refundable filing fee to the Town for Two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) to defray the cost of the public notice and other
advertising expenses relating to such application. The application shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and shall contain such information as the Town may require, including, but
not limited to, a general description of the applicant’s proposed operation, a schedule of
proposed charges, sufficient financial information to determine the applicant’s financial
capacity, and estimated ten-year financial projection of its proposed system, its proposed
annual Town franchise fee, if any, or the basis for same, and a statement detailing the
prior operational experience of the applicant in both CATV and microwave service,
including that of its officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed
operation.
C. Any franchise contract may be revoked by the municipal officers for good and
sufficient cause, after due notice to the company and a public hearing thereon, with the
right to appeal to the Superior Court under Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
SECTION 5. PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD
A. Before issuance of a request for proposals, the Town shall hold a public hearing with
at least seven (7) days advance notice for the purpose of determining any special local
needs or interests regarding cable television.
14
B. Any proposal submitted by a prospective CATV franchise shall be filed in triplicate
with the Town Clerk’s office, shall be deemed a public record, shall be available for a
period of not less than thirty (30) days prior to the Town’s taking any formal action
thereon, and public notice of the filing shall be given.
C. Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise contract, the municipal officers
shall review the applicant’s character, financial and technical qualifications and the
adequacy and feasibility of its qualification to operate a CATV system within the Town,
and shall conduct a public hearing thereon, with at least seven (7) days advertised notice
prior to said public hearing.
SECTION 6. FINANCIAL GUARANTEE & INSURANCE COVERAGE
Upon the executive of any such franchise contract the cable television company shall file
a financial guarantee in an amount not less than 25,000 conditioned upon the faithful
performance of said contracts and full compliance with any laws, ordinances, regulations
governing said franchise, including cost of dismantling the system. Cable Television
Company shall show evidence of such public liability, copyright infringement and other
insurance coverage as the municipal officers may require. When the cable television
company has completed its proposed system as set forth in its proposal, and in
compliance with its franchise agreement, the municipal officers may permit the company
to reduce said guarantee to an amount sufficient to cover cost of dismantling the system.
The financial guarantee options are:
A. performance bond from a surety bonding company authorizing to do business in the
State of Maine which bond shall be payable to the Town.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution satisfactory to
the municipal officers and in a form satisfactory to them, which letter of credit shall
certify the following:
(1) That the issuer does guarantee funds in a specified amount and for a specified
duration; and
(2) That, in case of failure on the part of the company to satisfactorily perform
said contract within the required time period, the issuer shall pay to the Town
immediately, without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the
proper completion of dismantling of the system, up to the credit limit stated in the
letter.
15
C. Evidence that cash has been deposited in an escrow account at a bank or other
reputable institution acceptable to the municipal officers, and the escrow agreement
acceptable to the municipal officers. The agreement shall provide that in case of
failure on the part of the company to satisfactorily perform said contract within the
required time period, the escrow agent shall pay to the Town immediately, and
without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the proper completion
or dismantling of the system, up to the amount of the escrow account.
SECTION 7.
To the extent, if any, that this ordinance conflicts with a franchise agreement, which is in
effect as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance, the franchise agreement, including
renewal provisions contained therein, shall control.
32
Chapter 6
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDINANCE
Adopted 3/10/97
Annual Town Meeting
SECTION 1: Establishment:
Pursuant to Article VIII Part 2 Section 1 of the Maine Constitution and 30-A
MRSA Section 3001, the Town of Skowhegan hereby establishes the Office of Code
Enforcement, and creates the positions of Code Enforcement Officer and Deputy Code
Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 2: Appointment:
2.01 The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen to serve until a successor is appointed and qualified.
2.02 The Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen, to serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Deputy
Code Enforcement Officer shall assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
performance of their duties and in the event of the absence of the Code
Enforcement Officer, the Deputy is authorized to act in their behalf.
SECTION 3: Duties:
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
3.01 Perform the duties of Building Inspector as required by Town Ordinances
and the laws of the State of Maine.
3.02 Perform the duties of Plumbing Inspector as required by Town Ordinances
and the laws of the State of Maine.
3.03 Enforce the Skowhegan Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
3.04 Enforce the Skowhegan Subdivision Ordinance.
3.05 Enforce the Skowhegan Floodplain Management Ordinance
3.06 Enforce the Skowhegan Site Plan Review Ordinance.
3.07 Enforce the Skowhegan Sewerage Ordinance.
3.08 Enforce the junkyard laws of the State of Maine.
3.09 Provide staff support to the Zoning Board of Appeals in any matter not
directly involving the Office.
3.10 Perform all such duties as required by local ordinance and the order of the
Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 4: Effective Date:
This ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the legislative body of
the Town of Skowhegan.
33
SECTION 5: Amendments:
This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the Legislative Body.
Amendments may be initiated by the Board of Selectmen or on petition of 10 percent of the
number of voters who voted in the last Gubernatorial Election.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN, MAINE
Controlled Substance Facilities Ordinance
Adopted June 13, 2016
The Skowhegan Board of Selectmen devise this Public Safety Ordinance, and ordain that:
1) This Ordinance regulates facilities involved in the production and/or distribution of
controlled substances including but not limited to medical marijuana dispensaries and
opioid treatment centers (methadone clinics). For the purpose of this Ordinance,
“facility” means the location of an operation to dispense methadone or other controlled
substances, or to grow or dispense marijuana. Individual Registered Patients, licensed
hospitals and pharmacies, and Registered Primary Caregivers under DHHS supervision
are not governed by this ordinance.
2) All operations in Skowhegan under the Statute and the DHHS Rules must be performed
in such a way as to protect the required confidentiality of identity of applicants, patients,
caregivers, and physicians.
3) Locations Restricted: A registered facility shall only be located on US Route 201 or US
Route 2 east of ME Route 150, or Northgate Industrial Park or Southgate Industrial Park.
A facility may not locate within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of any preexisting
public or private school, or any safe zone as designated by the Town of
Skowhegan in accordance with state law, 30-A MRSA, section 3253. (Current safe zones
are: Bucky Quinn Ball Field on South Factory Street, Pat Quinn Ball Field on East Maple Street,
Memorial Field on East Maple Street, Carl Wright Ball Fields at the Community Center, the
Community Center.)
4) No registered facility governed by this ordinance may be sited in the Shoreland Zone, or
in a Floodplain or Wetland or any other Ordinance required by the Town of Skowhegan.
5) A marijuana growing facility is considered primarily a nursery for plants and must be
fenced, completely enclosed, and secured by locks, lights, motion detection devices, and
such other security systems as may be required by the DHHS. This growing facility may
NOT be or contain an open field or garden. It may be sited with the dispensary or may be
on a different lot.
6) All facilities will be designed in such a way as to minimize the impact on neighboring
properties and public services. At a minimum, the facility shall conform to the design
provisions of the following sections of the Skowhegan Site Plan Review Ordinance
(2008, or as amended):
a. Section 3.A.3 (public safety)
b. Section 3.A.5 (waste disposal and storage)
c. Section 3.B (vehicle access and parking)
d. Section 3.C.1 (exterior lighting), and
e. Section 3.C.3 (buffering)
The Skowhegan Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for conducting such
reviews and inspections as are necessary to assure compliance with all other codes and
ordinances.
7) For confidentiality and public safety reasons, no interior layout plans or details of
security features for any facility will be required to be submitted, except the minimum
needed for a building permit..
8) No application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be approved for a facility unless it has
been issued a valid registration certificate by the State pursuant to 22 M.S.S.A. § 2428(2)
and meets all other State and local laws and regulations.
9) Because the products in medical marijuana have proliferated to include extracts, pills,
sprays, and topical products (ointments, salves, and lotions) due to differing needs of
patients, different prescriptions by physicians, and increasing knowledge of various
effects of the complex chemistry of the several cannabis species and strains, multiple
facilities may share in the DHHS approved process of manufacturing, preparing, and
packaging the usable marijuana.
10) Municipal Officers, Town Officials, and Citizens are referred to the State Statute and to
the DHHS Rules, as amended.
11) Additional sections of this ordinance may be added if additional controlled substances are
legislated for local or regional distribution under DHHS or State-administered control.
12) Severability: The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance
are severable, and if any of them shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or
unenforceable, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Ordinance.
13) This Ordinance and subsequent amendments take effect on the date of enactment by
Town Meeting vote.
303
Chapter 23
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
CURFEW ORDINANCE
Adopted Annual Town Meeting, March 8, 1999
WHEREAS, there is a need for governing the conduct of minors in the Town of Skowhegan for
the purpose of alleviating the problem of juvenile delinquency.
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to reduce noise and
disturbances at the late hours in the Town of Skowhegan.
NOW, THEREFORE, the Town of Skowhegan hereby ordains that nay existing curfew
ordinances be repealed and replaced with the following new ordinance.
SECTION 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Curfew Ordinance of the Town of
Skowhegan, Maine.
SECTION 2. Purpose
The purpose of the Ordinance is to aid in the control of juvenile delinquency in the Town of
Skowhegan.
SECTION 3. Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of the usage clearly indicates another
meaning:
“Emergency” shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstance or the resulting state that
calls for immediate action. The term shall include, but not be limited to, fire, natural disaster,
vehicular accident, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset.
“Guardian” shall mean the person(s) or public or private agency whom, pursuant to a court
order, or a voluntary placement or appointment by the minor’s parent(s), is the guardian of the
person that is the minor.
“Minor” shall mean any person who has not attained the age of eighteen.
“Parent” shall mean the natural mother or father, adoptive mother or father, or stepmother or
stepfather of a minor.
304
“Public Place” means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited
to, streets, highways, public parks and the common areas of schools, hospitals, houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
SECTION 4. Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or knowingly remain in or upon any
public place within the Town of Skowhegan between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 5:00 a.m.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or knowingly remain in or upon any public
place while in a motor vehicle, regardless of whether or not it is stopped, parked or
mobile, within the Town of Skowhegan between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
5:00a.m.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to
knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in
Section 4 (a) of this Ordinance.
(d) Violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in Section 7 of this
ordinance.
SECTION 5. Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4 of this Ordinance that:
(a) The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
(b) The minor was accompanied by an adult specifically designated, before the fact, by
his or her parent or guardian.
(c) The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency.
(d) The minor was attending a school, religious or government-sponsored activity or
was traveling to or from a school, religious or government-sponsored activity.
(e) The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or
coming directly from lawful employment.
(f) The minor was on the sidewalk in front of the place where he or she resides.
(g) The minor was on an errand specifically directed by his or her parent or guardian and
had in his or her possession at the time the errand was performed a document, signed
305
by the parent or guardian , which expressly permits the minor to knowingly remain in
or upon any public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
(h) The minor was traveling intrastate or interstate in a motor vehicle and the route
selected required the minor to proceed through the Town of Skowhegan.
(i) The minor was engaged in participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function
or activity for which the application of Section 4 of this Ordinance would contravene
his or her rights protected b the Maine or United States Constitutions.
SECTION 6. Enforcement
Except as provided below for a first offense for minors, this Ordinance shall be enforced by
issuance of a civil summons directly to the offender. Before taking any action to enforce this
ordinance, the police officer shall, in the case of a minor, ask the age of the apparent offender.
The police officer may ask for proof of the apparent offender’s age and shall be justified in
taking action to determine the apparent offenders age in the absence of identification, subject to
and in compliance with all requirements imposed by law, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of Title 17-A M>R>S>A> Section 17. Pursuant to that statute, the police officer may
require the minor to remain in his or her presence for a period of up to two (2) hours.
For minors, documented verbal warning shall be issued for the first offense.
In all cases, upon finding a minor in violation of this Ordinance, the police officer shall advise
the minor that he or she is in violation, of this curfew ordinance and direct the minor to proceed
at once by the most direct route to his or her home or usual place of abode.
If the minor refuses to proceed to his or her home or usual place of abode after having been
warned of the violation, or if the minor is subsequently observed by a police officer to be in
violation of the Ordinance after being previously warned, the police officer shall summons the
minor and, if the minor’s parent or guardian knowingly allowed the violation to occur, the police
officer may also summons the parent or guardian.
SECTION 7. Penalties
The penalty for violation of the ordinance shall be as follows for a minor:
(a) For the first offense, subsequent to a receipt of a warning, as provided above, a civil
forfeiture of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or, if the minor consents, four (4) hours of
community service to be completed within thirty days (30) of adjudication; and
(b) For each subsequent offense, a civil forfeiture of up to one-hundred dollars ($100.00)
or, if the minor agrees, sixteen (16) hours of community service to be completed
within thirty (30) days of adjudication.
306
The penalty for violation of this Ordinance shall be as follows for a parent or guardian having
custody of the minor:
(a) A forfeiture not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each civil violation.
SECTION 8. Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance is determined invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such determination shall not render invalid the remaining portions of the Ordinance.
307
Chapter 24
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Adopted : Annual Town Meeting March 11, 2000
Art. I. In General,
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION 1. Fire limits described.
The fire limits of the Town of Skowhegan is that area within the following described
bounds:
Commencing on the southerly line of Water Street at its intersection with the westerly
line of North Avenue; thence northerly along the westerly line of North Avenue to Cross
Street, so-called; thence westerly along the southerly line of Cross Street to the easterly
line of Court Street, so-called; thence northerly along the easterly line of Court Street to
the southerly line of High Street; thence, westerly along the southerly line of High Street
crossing Madison Avenue and continuing westerly one hundred and fifteen feet (115’) to
the westerly line of the Town of Skowhegan Assessor’s map 26 lot #116; thence
southerly three hundred and eighty feet (380’) along the westerly line of the Town of
Skowhegan Assessor’s property map 26 lots #116, 115, 114; to Elm Street; thence, across
Elm Street to a point eighty (80) feet westerly from the westerly line of Madison Avenue;
thence continuing southerly the same distance of eighty (80) feet from said Madison
Avenue and crossing Water Street to the Kennebec River; thence continuing southerly
and easterly along said river to a point in line with the easterly boundary of the Municipal
Building lot; thence northerly in a straight line to the south side of said Water Street;
thence in a straight line to the point of beginning. (Town Meeting, 03-08-09; Town
Meeting, 3-31-53)
SECTION 2. Construction of wooden buildings in fire limits
Within the fire limits of Skowhegan there shall not hereafter be erected any wooden
buildings, except small additions to existing structures, and those only with and by the written
consent of a majority of the Selectmen.
EXCEPTION: Non fire resistive construction would be permitted if an approved
automatic sprinkler system is provided.
SECTION 3. Single chimneys.
No unlined single brick chimneys shall hereafter be built, but single brick chimneys which are
properly lined with fire proof tile and acceptable to the fire chief may be allowed.
308
SECTION 4. Rubbish accumulation prohibited; penalty.
(a) The accumulation of rubbish, which may more readily cause the spread of fire, either
within or without any building, is prohibited. Any such accumulation shall at once be
removed on request of the fire chief.
(b) Violators of this section shall be subject to the provisions of section 7-5.
(Town Meeting, 3-8-09, §12; Selectmen’s meeting, 5-5-53)
SECTION 5 Penalty for violating section 7-4.
A person who violates any provisions of this section commits a civil violation for which a
forfeiture not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) may be adjudged.
1
Chapter 18
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Adopted March 12, 2001, Annual Town Meeting
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing
serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood
insurance as authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Skowhegan, Maine has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as
delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine to require the recognition and
evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain
areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Skowhegan has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures
to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352
and 4401-4407.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that
areas of the Town of Skowhegan having a special flood hazard be identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be
applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard
Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and AE, are identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Skowhegan, Maine, Somerset County," dated September 20, 1995 with accompanying
"Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated September 20, 1995, which are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIII), including the
placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard
established in Article I, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the
Planning Board. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be
required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
2
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including
but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities,
areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to
a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined:
a. in Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study -
Town of Skowhegan, Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or
other technical sources (such as FEMA’s Quick-2 model,
FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Article VI.K. and VIII.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto a
USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map prepared
by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional
engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a significant
correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in the
absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the
floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of
the proposed building.
3
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed
building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures
contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure
will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all
developments for which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional
engineer or architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on
the application are accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional
engineer or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 08/99, as amended), to
verify that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures
will meet the floodproofing criteria of Article III.H.4.; Article VI.G.; and
other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic
openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of
Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated
as a result of the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable
development standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of
a receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Planning Board and/or Board of Appeals needs
the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in
full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure
to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance
of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of
an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been
4
given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a
decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT
PERMIT APPLICATIONS
The Planning Board shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that
proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that
all pertinent requirements of Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or
will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Skowhegan, Maine," as described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not
provided, the Planning Board shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other
technical sources, including information obtained pursuant to Article
III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIII.D., in order to administer Article
VI of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by
methods outlined in Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that
data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning
Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas
shown on the maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that
all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local
government agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state
law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and
the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to
any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit copies of such
notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the
issuance of one of the following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the
type of development:
5
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures.
Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the
first horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the
applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a second
Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor,
registered professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit
construction , “as built”, for verifying compliance with the elevation
requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of
the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of
receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II
of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the
applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-
Residential Structures that are new construction or substantially improved
non-residential structures that are not being elevated but that meet the
floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for
this permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all
development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less
than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development also
includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in
Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects
such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including
reports of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of
Article IX of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing
Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design standards
required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable
standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation
(excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the
development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
6
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage;
and,
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or
relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner that no reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any nonresidential
structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation
so that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
7
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided
with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as
required by Article III.K. and shall include a record of the
elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes
located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood
elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab
or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced
piers or block supports, any of which support the manufactured
home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners
of the manufactured home, plus two additional ties per side
at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional
ties along each side at intermediate points (manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per
side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in
Article VI.H.1.c.(1)&(2) shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone A shall:
8
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article
VI.H.1.b., such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article
III.H.1.b.; Article V.B; or Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zone AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIII, located
within Zones AE and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in
Article VI.F. & G. above, if all other requirements of Article VI and all the
following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two
different walls of the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer
the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further
from the source of flooding than is the primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service
disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation and when
possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be
9
permitted within a regulatory floodway which is designated on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is
designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in the
floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one foot at any point within the community; and,
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5
entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines
and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/ January
1995, as amended).
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is
designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the
river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of onehalf
the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high water
mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones AE and A that meets the development
standards of Article VI, including the elevation requirements of Article VI,
paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or
crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements
provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
water. Designs for meeting this requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
10
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other non-automatic
mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of
vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones
AE and A shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or
columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the
elevation requirements of this section and the floodway standards
of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of
wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all structural
components. Water loading values used shall be those associated
with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any
containment wall located within:
1. Zones AE and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
11
section. Such certification shall be provided with the application
for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article
III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of
wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and
seaward of the mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and
federal regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional
engineer shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is
constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance
is
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the
applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate
completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or
architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer
that the development is complete and complies with the provisions of this
ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification;
and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of
this ordinance, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT
PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or
regulations and all projects on 5 or more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured
home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
12
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine
floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering
practices recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval
requiring that structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its
land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with
Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included in any deed,
lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an
intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited
to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate that the
municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that
fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map,
plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as
part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Skowhegan may, upon written application of an
aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the administration of the provisions of this
Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance
consistent with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
13
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other
state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue
hardship," which in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of
the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character
of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or
a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board
of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of Historic Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D.
above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through E. shall
be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman
of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
14
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the
risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks
and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against any claims
filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use land
located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the
municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the
municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all
of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
thirty-five days of its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after
the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Planning Board and Code
Enforcement Officer a report of all variance actions, including justification
for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Planning
Board to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings
before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in
accordance with State laws within forty-five days from the date of any
decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation
of this Ordinance.
15
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of
flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the
property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a
cited State or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority
to do so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation
and the prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law.
Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or
structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have
the same meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most
reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may"
is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and
subordinate to the principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction
next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood
Insurance Study cited in Article I of this Ordinance.
16
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer
stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - any person or board responsible for performing the
inspection, licensing, and enforcement duties required by a particular statute or
ordinance.
Development - means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other
structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other
structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE or A, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or
"stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L..
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 08/99, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the
National Flood Insurance Program; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
17
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention
and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for
purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many
unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions.
18
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a
registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation
established for a specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This
elevation is generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or
any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far
from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Article VI.L.
of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management
purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
19
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a
substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose
value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not
limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials,
deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose
standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929
Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not
including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is
considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the
normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
20
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries),
stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building.
A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a
variance is obtained from the community’s Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a
community's floodplain management regulations.
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
21
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to
comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (d)
GENERAL
ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
August 2019
Approved Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/12/93
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/28/03
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 01/25/05
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 11/14/06
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/13/09
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/11/11
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 6/12/12
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 9/12/12
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 9/10/13
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 11/12/14
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/13/15
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/11/16
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 9/26/17
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/09/18
Amended Regular Selectmen’s Meeting 10/08/19

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Article I – Statement of Policy ......................................................................................... 1
Article II – Definitions ...................................................................................................... 3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words .................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ................................................................................... 3
Applicant .................................................................................................................. 3
Application Form ...................................................................................................... 3
Basic Necessities .................................................................................................... 3
Case Record............................................................................................................ 4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................ 4
Claimant .................................................................................................................. 4
Deficit ...................................................................................................................... 4
Disabled Person ...................................................................................................... 5
Dwelling Unit............................................................................................................ 5
Eligible Person ......................................................................................................... 5
Emergency .............................................................................................................. 5
General Assistance Program ................................................................................... 5
General Assistance Administrator ........................................................................... 6
Homelessness ......................................................................................................... 6
Household ............................................................................................................... 6
Income ..................................................................................................................... 6
Initial Applicant ........................................................................................................ 8
Just Cause............................................................................................................... 8
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................ 8
Material Fact ............................................................................................................ 9
Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................................................................... 9
ii
Misconduct .............................................................................................................. 9
Municipality .............................................................................................................. 9
Municipality of Responsibility ................................................................................... 9
Need ........................................................................................................................ 9
Net General Assistance Costs ............................................................................... 10
Period of Eligibility ................................................................................................. 10
Pooling of Income .................................................................................................. 10
Real Estate ............................................................................................................ 10
Recipient ............................................................................................................... 10
Registered Domestic Partner ................................................................................ 10
Repeat Applicants ................................................................................................. 10
Resident ................................................................................................................ 10
Resources ............................................................................................................. 11
30-Day Need ......................................................................................................... 12
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .............................................................................. 12
Unmet Need .......................................................................................................... 12
Work Requirements ............................................................................................... 12
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ......................................................... 13
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ................................................................. 13
Release of Information .......................................................................................... 13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................. 13
Misuse of Information ............................................................................................ 14
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records ....................................................................... 14
Case Records ........................................................................................................ 14
Retention of Records ............................................................................................. 15
Article IV – Application Procedure ................................................................................. 16
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply ........................................................................................ 16
Who May Apply ..................................................................................................... 16
iii
Application Via Telephone ..................................................................................... 16
Written Application Upon Each Request ................................................................ 16
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice ................................................................... 17
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ............................................................................. 17
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ................................................................... 17
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ..................................................................................................... 18
Application Requirements ...................................................................................... 18
Eligibility Requirements ......................................................................................... 19
Applicant Rights ..................................................................................................... 19
Reimbursement/Recovery ..................................................................................... 19
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application .................. 20
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications ........................................................................... 21
Written Decision ....................................................................................................... 21
Content ..................................................................................................................... 21
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ................................................................. 22
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ............................................. 22
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ......................................................................................... 23
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 23
Assistance Prior to Verification ................................................................................. 24
Telephone Applications ............................................................................................ 24
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ....................................................................... 24
Section 4.10 – Residence .......................................................................................... 26
Moving/Relocating ................................................................................................... 26
Institutions ............................................................................................................... 27
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................. 27
Disputes ................................................................................................................... 27
Article V – Eligibility Factors ............................................................................................ 28
Section 5.1 – Initial Application ................................................................................... 28
iv
Initial Application ...................................................................................................... 28
Subsequent Applicants............................................................................................. 28
Section 5.1A – Presumptive Eligibility ......................................................................... 29
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................... 29
Section 5.3 – Personal Property ................................................................................. 30
a) Liquid Assets ........................................................................................................ 30
b) Tangible Assets ................................................................................................... 30
c) Automobile Ownership ......................................................................................... 30
d) Insurance ............................................................................................................. 31
e) Transfer of Property ............................................................................................. 31
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate ...................................................................... 32
a) Principal Residence ............................................................................................. 32
b) Other Property ..................................................................................................... 33
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................ 33
Employment; Rehabilitation ...................................................................................... 34
Verification ............................................................................................................... 34
Ineligibility ................................................................................................................. 35
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct ......................................... 35
Just Cause ............................................................................................................... 36
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause ........................................................ 36
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 36
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 37
Exemptions .............................................................................................................. 37
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program ....................................................................... 38
Consent .................................................................................................................... 38
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ............................ 38
Limitations ................................................................................................................ 39
“Workfare First” Policy ............................................................................................. 40
Work-Related Expenses........................................................................................... 42
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 42
v
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 43
Reports ..................................................................................................................... 44
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources .................................................................................. 44
Minors ...................................................................................................................... 44
Mental or Physical Disability ..................................................................................... 45
Written Notice; Disqualification ................................................................................. 46
Forfeiture of Benefits ................................................................................................ 46
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility .............................................................................. 46
Work Requirement ................................................................................................... 47
Fraud ........................................................................................................................ 47
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud ........................................................................... 47
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ........................................................................... 48
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights ......................................................... 48
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ............................................................ 48
Section 6.3 – Verification ............................................................................................ 49
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility ............................................................... 49
Applicant’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 49
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 49
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................... 50
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ................................................................................. 50
Overseer’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 50
Redetermination of eligibility .................................................................................... 51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ............................................................ 52
Section 6.4 – Fraud ..................................................................................................... 52
Period of Ineligibility ................................................................................................. 53
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................. 53
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................ 53
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 54
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility ................................................................................. 54
vi
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need .......................................................................... 55
Income for Basic Necessities ................................................................................... 55
Use-of-Income Requirements .................................................................................. 56
Calculation of Income and Expenses ....................................................................... 58
Consolidation of Deficit............................................................................................. 58
Section 6.7 – Income .................................................................................................. 59
Income Standards .................................................................................................... 59
Calculation of Income ............................................................................................... 59
Types of Income ....................................................................................................... 59
a) Earned income................................................................................................ 59
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ......................... 60
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments .................................................................. 61
d) Income from Other Sources ............................................................................ 61
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter ....................................................................... 61
f) Income from Household Members ................................................................... 62
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................... 62
h) Lump Sum Income .......................................................................................... 63
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................... 64
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance .................................................................... 64
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ................................ 65
A) Food .............................................................................................................. 66
B) Housing ......................................................................................................... 66
Rental Payments to Relatives ....................................................................... 67
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ................................................................ 67
Mortgage Payments ...................................................................................... 68
Liens .............................................................................................................. 70
Property Taxes .............................................................................................. 71
Housing Maximums ....................................................................................... 71
C) Utilities .......................................................................................................... 72
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ................. 73
vii
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................. 73
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................... 73
D) Fuel ............................................................................................................... 73
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies ........................................................ 74
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................ 74
1) Clothing ..................................................................................................... 74
2) Medical ...................................................................................................... 74
3) Hospital Bills .............................................................................................. 75
4) Dental ........................................................................................................ 76
5) Eye Care ................................................................................................... 77
6) Telephone Charge ..................................................................................... 77
7) Work-Related Expenses ............................................................................ 77
8) Travel Expenses ........................................................................................ 77
9) Burials, Cremations ................................................................................... 78
10) Capital Improvements ............................................................................... 78
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ............................................................................... 79
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ............................................................. 79
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased ........... 79
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................... 80
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members ......................... 80
Proration of Familial Responsibility ........................................................................ 81
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility ......................................................................... 81
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................ 81
Burial Expenses ..................................................................................................... 82
Cremation Expenses ............................................................................................. 82
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ............................................................................... 82
Written Decision .................................................................................................... 82
Contents ................................................................................................................ 83
viii
Disbursement of General Assistance .................................................................... 83
Article VII – The Fair Hearing........................................................................................ 84
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .......................................................................... 84
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing ...................................................... 84
Written Request ..................................................................................................... 84
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................. 85
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority .................................................................... 85
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure ......................................................................... 86
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................. 87
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ..................................................................... 88
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................. 90
Recipients ................................................................................................................... 90
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................... 90
Recipients of SSI ........................................................................................................ 91
Relatives ..................................................................................................................... 91
Article IX – Severability................................................................................................. 92
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
1
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of Skowhegan, Maine administers a program of general assistance (GA)
available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with the
standards of eligibility as provided within this ordinance, Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging selfreliance.
The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance by
promoting the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than
financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general assistance
program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the applicant or
recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality,
religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed to including
qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services, programs, and activities. As a
result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in its entirety, is
readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. GA applicants with
physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order to access
and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide the municipality with
advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding their
rights and responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours after receipt of an
application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not
assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The
administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal to
the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is
determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be furnished within 24
2
hours after the completed application is submitted except when the administrator issues
non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each applicant
and recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22 MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance and
Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public upon
request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
3
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their
common meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency,
requested assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on
whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for
the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact
that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the
applicant to be considered complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, potable water, non-elective
essential medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic
telephone service where it is necessary for medical or work related reasons, property
taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of the applicant’s place
of residence, and any other commodity or service determined essential by the
municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
? Phone bills
? Cable or satellite dish
television
? Mail orders
? Vehicle payments
? Credit card debt**
4
? Furniture
? Loan re-payments**
? Cigarettes
? Alcohol
? Pet care costs
? Vacation costs
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Key deposits
? Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is
available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver,
deferral or installment
arrangement cannot be made
between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
**Repayments of loans or credit will be treated as having been spent on basic
necessities when the applicant can provide verification of this fact.
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative
records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request
for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for
the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as
calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a
positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall
maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
5
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to
a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health
provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance benefits from
the municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance, Maine
General Assistance law (22 M.R.S.A. ch. 1161), and Maine Department of Health &
Human Services regulations (10-144 C.M.R. ch. 323). If otherwise qualified, “Eligible
Person” shall include U.S. citizens; non-U.S. citizens who are lawfully present in the
United States as described in 8 U.S.C. § 1621(a)(1)-(3); and non-U.S. citizens who are
pursuing a lawful process to apply for immigration relief. Assistance for non-citizens
pursuing a lawful process for immigration relief shall not exceed 24 months beginning
with assistance provided after July 1, 2015. “Eligible Person” does not include a fugitive
from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is
imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual
or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to
maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific
amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not
intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or “categorical” welfare program. This
definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be
otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).
6
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and
prepare records and communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an
elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or
caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
Homelessness. “Homelessness” means a situation in which a person or household is:
(a) living in a place that is not fit for human habitation; (b) living in an emergency shelter;
(c) living in temporary housing, including but not limited to a hotel, motel, campground,
unlicensed campsite or rehabilitation facility; (d) exiting a hospital or institution licensed
under 22 M.R.S.A. ch. 405 or a correctional facility where the person or household
resided for up to 90 days if the person or household was in an emergency shelter or
place not fit for human habitation before entering the hospital, institution or correctional
facility; (e) losing the person’s or household’s primary nighttime residence and lacking
the resources or support networks to remain in that residence; or (f) fleeing or
attempting to flee violence and has no other residence.
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals,
even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the
dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata
share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the
maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata
share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire
household by the total number of household members. The income of household
members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant only when
there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the
household including:
7
? Net remuneration for services
performed
? Cash received on either
secured or unsecured credit
? Payments received as an
annuity, retirement or
disability benefits
? Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
? Retirement accounts or
benefits
? Workers’ compensation
? Unemployment benefits
? Federal and/or state tax
returns
? Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security
Income, Social Security and
any other payments from
governmental sources (unless
specifically prohibited by any
law or regulation)
? Court ordered support
payments, e.g., child support
? Income from pension or trust
funds
? Household income from any
other source, including
relatives or unrelated
household members
? Student loans
? Rental income
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated
for the purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such
as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and
from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
8
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall
be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective
calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to
purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the
income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as
income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
? Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
? Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness
Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic
necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
? Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
Initial Applicant. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality is considered an initial applicant.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with
one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an
applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments,
unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or
money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property
damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount
of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been
9
made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include
conversion of a non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary
expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if
disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of
eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or
service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such
basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A)
misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043
(23). (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.)
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her
duties or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s interest may also be found
guilty of misconduct.
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support
of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the
individual’s family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(10), 4308).
10
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the
municipal officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general
assistance program (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in
no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among
household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by
ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling
unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of
eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their
income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to
the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Registered Domestic Partner. An individual registered as the domestic partner of the
applicant pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2710.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have
the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of
remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no
other residence. A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a
resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
11
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application
and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of
resources: “available” and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services, nonliquid
assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance
program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available
trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held
resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as
AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar
programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant
or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on
hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market,
or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g.,
relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion of the GA administrator a
necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free
checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services,
commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although
GA applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource
12
and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a
private charitable resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective
30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the
purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s
actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for
assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly
become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as
established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive
number. If the household income is greater than the household’s 30-day need, the
household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal
administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential
eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated,
and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include
registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational,
or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
13
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general
assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the
applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however,
unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly
authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file
stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a
reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by
the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator
will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as
those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution or any employer of a general assistance
applicant who, upon receipt of a written release signed by the depositor and a written
request from the Administrator, refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason
for the refusal. National banks are also obligated to disclose deposit information to the
Administrator upon receipt of a written request and release signed by the depositor.
14
Additionally, when a municipality or its agents are acting in accordance with section
4313(2) to verify eligibility for funeral or cremation benefits, an officer of a financial
institution must disclose the amount deposited upon receipt of a written request from the
municipality or its agents and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the
municipality or its agents stating that the named depositor is deceased. Any such
person who refuses to provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant,
who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a material fact to the
administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314, 4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is
a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record,
either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record
will include at least:
? household applications
? budget sheets
? information concerning the
types and amounts of
assistance provided
? narrative statements
describing the nature of the
emergency situation
whenever general assistance
is granted in amounts greater
15
than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need,
whichever is less)
? written decisions
? requests for fair hearings and
the fair hearing authority
decisions
? workfare participation records
? repayments to the
municipality
? narrative writings
documenting the need for
general assistance, the
results of home visits,
collateral information,
referrals, changes in status
? client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information
and/or reason(s) for the
release of confidential
information
? adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
? physician’s documentation
? Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) interim
assistance reimbursement
authorization forms
? vendor forms
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the
applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of
three full years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which
begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three
years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the
event a client’s records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be
maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.
16
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family,
any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in
person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this
ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the
municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases,
the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement
documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household
receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the
administrator. Note that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good
cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with
his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be
administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an
independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person
applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
17
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take
emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include
the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24
hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or
complaints. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during
the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency,
however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in
private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or
family member.
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of
birth, Social Security number or
appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)
documentation, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
18
e) all household income, resources,
assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social
Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the
initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in
order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a
good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate
and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect
to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the
Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying
for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility
guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the
application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the
applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to
provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or
reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written
authorization.
19
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
? the income standard of need;
? the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
? the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
household income on non-basic necessities;
? immigration status (see definition of “Eligible Person”); and
? the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform
work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith
effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain
those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
? review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law;
? apply for assistance;
? receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
? confidentiality;
? contact the DHHS;
? challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been
granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as
appropriate, contact the client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s
obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
20
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance
granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for
the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article
VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319). Whenever applicable, the
administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient’s
real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the
Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
? Income
? Resources
? Assets
? Employment
? Use of income
? Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s
support
? Any change in this information from a previous application that would
affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without
just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a
part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has
21
satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to
perform those assignments;
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in
writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to,
other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of
sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative
program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program
by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to
the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits
a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period
except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this
ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or
terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s
ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
22
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has
acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily
refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only
be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the
health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is
violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing
behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the
applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his
or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal
building;
23
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person
may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly
authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be
expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the
household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)). An emergency includes homelessness or imminent
homelessness. Although they may be considered otherwise ineligible to receive
general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an emergency may be
granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and
resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had sufficient income and
resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines
that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in
undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9 or 6.4 of this ordinance is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of
this section, “dependents” are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or
disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child
under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
24
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that
he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification,
the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the
applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the
applicant’s statements about needing emergency assistance. No further
assistance will be authorized until the applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there
is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the
administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if
the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting
his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility
through any other means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not
basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the
misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).
25
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable
documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert
the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money
necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for
emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created
by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent,
mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created
over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be
the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that
period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities
during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum
levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual
monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the
particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time
period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments
available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.
26
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant
will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life
threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never
before applied for general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from
electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner
available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is
in conformance with general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for
assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no
other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain
here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible
persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other
municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
27
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she
moves provided the recipient remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the
responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if
the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met. The municipality thereafter
retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return. The
municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the
denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up
to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify
the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for
providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover
the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
28
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is an “Eligible Person” as
defined in section 2.2, is in need, and has complied with the eligibility requirements set
forth below. For guidance in determining whether an applicant is an Eligible Person,
contact the Department of Health & Human Services at (800) 442-6003 (TTY: 287-
6948).
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by
law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a
defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this
ordinance) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(3)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where
applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants.
Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in
the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance
application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant
was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for
29
general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The
eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not
used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
Section 5.1A—Presumptive Eligibility
A person who is provided shelter in an emergency shelter for the homeless located in
the municipality shall be presumed to be an eligible person. Presumed eligibility may not
exceed 30 days within a 12-month period. Full eligibility must be verified prior to
assistance issued subsequent to the presumed period of eligibility. When presumptive
eligibility is determined under this section, no other municipality may be determined to
be the municipality of responsibility during that 30-day period.
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance
programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of
Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into
consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be
considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs
of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at
section 6.7 of this ordinance. For several additional exceptions please refer to the
definition of “Income” in this ordinance (see page 7, subsection 4).
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being
advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
30
without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including
but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement
accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for
general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or
her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance
necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per
household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as
but not limited to: a motor vehicle (except as provided immediately below in
subsection c), or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are
convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of the applicant’s
household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when
a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at
fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment
and other equipment used for the production of income are exempt from the
above category and are not considered available assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not
make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care,
rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator
determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s household.
31
Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good
faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less
than $8000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade
down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or
vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is
responsible. However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the
applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned “essential”
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable
car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs
shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel
Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis
or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining
eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may,
at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market
value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general
assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated
value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up
to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will be issued. There will be a presumption that the applicant
transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance
32
whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer
occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the
applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s
principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training,
education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to return.
If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or
district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will
release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other
land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary
surveys); and
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the
household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in
question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid
the applicant’s financial rehabilitation; and
33
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly
burdensome or inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt
of future assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render
saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the
applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres. Sale of 10 of the acres
would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be
sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in
question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this
section shall also cease.
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the
applicant making a reasonable effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the
property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present
need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in
order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property.
The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the
death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
34
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to
the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless
the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required
to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment
workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see “Exemptions” ).
Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to
perform. “Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work
requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will
be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the
time of each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the
employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting
a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial
employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to
whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the
region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
35
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment
obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will
not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility
for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants
will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just
cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and
appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent work search and will
be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program
that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work
program (see section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an
initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just
cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
36
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to
comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to
any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable
and verifiable evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her
from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to
meet piece work standards;
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or
rehabilitation program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any
other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate
will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or
otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by
fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the
37
performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social
security tax pursuant to federal law.
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a
disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under
“Eligibility Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household
who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under 6 years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and assistance is
requested for those remaining members of the household who are dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of
assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly,
physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for
any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also
exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an
applicant’s existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend
an interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site
participation in a training program which is either approved by the Department of Labor
38
or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be
required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit
organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to
participate in training, education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient
in securing employment. The work requirement provisions found in section 5.5
regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare
program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work
and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is
calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to
adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA
§ 4318 individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them
are obligated to repay the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed
deducted from any and all GA debt including GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation
Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement, Home Mortgage) that
might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
39
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work
that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work
under this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance, the value of
which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state
or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace
regular municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible
person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by
the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be
reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or
classroom participation in a degree-granting program administered by the
DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An eligible person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination
with his or her regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
40
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person
may be required as a condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or
disability and the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the
municipality may pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam. However in such a case the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the municipality may
elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this
subsection prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet
immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that
he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance. When the
recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first”
policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
41
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage), upon which the duration of the workfare assignment
is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed,
in hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general
nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s) of work-site,
date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors’ names
and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s)
the recipient will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfarerelated
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to
perform all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
42
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there
has been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just
cause, the administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount
of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate
used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any
disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant
in accordance with section 6.10 of this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
cause reasons shall be reassigned or excused at the discretion of the GA
administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the
person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes
or equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs
below average standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator
knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify
the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last date
of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
43
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been
given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”) .
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to
perform the work assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator
will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the
administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert
the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment.
The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of
the total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the
administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the
44
municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period
beginning with the new disqualification date, but will be provided no opportunity to
requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other
employees or who otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is
discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to
persons who work for the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)).
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available
or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see
section 2.2 for definition of “Resources”). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource.
Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement; or
45
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are
unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor
or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause
to waive this limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents
for general assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the
applicant’s parents are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has
the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such
a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially capable of repaying the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s
need for general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents
declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and
there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on
his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in
need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be provided by a
legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability
must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have
been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
46
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not
constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any
applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving
written 7-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good
faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance will not be withheld
from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made, or is in the
process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather,
in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource,
up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the municipality is prohibited by federal
or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local
public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being
given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-4322).
Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any
47
person disqualified for not complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the
period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement
are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain
their eligibility) (see sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance
and does not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision of ineligibility.
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is issued before the
expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered
after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility
will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation benefits because
of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is
ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited unemployment
compensation benefits for the duration of the forfeiture established by the Department of
Labor. 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
48
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or
her individual rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he
or she is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the
recipient’s circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may
receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not
reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining
the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the
decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
49
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will
not exceed one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may
reapply for assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are
responsible for providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility,
the applicant must have the first opportunity to provide the specific information or
documentation required by the overseer. When information required by the overseer is
unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative available information, which is subject
to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and
continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her:
? Need
? Income
? Employment
? Use of income
? Expenses
? Assets & liabilities
? Use of available resources
? Household composition
Initial Applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined
solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions
placed on repeat applicants (see below). However, such applicants are still responsible
for providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
50
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial applicants must also
comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the
basis of need and all other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal
ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of
income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel,
telephone, medical services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list
of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name
of the employer representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information
reported on previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that
may affect his/her eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly
employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have
unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income
and/or benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of
their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be considered initial applicants for
purposes of verification requirements and misspent income if the administrator finds that
imposing the general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed on
repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the
applicant. Once the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is
51
responsible for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to
determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources
other than the applicant for verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of
the applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records without the
applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
? DHHS and any other
department/agency of the
state or non-profit
organizations
? financial institutions
? creditors
? utility companies
? employers
? landlords
? physicians
? persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a
cohabitant
? legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the
overseer with necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral
contacts, or if the overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information
supplied by the applicant or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any
time during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of
any change in the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to
which the recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that
once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction
in assistance for that time period may not be made without prior written notice to the
recipient with the reasons for the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a
fair hearing upon the proposed change.
52
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has
been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of
receiving the request. Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without
just cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E
crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and willfully make a false representation of a
material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause
someone else to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). A person who
commits fraud in an effort to receive general assistance benefits may be prosecuted for
this offense.
False representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either
orally or in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or
the applicant’s household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order
to obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not
entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which
they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to
being given an opportunity for a fair hearing.
53
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making
himself or herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that
applicant in writing that he or she must reimburse the municipality for the assistance he
or she was not entitled to receive and that he/she is ineligible for assistance for the
longer of: (a) a period of 120 days; (b) until he or she reimburses the municipality for the
assistance; or (c) until he or she enters a reasonable written agreement to reimburse
the municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315)
For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false statement about
eligibility factors in the absence of which some or all of the assistance would not be or
would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his
or her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA)
within 5 working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
authority (FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have
his or her assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being
notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to
Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing
authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will
be required to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she
54
was not entitled. The recipient may enter a reasonable written agreement to reimburse
the municipality over a period of time.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the
event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in
excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed
application the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render
a notice of “ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as
soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for
the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative
efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter
periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the
administrator elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued
pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant’s financial situation
changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility.
55
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’
expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels
for the specific necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these
expenses, as calculated for a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need.
Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources exceed
this calculation except in an emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 of this
ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income,
property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their
household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth
in the beginning of section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference
between the applicant’s income and the overall maximum levels of assistance
established by this ordinance is the applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be
used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant
is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are
intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health
and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to
replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for
assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on
56
goods and services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to the
applicant and combined with the applicant’s prospective 30-day income for the
purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Applicants who have
sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income to purchase
goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does
not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for
general assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which
demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all household income received over the
last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for
“unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities. Income
expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such
case will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of
heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the
base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of nonelective
medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise
covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of
essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
? Internet services ? Cable or satellite television
57
? Cellular phones, except when
deemed essential by the
overseer for medical or work
related purposes
? Cigarettes/alcohol
? Gifts purchased
? Pet care costs
? Costs of trips or vacations
? Paid court fines
? Repayments of unsecured
loans
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Credit card debt.
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic
necessities or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her
income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The
administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e.,
heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s
income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income
was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the
applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with
verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to
allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s
eligibility and need.
58
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found
at the beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of
assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section 4.9).
If income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the
applicant also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality
will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of
this ordinance for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the
administrator elects to consolidate the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately
below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants
will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the
maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost
of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the
applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the
ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity
in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather
than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
59
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in
an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the
applicant’s income and expenses each time an applicant applies.
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their
need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider
as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period
on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in
unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need for basic necessities,
up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be considered in
need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance).
To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual income
received or actual anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need
includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through
wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee,
is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
60
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce
that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and
unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be considered
as earned income.
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be
deducted from an applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other
government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited
by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP
and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or
reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently
received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise
prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an
applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her
total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the
household’s heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
61
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s
fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a
positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating
purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility
include:
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred
to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with
such services. Because child support payments are considered a resource,
applicants must make a good faith effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered
income as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any
other source, including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time
62
will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household
will be considered available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as
to provide support to one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the
same dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable
presumption that the entire household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-
A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption
that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with
verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for
the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would
include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements,
cancelled checks, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely
responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that
all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be
determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled,
the applicant’s eligibility will be determined on the basis of his or her income and
his or her pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
63
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or
recipient prior or subsequent to the date of application for general assistance will
be considered as income available to the household. However, verified required
payments (i.e., any third party payment which is required as a condition of
receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the
purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the
lump sum payment which the applicant can document was spent on basic
necessities, as described below, will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior or
subsequent to the date of application for general assistance, the administrator
will assess the need for prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance
according to the following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was
spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the
general assistance program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or
burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to
the illness or death of a family member; repair or replacement of essentials
lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor
vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day
living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of
bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
64
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between
the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of
application for general assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the verified actual
monthly amounts for all of the household's basic necessities. 22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-B)
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment.
The prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the
household for 12 months from the date of application or during the period of
proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate
need solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA
§ 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or
her income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for
the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by
this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent
the applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
65
emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will
grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum
levels for specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation
with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance
with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which case
these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases
either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other
household members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid
by another person. In addition, as a general rule the municipality will not provide a
benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the
applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not
been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the
following circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household
member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members
of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and (3)
the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
66
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the
appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A.
Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services on or about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for
the current year’s food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C.
§2017(b)). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s
statement verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food
that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments
that are reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of
this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant
of the allowed housing maximums to assist the applicant in his or her search for
housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing
maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately
shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that
contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members
67
will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of
those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes
with the owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or
who are not legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter
expense will be the applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to
the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued,
whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee
before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any
landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental
payments issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue
Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on
behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department
68
of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A
Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving
future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In
making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of
the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant
an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate
needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she
were to be dislocated to rental housing;
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because
of his or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
69
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the
shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s
request for mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for
general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines
that:
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels
of assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s
household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when
considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the
mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to
suspend or reduce the mortgage obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount
due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After
an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the
applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her
home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if
the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for
similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the administrator
will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to
secure such housing.
70
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs
of granting assistance with mortgage payments. In addition, a municipality may claim
a lien against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make
capital improvements to the real estate (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be
enforced against a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently
receiving any form of public assistance, or who would again become eligible for
general assistance if the lien were enforced.
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s
property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment
or capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of
deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage
payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital improvement payment and all
subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers
must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient,
and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice must
clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The
municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount
secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage payment. This
notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file
notice sent to the recipient.
71
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien.
The municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes.
The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her
property taxes, the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two
procedures on the local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
(36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek
property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a
poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the
date of application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information
obtained from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a
tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the
Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are
derived from the HUD values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to
disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine
72
State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See
Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a
special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases.
The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the
termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their
utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace those funds.
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income
for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and 6.3).
73
The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the
administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements
with the utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for
fuel during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses
are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided
in section 4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have
been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just
cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the
administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicants’ control,
and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
74
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and
household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual
need for these items. Personal and household supplies include: hand soap,
toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies
and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as toilet paper,
tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light bulbs and supplies for children under
5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for the current year’s personal
care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when
they are deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the
general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general
assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all
available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances,
clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if
fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate
necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than
hospital bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves
the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are
75
determined to be ‘medically necessary’ by a licensed physician. The
municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able
to receive necessary medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The
applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state
program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general assistance for
medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for non-emergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a
second medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to
verify the necessity of the services.
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established
Medicaid rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical
commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the
municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and
ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual
amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable
supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, nonprescription
medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone
service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety
of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable
expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician
certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the admission.
76
Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified
mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22
M.R.S.A. § 1716. Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for
assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a
notice from the hospital certifying that he or she is not eligible for the hospital’s
free care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a
necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment
arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will
budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay.
The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each
time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly
budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary
payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at
section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only.
As is the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue
general assistance for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for
those services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental
services, the administrator will inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the
municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are
necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
77
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a
dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the
applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses,
an applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed
to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide
assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a
telephone is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job search or work
related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons the administrator deems
necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include childcare costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual
costs not to exceed the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s
maximum mileage allotment) . The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not workrelated
will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the
prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly
transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which such necessary
78
travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs
associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires,
maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality
recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a
basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital
improvement/repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a
necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair has
been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of the
applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be
mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement
with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any
property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been
used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished
79
in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection
(B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to
the burial or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral
director’ receipt of the body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact
by the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application for
burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral director’s
responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if the family or any other persons
are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are
unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or
part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the municipal
administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to the
administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the
purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance
for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be
the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of
death as residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their
income, assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an
application for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial
assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial
80
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial
responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general
assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or
cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial
or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Grandparents, parents,
children and grandchildren of the deceased whether or not living in or owning property
in Maine, and the spouse or registered domestic partner of the deceased, are financially
responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives,
individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation
either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement with the funeral
home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable relatives must
provide the municipal administrator with any reasonably requested information
regarding their income, assets, and basic living expenses. The Administrator may also
seek information from financial institutions holding assets of the deceased. Maine law
requires a financial institution to disclose the amount deposited in the corporation or
association when the municipality or its agents are acting in accordance with section
4313(2) and provide a written request and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer
of the municipality or its agents stating that the named depositor is deceased.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable
relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or
cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the
administrator is unable to make such a finding, the following proration of familial
responsibility will be implemented.
81
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found
to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator
is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible
for his or her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no
legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long
as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial
or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally
liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information
or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative’s financial capacity,
and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can
financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent
of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the
date of an application for burial/cremation assistance to issue a written decision
regarding the amount of the municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The
8-day eligibility determination period from the date of application shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family
members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial
or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and
other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this 8-day period
allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by
the municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from
82
any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other
benefits or resources that are available, such as Social Security burial benefits,
veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the
maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from the
municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the purpose of
publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to
the administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with
regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See
Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the
deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any
family members, the administrator may issue general assistance for cremation
services. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the
purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6).
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide
83
to render a notice of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to
submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the
general assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the
written notice of decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written
notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the
contents of a written decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state
that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing and;
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated
the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or
purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of
goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which
case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance
in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
84
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant
or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a
review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that
are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the
administrator’s decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if
necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes
he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
85
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been
withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair
hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The
administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice
of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the
claimant; and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely
notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information
about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine,
based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were
eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with
the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with
the state law and local ordinance.
86
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of
appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the
organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following
criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and
the facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the
hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant
shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the
claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair
hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
87
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the
hearing; and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will
send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not
altered due to the claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate
that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just
cause” include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
88
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the
hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at
the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable
inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will
be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair
hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but
may cross examine witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days
after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
89
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant
must file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair
hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
90
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her
executors or administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance
granted, the municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA
recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality
will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and
discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump
sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’
Compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code
division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient
of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any
general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be
found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
91
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s
Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s
insurance company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’
Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’
Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI
payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying
for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and
who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible
to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition, the
grandchildren, children, parents, grandparents, and effective November 1, 2017, the
spouse and a registered domestic partner, are liable for the burial costs of each other.
The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the
support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may
complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the
behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
92
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
Appendix A
Effective: 10/1/19 – 9/30/20
2019-2020 GA Overall Maximums
Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Bangor HMFA:
Bangor, Brewer, Eddington, Glenburn, Hampden,
Hermon, Holden, Kenduskeag, Milford, Old Town,
Orono, Orrington, Penobscot Indian Island
Reservation, Veazie
759
862
1,096
1,373
1,924
Cumberland County HMFA: Baldwin,
Bridgton, Brunswick, Harpswell, Harrison, Naples,
New Gloucester, Pownal, Sebago
865
909
1,176
1,634
1,866
Lewiston/Auburn MSA:
Auburn, Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lewiston,
Lisbon, Livermore, Livermore Falls, Mechanic
Falls, Minot, Poland, Sabattus, Turner, Wales
725
783
1,007
1,265
1,606
Penobscot County HMFA:
Alton, Argyle UT, Bradford, Bradley, Burlington,
Carmel, Carroll plantation, Charleston, Chester,
Clifton, Corinna, Corinth, Dexter, Dixmont, Drew
plantation, East Central Penobscot UT, East
Millinocket, Edinburg, Enfield, Etna, Exeter,
Garland, Greenbush, Howland, Hudson, Kingman
UT, Lagrange, Lakeville, Lee, Levant, Lincoln,
Lowell town, Mattawamkeag, Maxfield, Medway,
Millinocket, Mount Chase, Newburgh Newport,
North Penobscot UT, Passadumkeag, Patten,
Plymouth, Prentiss UT, Seboeis plantation,
Springfield, Stacyville, Stetson, Twombly UT,
Webster plantation, Whitney UT, Winn, Woodville
725
728
964
1,208
1,330
Portland HMFA:
Cape Elizabeth, Casco, Chebeague Island,
Cumberland, Falmouth, Freeport, Frye Island,
Gorham, Gray, Long Island, North Yarmouth,
Portland, Raymond, Scarborough, South Portland,
Standish, Westbrook, Windham, Yarmouth;
Buxton, Hollis, Limington, Old Orchard Beach
1,089
1,191
1,526
2,037
2,418
Sagadahoc HMFA:
Arrowsic, Bath, Bowdoin, Bowdoinham,
Georgetown, Perkins UT, Phippsburg, Richmond,
Topsham, West Bath, Woolwich
809
915
1,076
1,425
1,677
Appendix A
Effective: 10/1/19 – 9/30/20
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
York County HMFA:
Acton, Alfred, Arundel, Biddeford, Cornish,
Dayton, Kennebunk, Kennebunkport, Lebanon,
Limerick, Lyman, Newfield, North Berwick,
Ogunquit, Parsonsfield, Saco, Sanford, Shapleigh,
Waterboro, Wells
899
961
1,190
1,525
1,692
York/Kittery/S.Berwick HMFA:
Berwick, Eliot, Kittery, South Berwick, York
1,112
1,143
1,511
1,893
2,654
*Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Non-Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Aroostook County 640 696 816 1,100 1,180
Franklin County 669 715 828 1,084 1,468
Hancock County 818 855 1,036 1,307 1,433
Kennebec County 752 777 969 1,273 1,360
Knox County 781 786 969 1,269 1,379
Lincoln County 849 869 1,038 1,326 1,541
Oxford County 748 752 920 1,299 1,511
Piscataquis County 645 700 865 1,144 1,373
Somerset County 699 733 942 1,228 1,316
Waldo County 801 855 979 1,316 1,676
Washington County 698 702 910 1,140 1,243
* Please Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Appendix B
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
2019-2020 Food Maximums
Please Note: The maximum amounts allowed for food are established in accordance with the
U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan. As of October 1, 2019, those amounts are:
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 $ 45.12 $ 194
2 82.56 355
3 118.37 509
4 150.23 646
5 178.60 768
6 214.19 921
7 236.74 1,018
8 270.70
1,164
Note: For each additional person add $146 per month.
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
2019-2020 GA Housing Maximums
(Heated & Unheated Rents)
NOTE: NOT ALL MUNICIPALITIES SHOULD ADOPT THESE SUGGESTED
HOUSING MAXIMUMS! Municipalities should ONLY consider adopting the following
numbers, if these figures are consistent with local rent values. If not, a market survey should be
conducted and the figures should be altered accordingly. The results of any such survey must be
presented to DHHS prior to adoption. Or, no housing maximums should be adopted and
eligibility should be analyzed in terms of the Overall Maximum—Appendix A. (See Instruction
Memo for further guidance.)
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Aroostook County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 113 487 137 587
1 117 502 147 634
2 133 572 173 743
3 186 799 236 1,015
4 192 826 251 1,079
Franklin County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 120 516 143 616
1 121 521 152 653
2 141 606 176 755
3 182 783 232 999
4 266 1,145 318 1,367
Hancock County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 155 667 178 764
1 155 667 184 791
2 184 792 223 958
3 234 1,007 283 1,216
4 248 1,067 308 1,324
Kennebec County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 140 601 162 698
1 140 601 166 713
2 169 725 207 891
3 226 973 275 1,182
4 231 994 291 1,251
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Knox County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 147 630 169 727
1 147 630 169 727
2 169 725 207 891
3 225 969 274 1,178
4 235 1,013 295 1,270
Lincoln County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 162 698 185 795
1 162 698 187 805
2 185 794 223 960
3 238 1,026 287 1,235
4 273 1,175 333 1,432
Oxford County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 139 597 161 694
1 139 597 161 694
2 157 676 196 842
3 232 999 281 1,208
4 266 1,145 326 1,402
Piscataquis County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 113 487 135 580
1 119 512 146 627
2 149 640 181 780
3 203 871 244 1,048
4 237 1,019 293 1,262
Somerset County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 127 548 150 645
1 127 548 156 669
2 162 698 201 864
3 216 928 264 1,137
4 221 950 281 1,207
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Waldo County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 151 650 174 747
1 154 663 184 791
2 171 735 210 901
3 236 1,016 285 1,225
4 305 1,310 364 1,567
Washington County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 127 547 150 644
1 127 547 150 644
2 155 666 193 832
3 195 840 244 1,049
4 204 877 264 1,134
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Bangor HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 141 608 164 705
1 156 670 186 798
2 198 852 237 1,018
3 249 1,073 298 1,282
4 362 1,558 422 1,815
Cumberland Cty.
HMFA
Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 166 714 189 811
1 167 717 197 845
2 217 932 255 1,098
3 310 1,334 359 1,543
4 349 1,500 409 1,757
Lewiston/Auburn MSA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 133 574 156 671
1 137 591 167 719
2 177 763 216 929
3 224 965 273 1,174
4 288 1,240 348 1,497
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Penobscot Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 133 574 156 671
1 133 574 156 671
2 167 720 206 886
3 211 908 260 1,117
4 224 964 284 1,221
Portland HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 218 938 241 1,035
1 232 999 262 1,127
2 298 1,282 337 1,448
3 404 1,737 453 1,946
4 477 2,052 537 2,309
Sagadahoc Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 153 658 176 755
1 168 723 198 851
2 193 832 232 998
3 262 1,125 310 1,334
4 305 1,311 365 1,568
York Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 174 748 197 845
1 179 769 209 897
2 220 946 259 1,112
3 285 1,225 333 1,434
4 308 1,326 368 1,583
York/Kittery/S. Berwick
HMFA
Unheated
Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 223 961 246 1,058
1 223 961 251 1,079
2 295 1,267 333 1,433
3 370 1,593 419 1,802
4 532 2,288 592 2,545
Appendix D
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
2019-2020- ELECTRIC UTILITY MAXIMUMS
NOTE: For an electrically heated dwelling also see “Heating Fuel” maximums below. But
remember, an applicant is not automatically entitled to the “maximums” established?applicants
must demonstrate need.
1) Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water: The maximum
amounts allowed for utilities, for lights, cooking and other electric uses excluding electric hot
water and heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $14.00 $60.00
2 $15.70 $67.50
3 $17.45 $75.00
4 $19.90 $86.00
5 $23.10 $99.00
6 $25.00 $107.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $7.50 per month.
2) Electricity Maximums for Households With Electrically Heated Hot Water: The
maximum amounts allowed for utilities, hot water, for lights, cooking and other electric uses
excluding heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $20.65 $89.00
2 $23.75 $102.00
3 $27.70 $119.00
4 $32.25 $139.00
5 $38.75 $167.00
6 $41.00 $176.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $10.00 per month.
NOTE: For electrically heated households, the maximum amount allowed for electrical utilities
per month shall be the sum of the appropriate maximum amount under this subsection and the
appropriate maximum for heating fuel as provided below.
Appendix E
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
2019-2020 HEATING FUEL MAXIMUMS
Month Gallons Month Gallons
September 50 January 225
October 100 February 225
November 200 March 125
December 200 April 125
May 50
NOTE: When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for
heating purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed
for that month by the current price per gallon. When fuels such as wood, coal and/or
natural gas are used for heating purposes, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are
reasonable. No eligible applicant shall be considered to need more than 7 tons of coal per
year, 8 cords of wood per year, 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or 1000
gallons of propane.
APPENDIX F
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
2019-2020 PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
MAXIMUMS
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $10.50 $45.00
3-4 $11.60 $50.00
5-6 $12.80 $55.00
7-8 $14.00 $60.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $1.25 per week or $5.00 per month.
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
When an applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be
budgeted as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth
or disposable diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 $12.80 $55.00
2 $17.40 $75.00
3 $23.30 $100.00
4 $27.90 $120.00
APPENDIX G
Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate for approved employment and necessary medical
travel etc. is 44 cents (44¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
Effective: 10/01/19 to 09/30/20
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,475.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:
? the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
? the opening and closing of the grave site; and
? a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able
to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery
under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery
will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
? removal of the body from a local residence or institution
? a secured death certificate or obituary
? embalming
? a minimum casket
? a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
? other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the
funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $1,025. Additional costs
may be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
? a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
? a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $55
? transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile
for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
Appendix I
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
Chapter 8
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SKOWHEGAN HERITAGE COUNCIL
Adopted Special Town Meeting
July 20, 1999
Amended, Annual Town Meeting March 12, 2001
A. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Heritage Council
Ordinance of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine” and will be referred to, hereafter, as
“this Ordinance”.
B. AUTHORITY: This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of
Article VIII, part 2, section 1, of the Maine Constitution and the provisions of Title
30-A MRSA §3001 (Home Rule).
C. PURPOSE: The purpose of this Ordinance is to further awareness of Skowhegan’s
rich and diverse past; to integrate that heritage into the future development of the
community by establishing a Council to provide recommendations on heritage issues
to the Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen; and to promote stewardship of the
community’s heritage by cultural, educational, and social organizations.
D. DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL: The Council Shall:
1. Maintain and update the Heritage Profile for the Town of Skowhegan.
2. Seek to coordinate the activities of heritage related organizations in Skowhegan
and to cooperate with other like minded regional entities.
3. Conduct research into the history and heritage of the Town.
4. Advise municipal departments and regional, State and Federal agencies on
heritage issues.
5. Undertake projects to develop and support heritage preservation and
enhancement.
6. Keep records of its meetings and activities and make an annual report to the
Town.
E. COMPOSTION OF THE COUNCIL:
1. The Council shall consist of no less than five (5) nor more than eleven (11)
members, appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
2. The term of each member shall be five (5) years except that initial appointments
shall be staggered to prevent the expiration of the term of more than three (3)
members in any one-year.
3. The Board of Selectmen may remove members of the Heritage Council by
unanimous vote, for cause, after notice and hearing.
F. ORGANIZATION AND RULES
The Council shall elect from its membership a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a
secretary. The term of all officers shall be one (1) year with the eligibility for reelection.
The Chairperson shall call meetings, as required, to further the purposes of this
Ordinance.
The Council shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and a record shall be kept of
its resolutions, transactions, and correspondence. All records shall be deemed public and
may be inspected at reasonable times.
The Council may, from time to time, appoint subcommittees to help further the purposes
of this Ordinance.
G. SEVERABILITY: Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by
the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of this Ordinance.
H. AMENDMENTS: This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the
Municipal Legislative Body.
I. EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the
Municipal Legislative Body.
1
HOLDING TANK ORDINANCE
Approved March 9, 1998
SECTION I. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Town of Skowhegan, Maine,
Holding Tank Ordinance, and will be referred to as this Ordinance.
SECTION II. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish the requirement for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks utilized as first time disposal systems designed to receive
and retain wastewater from residential use. It is hereby declared that the enactment of
this Ordinance is necessary for the protection, benefit, and preservation of the health,
safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Skowhegan, Maine.
SECTION III. Authority and Administration
A. This Ordinance is hereby adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to and
consistent with Article VIII of the Maine Constitution, the provision of Title
30-A and the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules (144A CMR
241).
B. This Ordinance shall be administered by the Board of Selectmen and the
Local Plumbing Inspector.
SECTION IV. Applicability
This Ordinance applies to the approval for the installation, and maintenance, of
holding tanks as first time disposal systems in a areas not governed by the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance. In addition to the prohibition on using holding tanks as first time
disposal systems in the Shoreland Zone they are also prohibited from being used to
satisfy the requirements of a Seasonal Conversion Permit.
SECTION V. Amendments, Validity and Severability and Effective Date.
A. Amendments.
1. Initiation of Amendments: an amendment to this Ordinance may be
initiated by:
a. The Local Plumbing Inspector;
b. The Board of Selectmen, provided a majority of the Board has so
voted; or
2
c. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least 10% of the
number of votes cast in the municipality in the last gubernatorial
election.
2. The Board of Selectmen shall hod a public hearing on the proposed
amendment at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting of the
Governing Body. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted at the Town
Office at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. Notice o f the
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area. The date of the first notice shall be at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the hearing and the date of the second notice shall be at least seven (7)
days before the hearing.
3. Adoption of Amendments: An amendment to this Ordinance may be
adopted by a majority vote of the Town Meeting.
B. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by any court to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision.
C. Effective Date
The effective date of the Ordinance is the date of adoption by the Town
Meeting.
SECTION VI. Enforcement
A. Nuisances
Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance.
B. Local Plumbing Inspector
It shall be the duty of the Local Plumbing Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. If the local Plumbing Inspector shall find
that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, they shall notify in
writing, the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of
the violation and the action necessary to correct it. A copy of such notices
shall be maintained as a permanent
record.
C. Legal Action
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of
the violation or nuisance condition, the Selectmen, upon notification from
3
the Plumbing Inspector, are hereby authorized and directed to institute any
and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including
seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the
name of the Municipality.
D. Fines
Any person, including but not limited to the landowner, a landowners
agent or a contractor, who orders or conducts any activity in violation of
this Ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 4452. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate
violation. Such persons shall also be liable for court costs and attorney
fees incurred by the Town of Skowhegan.
SECTION VIII. Application Procedure and Content
A. Application Procedure
1. All applications for a Holding Tank Permit shall be in writing on forms
provided for that purpose. Applications shall be received at the Local
Plumbing Inspector’s office and presented to the Board of Selectmen at
their regular scheduled meeting.
2. The applicant, or his duly authorized agent, shall attend the Selectmen’s
meeting to discuss the application. The Selectmen, or their designee, shall
provide the applicant with a dated receipt at the meeting where the
application is first presented.
3. Within thirty-five (35) days of receiving an application the Selectmen
shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
B. Fees
All applications for a first timed Holding Tank Permit shall be accompanied
by an application fee of twenty-five (25) dollars. If the application is
approved by the Board of Selectmen, a plumbing permit fee of one hundred
(100) dollars will be charged at the time a plumbing permit is issued by the
Local Plumbing Inspector.
C. Expiration of Approvals
All Holding Tank Permit approvals shall expire two (2) years after the
date of issuance unless the work thereunder has commenced and, in this
case, the permit can be extended for a n additional six (6) months.
4
D. All applications for a permit for a holding tank for first time disposal shall be made in
writing on forms provided for that purpose. The submission shall contain the
following information and exhibits:
1. Name of the owner(s) of record and applicant’s name and address, if different.
2. Sketch map showing the general location of the property;
3. The tax map and lot number of the parcel;
4. A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the property or other
documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on the part of
the applicant;
5. A signed agreement between the property owner and a tank pumper to pump and
maintain the tank on a regular basis;
6. A completed HHE 200 application from a licensed Site Evaluator that indicates
that due to site conditions, lot configuration, or other constraints, the installation
of a system with a disposal field that complies with the State Plumbing Code is
not legally possible.
SECTION IX. Performance Standards
The following standards shall be utilized by the Board in reviewing applications for a
holding tank for first time disposal systems. The Board shall approve the application
unless the Board finds that the applicant has not satisfied one or more of the following
standards.
A. A holding tank for a first time disposal system shall not be permitted in any area
regulated under the Town of Skowhegan’s Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
B. A holding tank for a first time disposal system shall not be permitted to satisfy
the requirements for a Seasonal Conversion Permit under Title 30-A MRSA
Section 4215 subsection 2.
C. The installation of a disposal system in compliance with the State Plumbing Code
is not feasible due to site conditions, lot configuration, or other constraints.
D. The interior plumbing shall be modified for weather conservation and all water
closets shall not exceed 1.6 gallons per flush.
E. The structure that is served by a holding tank shall have a notarized statement
that a holding tank is serving the structure for the disposal of human sewage and
wastewater. This statement shall be attached to the deed and recorded in the
Registry of Deeds within ten (10) days of the approval of the permit. The Local
5
Plumbing Inspector shall not issue a plumbing permit until he/she has received a
copy of the deed with the aforementioned statement.
F. The agreement between the property owner and tank pumper shall be filed in the
Town Office and indicate the location of the site or sites that the septage will be
disposed of. Only those sites approved by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection shall be utilized.
G. The property owner shall deep a copy of the pumping records and, if ordered,
provide the Local Plumbing Inspector with copies of all such records within three
(3) days of notification
H. The holding tank shall be equipped with a visual and audible alarm device. The
alarm shall be located and adjusted in a manner that assures that the tank is
pumped before it is full.
SECTION X. Appeals
An appeal may be taken by a aggrieved party to Superior Court in accordance with
State law within forty-five (45) days from the date any decision of the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION XI. Definitions
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly affected by the granting
or denial of a permit; or a person whose land abuts or is across a road or street from
which a permit is granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered
particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of a permit.
Holding Tank: A closed, water-tight structure designed and used to receive and store
waste water or septic tank effluent. A holding tank does not discharge waste water or
septic tank effluent to surface or ground water or onto the surface of the ground. Holding
Tanks are designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of waste wafer at
another site.
Local Plumbing Inspector: A person as defined in Title 30-A MRSA Section 4221 and
Title 30-A Section 4451.
Seasonal Conversion Permit: Written authorization issued by the Local Plumbing
Inspector to allow the conversion of a seasonal dwelling unit located in a shoreland zone
to a year-round use as per title 30 A MRSA Section 4201-4216.
Waste Water: Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or
solution, or the water carried waste from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubes,
washing machines, sinks, dishwashers, or other sources of water-carried waste of human
6
origin. This term specifically excludes industrial, hazardous, or toxic wastes and
materials.
92
Chapter 9
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
SECTION 1. License and permit schedule.
The following provisions relative to licenses shall be applicable in the Town of Skowhegan:
(1) Bowling, pool and shooting galleries.
(a) See 8 M.R.S.A. Section 1 et seq. or as amended
(b) License issued by municipal officers.
(c) License fee-----------------------------------------------------------$30.00each
Public Hearing
(2) Circuses and carnivals.
a) See 8 M.R.S.A. Section 502, or as amended.
b) Licenses issued by municipal officers.
c) License fee-----------------------------------------------------------$30.00per day
(3) Innkeepers and victualers, and lodging houses.
(a) Refer to Town Ordinance.
(b) Licensed by municipal officers.
(c) License fee------------------------------------------------------------$30.00each
Public Hearing
(4) Junkyards and auto graveyards.S\
(a)See 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3756, or as amended.
(b) Licensed issued by municipal officers
(c)License fee-----------------------------------------------------------$100.00
Public Hearing
(5) Pinball machines.
(a) Title 8 M.R.S.A. Section 441 et seq.
(b) Clerk to issue license.
(c) License fee-------------------------------------------------------------$30.00
93
(6) Special Amusement
(a) Refer to Town Ordinance.
(b) License issued by municipal officers.
(c) License fee--------------------------------------------------------------$30.00
(7) Pawnbrokers
(a) Refer to Town Ordinance
(b) Licensed issued by municipal officers.
(c) License fee--------------------------------------------------------------$55.00
1
Chapter 34
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
LOITERING
SECTION I Purpose
This ordinance is in accordance with prevailing community standards. Its
purpose is to regulate the conduct of persons on public ways who are committing
violations of law. It is to be enforced for the benefit of the public’s good, safety
and welfare.
SECTION II Definitions
Loitering means remaining idle in essentially (1) one location and shall
include the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to
saunter, to delay, or to stand around.
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort to business, entertainment or other lawful purpose and shall also
include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business. Public place shall also mean public grounds, parking areas,
parks, and other property under the jurisdiction of the town.
SECTION III Restrictions
It shall be unlawful for any person, at a public place or upon private property
within the town where the owner has given the town permission, to loiter, stand,
or remain idle, either alone or in concert with others, and:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public
parking area or any other public place or building so as to hinder or
impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians, or
(2) Commit any violation of state law or municipal ordinance, or
(3) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or breach of the peace,
and
(4) Refuse to leave such property, when requested to do so by a law
enforcement officer, provided that such officer has exercised his/her
discretion reasonably under the circumstances in order to preserve or
promote public order.
2
SECTION IV Exceptions to Enforcement
Special events sponsored by a recognized non-profit agency are excluded
from enforcement provided written request for such exception is made to the
Board of Selectmen within a reasonable time prior to the scheduled event.
SECTION V Penalty
Any person who violates any section of this Ordinance commits a civil
violation for which forfeiture, not to exceed ($100.00) one hundred dollars, may
be adjudged.
SECTION VI Severability
If any provision of this Ordinance is determined invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not render invalid the remaining
portions of the Ordinance.
SECTION VII Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department.
432
Chapter 39
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
Administrative Ordinance
Town of Skowhegan, Maine
Adopted: Town Meeting June 11, 2012 Article 48
1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code Administrative Ordinance” of the Town of Skowhegan,
Maine.
2. Purpose and Authority. The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish administrative
and enforcement provisions in relation to the Maine Uniform Building and Energy
Code (MUBEC). The Town has authority to enact building code provisions relating
to local enforcement, per MRSA Title 10 § 9724(5).
3. Code Administration. In accordance with MRSA 25 § 2373, the MUBEC must be
enforced in the Town of Skowhegan beginning July 1, 2012. The Town is required to
enforce the MUBEC through inspections that comply with the code. In accordance
with MRSA 25 § 2373(4), the Town has chosen the Building Official option for all
enforcement in relation to structures covered under the International Residential Code
and the Third-Party Inspector option for enforcement in relation to structures covered
under the International Building Code. The MUBEC shall be administered within the
Town of Skowhegan by the Town’s duly appointed Building Official.
4. Duties. The Building Official’s duties shall be as outlined in the MUBEC, and shall
include but are not limited to:
a. Receive permit applications, examine construction documents and issue permits
for the erection and alterations of buildings and structures.
b. For structures covered by the International Residential Code, the Building
Official shall inspect premises for which permits are issued. Make all required
inspections, or accept reports of inspection by approved agencies.
c. For structures covered by the International Building Code, the Building
Official shall receive certified reports from Third-Party Inspectors as outlined
below.
d. Enforce compliance with the provisions of the code and issue notices or orders
to ensure compliance, including suspending or revoking permits.
e. Render interpretations of the MUBEC and adopt policies and procedures to
clarify the application of its provisions.
f. Keep official records, applications received, permits and certificates issued,
fees collected, reports of inspections by the Building Official and Third-Party
Inspectors, as well as notices and orders issued.
433
g. Collect any fees due.
h. Refer permits requiring subdivision, shoreland zoning or floodplain review to
the Planning Board as required.
i. Investigate complaints and act on violations as outlined herein.
j. Issue Certificates of Occupancy as per MRSA 25 § 2357-A and the MUBEC.
5. Building Permits. Building permits are required as per the MUBEC and shall expire
as specified therein. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official until
such time that the applicant submits a completed building permit application. Such
application shall:
a. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application
is made.
b. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description,
street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate
the proposed building or work.
c. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required by
MUBEC.
e. State the valuation of the proposed work.
f. Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.
g. Give such other data and information as required by the building official.
h. For structures covered by the International Building Code – Include certification
of a contractual arrangement between a Third-Party Inspector and the building
owner.
i. A copy of all required State of Maine Fire Marshal’s building permits.
6. Permit Approval. The Building Official shall examine applications and shall either
issue the requested permit or transmit notice of refusal to the applicant in writing
stating the reasons therefore. All other permits required for the proposal shall be
obtained prior to issuance of the building permit.
7. Inspections. In accordance with the MUBEC, for structures covered by the
International Residential Code, upon notification the Building Official shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is
satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to
comply. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not
be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official. Work shall not be
done beyond the point indicated in each inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the Building Official.
434
8. Third-Party Inspectors (as defined in MRSA 25 § 2371). For structures covered by
the International Building Code, certified reports from third-party inspectors, as
outlined in MRSA 25 § 2373(4), shall be submitted to the building official prior to
obtaining a certificate of occupancy as required in MRSA 25 § 2357-A. Such thirdparty
inspections shall be obtained pursuant to independent contractual arrangements
between the building owner and a third-party inspector.
9. Fees. Prior to issuance of a Permit, the applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable
application fee. No building permit shall be issued until all fees due have
been paid.
All fees required by this Ordinance shall be established by the Board of Selectmen
and published within a schedule of fees, which the Selectmen may amend from time
to time according to the procedures required for taking actions at meetings of the
Board.
10. Permit Modifications. After issuance, any modifications to a permit application shall
require a revised permit application and a revised permit prior to beginning work.
11. Certificate of Occupancy. The Building Official shall issue a Certificate of
Occupancy per MRSA 25 § 2357-A and in accordance with the MUBEC prior to a
building or structure being used or occupied or and prior to a change in the existing
occupancy classification. For structures covered by the International Building Code,
the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy based on receipt of an
inspection report by a certified third-party inspectors.
12. Enforcement. Enforcement and penalties shall be consistent with MRSA 30-A §
4452. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove,
demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the MUBEC,
or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions
of the MUBEC. If the Building Official finds that any of the provisions of this
Ordinance are being violated, the Building Official shall serve a notice of violation on
the person responsible for the violation. Such notice shall direct the discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The Building
Official shall be responsible for initial efforts to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance, but enforcement cases shall be turned over to the Board of Selectmen if
the matter requires prosecution in court.
13. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of any building
or premises or part thereof who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
commits a civil violation and is subject to civil penalties under MRSA 30-A § 4452.
Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist, after notification by
the Building Official, shall constitute a separate violation. All fines shall be paid to
the Town of Skowhegan
435
14. Appeals. In accordance with MRSA 25 § 2356 and MRSA 30-A § 4103(5), an appeal
may be taken in writing from any order or direction of the Building Official to the
Board of Appeals. Fees for appeals shall be established as outlined above.
15. After the Fact Permits. In the event that any person is found to have begun work
prior to obtaining a permit as required, the permit fees otherwise set forth in the
schedule of fees shall be doubled.
16. Savings Clause. If any provision of this Ordinance is found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, this finding shall not affect the remainder of this Ordinance.
17. Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance shall be July 1, 2012.









Town of Skowhegan
Obscenity and Adult Entertainment Ordinance
Adopted: Town Meeting, June 10, 2019
SECTION I AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, part 2, Section 1 of
the Maine Constitution; the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Authority (30-A MRSA
Section 3001 et seq.) and by Title 28-A M.R.S.A.1054 regarding the authority to require a permit
for music, dancing or entertainment on licensed premises.
SECTION II APPLICABILITY
Persons or entities wishing to establish an Adult Entertainment Business within the Town of
Skowhegan shall first obtain a permit from the town and shall be subject to the provisions of this
ordinance.
In addition this ordinance identifies offences and penalties for any person engaging in commerce
in obscene materials, obscene devices or obscene performances.
SECTION III PURPOSE
It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate Adult Entertainment Businesses in order to promote
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of adult entertainment
businesses within the town. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene material.
In addition the purpose of this ordinance is to protect the morals of the community by using the
recognized, traditional police power of government to protect societal order, morality, physical
and emotional health and human dignity. This ordinance also acts to reduce the likelihood of
criminal activity, moral degradation, sexually transmitted diseases and disturbances of the peace,
without infringing on protected First Amendment rights; and to establish the community standard
on obscene material and performances.
Obscenity and Adult Entertainment Ordinance June 10, 2019
2
SECTION IV ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
4.1 Prohibitions
a) No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any Adult Entertainment Businesses,
as defined, within seven hundred and fifty feet of any church, public or private school,
library, or any municipally owned or state-owned park, athletic field or recreational
facility that is open to the public where children are the primary users.
b) For the purpose of this Ordinance, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises for an Adult Entertainment Business to the nearest
property line of a church, school, library or to the nearest boundary of a park, athletic field
or recreational facility.
4.2 Application for a Permit to Operate an Adult Entertainment Business
Applications for a permit to operate an Adult Entertainment Business shall be available at the
Town Clerk’s Office and shall include the following:
a) Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
b) Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association which will operate the
Adult Entertainment Business, if the permit is granted.
c) Such other information as the Board of Selectmen shall request in order to have all facts
before it prior to making a decision.
d) Upon receipt of such application and any necessary supplementary information, the Board
of Selectmen shall set a date for a public hearing in regard to the granting of such a license,
and a notice of such public hearing shall be published no earlier than twenty (20) days and
no later than ten (10) days before the date of such public hearing.
Adult Entertainment Licenses issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall be for a term of no more than
one year. The fee for an Adult Entertainment Business license shall be set by the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION V OBSCENE MATERIAL, DEVICES AND PERFORMANCE
5.1 Offences
a) A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, they wholesale
promote or possess with the intent to wholesale promote any obscene material or
obscene device as defined.
b) A person commits an offense if, knowing its content and character, said person:
i. Promotes or possesses with intent to promote any obscene material or obscene
device; or
Obscenity and Adult Entertainment Ordinance June 10, 2019
3
ii. Produces, presents, or directs an obscene performance or participates in a portion
thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity.
c) A person who promotes, or wholesale promotes, obscene material or an obscene device,
or possesses the same with intent to promote or wholesale promote it in the course of
their business is presumed to do so with the knowledge of its content and character.
d) This section does not apply to a person who possesses or distributes obscene material
or obscene devices or participates in conduct otherwise proscribed by this section when
the possession, participation, or conduct occurs in the course of law enforcement
activities.
SECTION VI INSPECTIONS
Whenever inspections of the adult entertainment and/or licensed premises is required by this
ordinance, state law or is reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any town ordinance,
code, regulation or state law, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the
premises to be inspected, to admit any law enforcement officer, official or employee of the town
authorized to make the inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
SECTION VII ENFORCEMENT
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department.
SECTION VIII PENALTIES
8.1 Obscenity
The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for a first offense, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second
offense, and two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a third or subsequent offense, regardless of the
time between offenses. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall
occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such penalties the town may enjoin or
abate any violation of this ordinance by appropriate action and, if the court finds for the town, the
town shall recover its costs of suit, including reasonable experts' fees, reasonable attorneys' fees
and reasonable investigative costs.
8.2 Adult Entertainment
Any person who violates this Ordinance commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be adjudged. Each day, during any portion of which,
any violation of the Ordinance is committed, permitted or continued, shall constitute a separate
offense. The Board of Selectmen may, after notice to the licensee and hearing, suspend or revoke
the permit issued under this Ordinance upon a finding that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
Obscenity and Adult Entertainment Ordinance June 10, 2019
4
SECTION IX SEVERABILITY
In the event that any section or any portion of this Ordinance shall be declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not be deemed to affect
the validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance.
SECTION X CONFLICT
This ordinance shall not in any way impair, or remove, the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw or provision of law.
SECTION XI DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the same meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Adult Entertainment Business means:
a) Adult Book Store is a person, establishment or business having more than a minimal
portion of its stock in trade, such as recordings, books, magazines, periodical films, video
tapes/cassettes or other reading or viewing materials for sale or viewing at the premises,
materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specific or general sexual activities or anatomical areas; or an
establishment with a section devoted to the sale or display or viewing of such materials.
b) Adult Motion Picture Theater is a structure--either indoors or outdoors-used for showing,
displaying or presenting to patrons therein or thereat materials distinguished and
characterized by emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to specific or general sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
c) Adult Motion Picture Arcade is a place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein
coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, mechanically or otherwise controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to any one person, at any machine, at any time so displayed as
to distinguish or characterize by emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual
activities or specific anatomical areas.
d) Massage Establishment is a place of business where any person, firm, association, or
corporation engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the
following activities:
i. Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the human body with
the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or device, with or
without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or others similar preparations.
The term "Massage Establishment’ shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, or medical
clinics or to persons possessing a license to practice massage therapy under the laws of the
State of Maine.
Obscenity and Adult Entertainment Ordinance June 10, 2019
5
Material means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or any picture,
drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure,
or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction but does not
include an actual three-dimensional obscene device.
Obscene shall mean to the average person applying contemporary community standards the
predominant appeal of the matter or act taken as a whole, is to prurient interest, and the matter or
act depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct or lewd exhibition of the
genitals or other body parts mentioned in this ordinance and the manner or act or performance
considered as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; or any matter or
acts or performance which are prohibited by the statutes of the State of Maine.
Obscene Device means any physical three-dimensional object or item that is classified as
“obscene”, as defined in this ordinance.
Patently Offensive means so offensive on its face as to be intolerable to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards.
Performance means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance, or other exhibition, or
entertainment performed before an audience.
Person means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or legal representative, acting
individually or jointly.
Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, give, provide, lend, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit,
publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, present, exhibit, advertise, or to offer or agree to do the
same.
Prurient interest in sex means a shameful or morbid interest in sex.
Sexually-Oriented Material means any element of adult merchandise, or any book, periodical,
magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or other visual representation
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to Specified Sexual
Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas
Specific Anatomical Area means less than completely covered human genitals, pubic regions,
and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and the human male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
Specific Sexual Activity means:
a. Human male genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
b. Ultimate sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human or animal genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or
breasts.
Wholesale Promote means to manufacture, issue, sell, provide, mail, deliver, transfer, transmit,
publish, distribute, circulate, disseminate, or to offer or agree to do the same for the purpose of
resale.
Town of Skowhegan
Ordinance Prohibiting Retail Marijuana Establishments
and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
Adopted June 12, 2017, Annual Town Meeting
Section 1. Authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the Marijuana Legalization Act, 7 M.R.S.A. c. 417; and
Municipal Home Rule Authority, Me. Const., art. VIII, pt. 2; and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
Section 2. Definitions
For purposes of this ordinance, retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores,
retail marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and retail
marijuana testing facilities, and retail marijuana social clubs are defined as set forth in 7 M.R.S.A. §
2442. Shown here as follows:
1. Retail marijuana cultivation facility. "Retail marijuana cultivation facility" means an entity
licensed to cultivate, prepare and package retail marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail
marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.
2. Retail marijuana establishment. "Retail marijuana establishment" means a retail marijuana
store, a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility or a
retail marijuana testing facility.
3. Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility. "Retail marijuana products manufacturing
facility" means an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package
retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products only to other
retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores and retail marijuana
social clubs.
4. Retail marijuana social club. "Retail marijuana social club" means an entity licensed to sell
retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers for consumption on the licensed
premises.
5. Retail marijuana store. "Retail marijuana store" means an entity licensed to purchase retail
marijuana from a retail marijuana cultivation facility and to purchase retail marijuana products
from a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility and to sell retail marijuana and retail
marijuana products to consumers.
6. Retail marijuana testing facility. "Retail marijuana testing facility" means an entity licensed
and certified to analyze and certify the safety and potency of retail marijuana and retail marijuana
products.
Section 3. Prohibition on Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
Retail marijuana establishments, including retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation
facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, and retail marijuana testing facilities,
and retail marijuana social clubs, are expressly prohibited in this municipality.
No person or organization shall develop or operate a business that engages in retail or wholesale
sales of a retail marijuana product, as defined by 7 M.R.S.A. § 2442.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to prohibit any lawful use, possession or conduct pursuant to
the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A. c. 558-C.
Section 4. Effective date; duration
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon enactment by the municipal legislative body
unless otherwise provided and shall remain in effect until it is amended or repealed.
Section 5. Penalties
This ordinance shall be enforced by the municipal officers or their designee. Violations of this
ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
SKOWHEGAN PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY
(PACE) ORDINANCE
Adopted at Town Meeting June 6, 2011
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, “An
Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known
as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying
property can access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the
City/Town, financed by funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds available for
this purpose, and to enter into a contract with the Trust to administer functions of its PACE
program; and
WHEREAS, the Municipality wishes to establish a PACE program; and
NOW THEREFORE, the Municipality hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
§ XX-1 Purpose
By and through this Chapter, the Town of Skowhegan declares as its public purpose the
establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for
energy saving improvements to their properties located in the Town. The Town declares its
purpose and the provisions of this Chapter/Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and State
laws.
§ XX-2 Enabling Legislation
The Town enacts this Chapter/Ordinance pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th
Maine State Legislature -- “An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for
Homeowners and Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the
PACE Act” (codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
§ XX-3 Title
This Chapter/Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the Town of Skowhegan Property
Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
§ XX-4 Definitions
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Chapter/Ordinance shall
have their customary meanings; as used in this Chapter/Ordinance, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an
improvement to qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property
and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or similar
energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements
of residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the
Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that
meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the Town of Skowhegan.
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of
qualifying property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on
qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying
property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against
qualifying property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality
establishes a PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s
boundaries.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to
the owner(s) of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made
pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying
property.
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State
statute by the Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy
savings improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the
PACE district of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a
fixture, product, system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter
at a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy
systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems
eligible for funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean
Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
1. Establishment; funding. The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE program
allowing owners of qualifying property located in the PACE district who so choose to
access financing for energy saving improvements to their property through PACE loans
administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available from the Trust in
municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE Ordinance, 2) adopt and implement a local public
outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust
to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the municipality’s
PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration
of the municipality’s PACE program.
2. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the Municipality may from time to
time amend this Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it or
appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality
shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
1. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust adopts
standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to the
Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model documents
substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality shall take necessary steps to
conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules, or model
documents.
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the Municipality will enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program for the
Municipality. The PACE administration contract with the Trust will establish the
administration of the PACE program including, without limitation, that:
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the Municipality’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE
mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
vii. the Trust or its agent on behalf of the Municipality, promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE
loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with
adopting this Ordinance, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an education
and outreach program so that citizens of the Municipality are made aware of
home energy saving opportunities, including the opportunity to finance energy
saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust
and consistent with applicable law.
2. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and
tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for
claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a PACE program,
including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above,
a municipality has no liability to a property owner for or related to energy savings
improvements financed under a PACE program.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS ORDINANCE
Adopted: Town Meeting, March 8, 1999
Amended: Town Meeting, June 10, 2019
Section I. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Parades and Processions Ordinance of the Town of
Skowhegan, Maine.
Section II. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety and well-being of any participants in a
parade, walk, road race or processions, as well as the citizens of the Town of Skowhegan, by
requiring a permit for such event.
Section III. Permission Required
(A) No person, corporation, partnership or other entity may hold, sponsor or organize any such
parade or procession, including but not limited to a march, ceremony, exhibition, pageant,
walk or foot race upon any public way or in or upon any municipally owned parks, fields, or
lands, without first obtaining permission from the Board of Selectmen or their designated
agent.
(B) Exceptions: This Ordinance shall not be applicable to the following:
1. Funeral Processions
2. Town or school sponsored events, providing such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper Town or school authorities; or
3. Parades or processions by the United States armed forces.
Section IV. Permit Application
(A) A person, corporation, partnership or other entity seeking a Parade or Procession permit shall
file an application with the Town Clerk on a form provided by the Town. The fee will be
paid to the Town Clerk upon the filing of the permit application. Non-profit charitable
organizations are exempt from payment of the filing fee upon the approval of the Town
Clerk, Town Manager or their designee. The current level of Fee is recorded in the Town of
Skowhegan Schedule of Fees.
(B) An application for a Parades and Processions permit must be filed with the Town Clerk no
less than seven (7) days prior to the next scheduled Board of Selectmen’s meeting.
Parades and Processions June 10, 2019
2
(C) An application for the Parades and Processions Permit shall set forth the following
information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the person,, corporation, partnership or
other entity seeking to conduct the parade or procession;
2. If the parade or procession is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by a
corporation, partnership or other entity seeking to conduct the parade or procession;
3. The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the parade or
procession chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
4. The proposed date of the parade or procession;
5. The starting point, the route to be traveled and the termination point of the parade or
procession;
6. The approximate number of persons, animals, and/or vehicles that will participate in the
parade or procession and a description of the types of animals and vehicles;
7. The proposed time of day when the parade or procession will begin or terminate.
8. The identity of any public ways and town parks, fields and lands that will be used for the
parade or procession;
9. If the parade or procession will use a public way or ways; a statement as to whether the
parade or procession will occupy all or a portion of the width of the way or ways; and
10. A description of the nature of the parade or procession (i.e. a road race, parade or march,
etc.)
Section V. Standards for Issuance
The Board of Selectmen or it’s designated agent shall approve a Parades and Processions Permit
Application upon finding after reviewing the application that:
(A) The conduct of the parade or procession will not substantially interfere with the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic on public ways.
(B) The conduct of the parade or procession will not interfere with proper police and fire
protection of, or rescue service to, residents of the Town of Skowhegan.
Section VI. Special Circumstances for Permit Expedition
If there is a reasonable need for expedition of the permit, approval can be obtained by the
Selectmen’s designated agent after they have consulted with the Selectmen regarding the application.
Parades and Processions June 10, 2019
3
Section VII. Notice of Rejection
If the Board of Selectmen or its designated agent deny the permit application, the Town Manager
shall notify the applicant within seven (7) days after the application is received by him/her. If the
Board of Selectmen deny the application, they shall notify the applicant in writing of that denial,
stating the reasons for that denial.
Section VIII. Right to appeal
An appeal from the decision of the Board of Selectmen may be taken to the superior court as
provided by applicable law.
Section IX. Alternative Permit
The Board of Selectmen, in denying an application for a Parades and Processions Permit, is
authorized to approve the conduct of the proposed parade or procession on a date, at a time or over a
route different than proposed by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit
shall, within seven (7) days of the date of the Board of Selectmen’s action, file a written notice of
acceptance with the Town Clerk. An alternative permit shall conform with all conditions and
requirements of this Ordinance.
Section X. Conditions
Prior to the actual issuance of a Parades and Processions permit under this Ordinance, the applicant
shall obtain insurance in an amount not less than $300,000 form a company authorized to do business
in the State of Maine to protect the Town, it’s officers, agents and employees from claims and
damages for property damage and/or personal injury that may arise out of the parade coverage and
listing the Town of Skowhegan and its agents, officials and employees as additional named insured,
however, the board of Selectmen may waive the requirement upon good cause shown.
Section XI. Conduct during Parades and Processions
(A) No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or procession or with
any person, vehicles or animal participating in or used in a parade or procession.
(B) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between persons, vehicles or animals comprising of a
parade or procession when such persons, vehicles or animals are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as part of the parade or procession.
Section XII. Penalty
Any person who violates Section III (A) and X of this ordinance commits a civil violation for which
a forfeiture not to exceed two hundred (200.00) dollars may be adjudged.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
PAWNBROKERS / PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS ORDINANCE
Adopted August 8, 2000
Amended at Town Meeting June 11, 2018
SECTION 1 - Definitions
(A) Dealer means a person who engages in the business of purchasing, selling or
acquiring through exchange secondhand precious metals.
(B) Minor shall mean any person who has not yet attained eighteen years of age.
(C) Pawn transaction shall mean the lending of money on the security of pledged
tangible property. The term also includes the purchase of tangible fixed property on the
condition that it may be purchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of
time.
(D) Pawnbroker shall mean and include any person who is in the business or
occupation of engaging in pawn transactions.
(E) Precious metals mean any item composed in whole or in part of gold, silver,
palladium or platinum, but does not include dental gold, unrefined metal ore, an
electronic product, any part of a mechanical system on a motor vehicle or gold or silver
coins or bullion.
(F) Seller means a person who sells or provides through an exchange secondhand
precious metals to a dealer.
SECTION 2 -License Required
A person, firm, or corporation may not act as a pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand precious
metals without registering and obtaining a permit issued by the Town of Skowhegan under
written license granted by the Board of Selectmen and issued under the signature of the Town
Clerk.
A dealer shall provide the address of the permanent place of business at which the dealer will do
business to the Town of Skowhegan and shall notify the Town of Skowhegan if the location
changes.
Pawnbroker / Precious Metals Dealers Ordinance June 11, 2018
2
SECTION 3 - License Fee
A dealers / pawnbroker’s license shall be issued upon payment of a Fee established by the Board
of Selectmen via the Application, License and Permit Fees Ordinance. Said license shall be
effective from the date issued and be valid for a period of one (1) year unless sooner revoked by
the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 4 - Purchase from minors
No dealer / pawnbroker shall directly or indirectly either purchase or receive by way of barter or
exchange any goods or articles from a minor, knowing or having reason to believe him or her to
be as such.
SECTION 5 - Record keeping
Every Dealer / Pawnbroker, at the time of receiving any precious metal or article pawned,
pledged or received in exchange, or any other article or consideration, shall fulfill the following
requirements:
A. Complete in duplicate a sworn statement stating the name, age, sex and address of
the person with whom the transaction is being made, the day and hour when the
transaction took place and the price paid by the licensee;
B. A full accurate and a detailed description including all distinguishing marks and
numbers of each article so pawned, pledged, or exchanged as will make its identification
certain and plain; A digital photograph of each item that is the subject of the transaction.
A pawnbroker / dealer may satisfy the requirements of this paragraph by taking digital
photographs of groups of 5 or fewer substantially similar items, as long as the quality of
each digital photograph is sufficient to allow the item to be identified by the owner;
C. A signed, in duplicate statement of ownership from the seller of the transaction
items stating that the seller is the owner or is otherwise authorized to sell the items. This
shall be made on a form provided by the dealer that details the source from which and the
time when the pawner, pledgor, or vendor procured the items of transaction and also
conspicuously bears the warning that making a false statement is a Class D crime under
Title 17-A, section 453.
Before the hour of 10 a.m. of the next business day following the transaction shall be
delivered or cause to be delivered at the office of the chief of police, one (1) of such
duplicate sworn statements to be kept on file by the police department and he or she shall
retain the other statement in his or her possession, which, together with any article therein
listed, may be inspected by any police officer at any and all times.
Pawnbroker / Precious Metals Dealers Ordinance June 11, 2018
3
D. Articles purchased outright by dealers / pawnbrokers shall be retained on the
premises not less than fifteen (15) days, unless sooner released by the chief of police, and
no article pawned, traded or purchased shall be altered or changed until opportunity shall
have been given for examination of such articles by the chief of police or his/her
designated representative.
A precious metals dealer who determines that the precious metals are not listed in an
electronic database designed to catalog stolen property may sell or alter the precious
metals five (5) business days after the date of acquisition.
E. For pawn transactions only, give the pawner a statement that the pawnbroker
will return the article at a stipulated price which shall be computed in accordance with the
requirements of Title 30-A § 3963;
SECTION 6 - Retention and maintenance of records.
The records required under Section 5 must be kept for a period of one year and maintained in
order by date of purchase.
SECTION 7 - Identification
Every dealer / pawnbroker is required to obtain a driver’s license or an official state
identification card from a pawner, pledgor, or vendor whenever receiving any article pawned,
purchased, pledged or received in exchange.
SECTION 8 - Enforcement and Penalty
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department. Any dealer /
pawnbroker who violates the regulations of this Ordinance commits a civil violation for which a
forfeiture not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) may be adjudged.
SECTION 9 - Exemption.
This ordinance does not apply to an auctioneer licensed under Title 32, chapter 5-B.
Chapter 11
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
PLANNING BOARD ORDINANCE
Adopted March 11, 1991, Annual Town Meeting, Article #38
Amended February 14, 2012, Special Town Meeting, Article #4
1. Establishment. Pursuant to Art. VIII, pt2. Section 1 of the Maine Constitution and 30-A
MRSA, Section 3001, the Town of Skowhegan hereby establishes the Skowhegan Planning
Board.
2. Appointment.
A. Board members shall be appointed by the municipal officers and sworn by the clerk
or other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. The board shall consist of seven (7) members.
B. The term of each member shall be five (5) years, except the initial appointments,
which shall be staggered to prevent expiration of the term for more than two (2)
members in any one-(1) year.
C. When there is permanent vacancy, the municipal officers shall within 60 days of its
occurrence appoint a person to serve for the un-expired term. A vacancy shall occur
upon the resignation or death of any member, or when a member ceases to be a voting
resident of the town, or when a member fails to attend four (4) consecutive regular
meeting, or fails to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding twelve
(12) month period. When a vacancy occurs, the chairman of the board shall
immediately so advise the municipal officer in writing. The board may recommend
to the municipal officers that the attendance provision be waived for cause, in which
case, no vacancy will then exist until the municipal officers disapprove the
recommendation. The municipal officers may remove members of the planning
board by unanimous vote, for cause, after notice and hearing.
3. Organization and Rules.
A. The board shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary from among its
members. The term of all offices shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election.
B. Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular
matter shall be decided by a majority vote of the members except the member who is
being challenged.
C. The chairman shall call at least one (1) regular meetings of the board each month.
Special meetings can be called at the discretion of the Chairman or the Board based
on their By-laws. No meeting of the board shall be held without a quorum consisting
of four (4) members authorized to vote.
D. The board shall act by majority vote, calculated on the basis of the number of
members present and voting.
E. The board shall adopt rules for transaction of business and a record shall be kept of its
resolutions, transaction, and correspondence, finding and determination. All records
shall be deemed public and may be inspected at reasonable times.
4. Duties: Powers
A. The Board shall serve as the Comprehensive Planning Committee for the Town of
Skowhegan as defined by 30-A MRSA Section 4234.
B. The board shall review and approve or deny all applications for subdivision as
defined in Section 30-A, 4401.
C. The board shall perform those duties and exercise those powers conferred upon it by
municipal ordinances and the laws of the State of Maine.
D. The board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper function within the
limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
The Skowhegan Planning Department shall provide administrative and staff support for
the Planning Board.
314
Chapter 27
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
POLICE
SECTION 1. Appointment of Police Chief, Deputy Chief, and the Officers.
The chief of police, deputy chief, and the officers shall be appointed annually by the
Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 2. General Duties of the Police Chief.
The chief of police shall be charged with the responsibility of the enforcement and
maintenance of law and order and the protection of public safety and welfare, and shall
be further charged to:
1) Superintend the overall administration of the police department as may be defined
in the department’s policies and procedures or organizational plans, including but
not limited to the assignment of personnel throughout the department.
2) Provide for the effective investigation of any violations of criminal law and Town
ordinances.
3) Provide for the effective patrol of the Town.
4) Provide for the operation and maintenance of the police communications and
central records system.
5) Any other duties which are prescribed by law and ordinance.
SECTION 3. Police Chief’s Authority
The chief of police shall have all powers necessary and proper to execute the duties of his
office as established procedure and need may direct.
The chief of police is authorized to represent the Town in district court in the prosecution
of alleged violations of those ordinances which the police department is empowered to
enforce, if duly certified in accordance with 25 M.R.S.A. §2803(3)-(A), or successor
statute. The chief of police may designate any officer under his/her command, if so
certified, to perform this prosecutorial function.
SECTION 4. Deputy Chief’s Authority.
315
The deputy chief of police shall have all powers necessary and proper to execute the
duties of his office as established procedure and need may direct
The deputy chief of police shall perform the duties of the chief of police, if and when the
chief is on vacation, incapacitated due to illness or injury or during the absence of the
chief from the Town.
SECTION 5. Officer’s Authority
Full-time police officers for the Town of Skowhegan are authorized to enforce Town
ordinances, State laws, civil violations and traffic infractions.
Reserve police officers for the Town of Skowhegan are authorized to enforce Town
ordinances, State laws, civil violations and traffic infractions while on duty.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE
Adopted June 12, 2017, Annual Town Meeting
SECTION I. Legislative authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
SECTION II. Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to set a minimum standard for the maintenance of the
grounds of property in order to protect public health, public safety, property values, and
to prevent nuisance conditions.
SECTION III. Required maintenance
All grounds or parts thereof shall be maintained to prevent unsafe, unsanitary and/or
nuisance conditions and to avoid any adverse effect on the value of adjoining
properties. Grounds include accessory and appurtenant structures such as garages, sheds
and fences.
SECTION IV. Grounds maintenance standards
The grounds of any property shall be kept in good repair and free of unsafe or
unsanitary conditions. Such conditions may include: refuse, household trash, junk,
discarded plumbing, heating supplies, old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper trash, rubber, waste and all scrap iron, steel, other scrap ferrous or nonferrous
material, debris, scrap lumber, inoperable machinery or part thereof, glass, unused and
inoperable appliances, worn and unused furniture, and three or more junked and/or
unserviceable vehicle(s). Materials intended for the private use of the property owner
may be stored on the property as long as such material is screened from the public way
and from abutting properties and is not in violation with state laws. Private use does not
include resale.
SECTION V. Maintenance after casualty damage
Within a period of 90 days after casualty (see Definitions) damage to property
grounds or structures, the owner shall cause or contract for the repair or restoration
of damaged areas and the demolition of any areas not to be repaired and the removal of
all debris connected therewith. The Code Enforcement Officer (where after known as
CEO) may grant an extension under certain hardship conditions as in Section VII.
SECTION VI. Liability for violations and corrective actions
Owners, operators, and occupants of properties in violation of this chapter shall be
jointly and severally liable for violations and for corrective actions required.
SECTION VII. Enforcement; violations and penalties; extensions
1. The CEO, or his or her designee, shall notify the violator, serving a written
notice by mail or by hand delivery. Said notice shall explain the nature of the
violation and require corrective action within 30 calendar days from the date of
the notice to correct the violation, seven days (maximum) for a health and/or safety
violation as determined by the CEO. The violator may appeal the CEO's decision
to the Board of Selectpersons. Appeals must be made within three working days
of notification by the CEO of a violation. The number of days given for compliance
shall start after the Board of Selectpersons has heard the appeal.
2. If a violation is not corrected within the time allowed, the Town shall pursue all
remedies, including pursuit of a judge's order to abate the property and remove
the material in violation at the property owner's expense provided in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3758-A(4)(C). In addition, the Town shall pursue relief available by
law and/or in equity for land use ordinances, including, without limitation, the
remedies and relief provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, currently including,
without limitation, a penalty of $100 to $2,500 per day for a specific violation,
injunctive relief and reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs. The
Town shall retain all penalties set forth in this chapter. The CEO may represent the
Town in District Court, pursuant to Rule 80-K. However, should the services of the
Town Attorney be required, in litigation in a higher court of law, for example,
the CEO shall first review the case with the Town Manager and Board of
Selectpersons.
3. The CEO may offer one special extension per person/per incident of up to 180
days to violators of this ordinance under certain hardship or extenuating
circumstances. If a violation is discovered during winter months (November 1 to
April 1) and if winter weather prevents the correction of a violation, an extension
may be given. Cases of disability or financial hardship shall also be grounds for the
consideration of an extension. Violators requesting an extension for financial
hardship shall be required to prove hardship through financial documentation.
These extensions for seasonal, disability, or financial hardship shall be at the
discretion of the CEO.
SECTION VIII. Definitions
CASUALTY–– Any unforeseeable, unintended damage affecting a property.
CAUSE or CONTRACT –– Includes the initiation of an insurance claim (as opposed
to resolution), the contracting of a construction/repair business, or the substantial
preparation for self-repair work.
CEO- Code Enforcement Officer
GROUNDS –– The part of a property not covered by permanent structures.
JUNK –– For this chapter, the term "junk" refers to dilapidated or discarded material or
objects as determined by the CEO.
NUISANCE CONDITION ––This term has been defined by 17 M.R.S.A. § 2802. It
reads as follows: "The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the
exercise of a trade, employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations,
offensive smells, or other annoyances, become injurious and dangerous to the health,
comfort or property of individuals, or of the public; causing or permitting abandoned
wells or tin mining shafts to remain unfilled or uncovered to the injury or prejudice of
others; causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome substance to collect, or to
remain in any place to the prejudice of others; obstructing or impeding, without
legal authority, the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water;
corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of a river, stream, pond or
aquifer; unlawfully diverting it from its natural course or state, to the injury or
prejudice of others; and the obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings or
otherwise, of highways, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, common landing
places or burying grounds are nuisances within the limitations and exceptions
mentioned. Any places where three or more old, discarded, worn out or junked motor
vehicles as defined in Title 29A, Section 101, subsection 42, or parts thereof, are
gathered together, kept, deposited or allowed to accumulate, in such manner or in
such location or situation, either within or without the limits of any highway, as to be
unsightly, detracting from the natural scenery or injurious to the comfort and
happiness of individuals and the public, and injurious to property rights, are declared to
be public nuisances."
OCCUPANT –– Any person living, sleeping, or having actual possession of a dwelling
unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR –– Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or property,
or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER –– Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with each other, shall have
legal or equitable title to any property, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof, or shall have charge or control of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of the
owner or as fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how
such possession was obtained.
PROPERTY –– For this chapter, the term shall be defined as any lot, plot, or parcel of
land
STRUCTURE –– Anything built or constructed and permanently affixed on a
property that cannot be considered grounds or landscaping.
UNSERVICEABLE –– For the purposes of this chapter, the Town will rely on a
Maine Supreme Court decision (Town of Pownal v. Emerson, 639 A.2d 619 (Me.
1994); Town of Mt. Desert v. Smith, 2000ME 88, 751 A.2.d. 445) which includes the
following: "unserviceable means not ready for use or presently useable" as opposed to
"incapable of being serviced."
SECTION IX. Severability
If any section, subsection, clause, paragraph, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portions shall be deemed to be a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
SECTION X. Conflict with other laws
Whenever a provision of this chapter conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the provision
imposing the greater restriction shall control. The newest version of this chapter shall be
the one that is enforced.
SECTION XI. Effective Date
This chapter shall be effective when approved by the voters of the Town of Skowhegan.
316
Chapter 28
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
PUBLIC CARRIAGES
Approved Selectmen’s Meeting, July 27, 1999, Effective August 30, 1999
Amended Selectmen’s Meeting, November 26, 2002; Effective December 26, 2002
Sec. 1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this article the following terms are to be deemed and construed to have
the meaning indicated in this section.
(A) Driver Permit Year: The term “driver permit year” shall mean the period of time
commencing on the fist day of January of one year and expiring on the thirty first
day of December of the same year.
(B) Holder: The term “holder” shall mean the person, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation to whom a license to operate a taxicab has been granted.
(C) Limousine: The term “limousine” shall mean a taxicab with a seating capacity of
seven (7) passengers or more, including the driver.
(D) Board of Selectmen: The term “Board of Selectmen” shall mean the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Skowhegan.
(E) Town: The term “Town” shall mean the Town of Skowhegan.
(F) Taxicab: The term “Taxicab” shall mean a sedan, station wagon, or minivan used
for hire, with a driver, and a seating capacity of fewer than five (5) persons behind
the driver, operated on call and demand, without fixed routes or termini, and the
destination and route of which are under the control of the passenger or
passengers being carried therein; the fares for which are at a rate per mile or wait
time or both.
(G) Driver: The term “driver” shall mean any person who is engaged in the driving of
a taxicab for hire.
(H) Vehicle Permit Year: The term “vehicle permit year” shall mean the period of
time commencing on the first day of January and expiring on the 31st day of
December of that same year.
317
(I) Taximeter: The term “taximeter” shall mean a mechanical instrument or device
by which the fare for hire of the taxicab and the distance traveled by the taxicab
are mechanically measured, calculated, and displayed.
Sec. 2 UNAUTHORIZED AND UNLICENSED TAXICABS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, situated
within or outside of the Town of Skowhegan, to operate or cause or permit to be operated in the
Town, any taxicab not authorized in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance without
having first obtained a taxicab license in accordance with the provisions of section 3 & 4 of this
Ordinance unless such person, firm, association, partnership or corporation holds a valid license
issued under a municipal ordinance whose provisions and requirement(s) are substantially
similar to the provisions of section 3 & 4 of this Ordinance.
Sec. 3 INSPECTIONS
Before a taxicab license may be issued it shall be inspected to determine whether the
taxicab:
(A) Has a valid State of Maine motor vehicle registration under title 29-A M.R.S.A.
§501(1)(3);
(B) Complies with the requirements of all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
relating to the examination, inspection and safe operation of motor vehicles
registered in the State of Maine;
(C) Is in a clean and sanitary condition;
(D) Meets the identifying lights and identifying design requirements of section 8 of this
Ordinance;
(E) Has the rate fare schedule conspicuously posted so that it is visible to passengers;
(F) Is in all other respects, safe and suitable for taxicab service.
(G) If equipped, has a statement from the sealer of weights and measures indicating the
taximeter accurately calculates the charged mileage and/or time rate of fare.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the right to require reinspection
of any taxicab for which he has good cause to believe no longer meets the standard set
forth herein. If a taxicab fails any re-inspection, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall
give the owner written notice of the deficiencies which must be corrected and a clear warning
that failure to correct these deficiencies within ten (10) days of mailing of the notice shall
constitute good cause for suspending or revoking the taxicab license pursuant to section 9.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of any law enforcement officer, including
318
the Chief of Police, his/her designee, to prevent by impoundment, or otherwise, continued
operation of a motor vehicle determined by the officer to be unsafe to operate.
Sec. 4 TAXICAB LICENSES REQURIED, TERMINATION, EXPIRATION OF LICENSES,
APPEAL UPON DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
(A) A taxicab license may be issued by the Board of Selectmen upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The Chief of Police
shall have the authority to deny a holder’s request for a taxicab license if the
requirements as set forth in sections (3) and (4) (B) (1-8) have not been satisfactorily
met. No taxicab license may be issued unless each taxicab authorized to operate in
the Town by a holder is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Such license shall only be valid until December 31st of the current year unless earlier
suspended or revoked under section 9 of this Ordinance, and must be renewed
annually in the same manner and subject to the same terms and conditions as in the
case of an initial application. Such taxicab licenses shall be non-transferable. No
taxicab license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has
paid the annual required fee for each vehicle operated under the license. A taxicab
license must be signed by the chairman of the Board of Selectmen or his/her
designee and shall be numbered in the order issued. Renewal taxicab licenses shall
receive the same number as was issued on the original license. A taxicab license
identification placard shall be issued bearing the name of the holder or applicant, a
description of the vehicle so licensed, license number and expiration date. The
taxicab license identification placard shall be conspicuously posted within the
interior of the taxicab. The taxicab license identification placard is not valid unless
it bears the signature of the Town Clerk or his/her designee.
(B) Application for taxicab license. Application for a taxicab license shall be made on a
form furnished by and filed with the Skowhegan Police Department. A
nonrefundable license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each taxicab shall accompany
the application. For new taxicab license application submitted within ninety (90)
days prior to the vehicle permit year expiration date, the nonrefundable license fee
for each taxicab shall be twenty-five dollars (25.00). Each completed application
form shall be signed, verified by the applicant and contain:
(1) The address of the applicant for purposes of any and all notices and other
mailings required to be given under this Ordinance;
(2) The name, residence and business addresses, residence and business telephone
numbers, date and place of birth of each person required to sign and verify the
application form, and of each person having management authority in the
business of the applicant.
(3) A record of conviction for any criminal offense punishable by incarceration for
319
any period of time, regardless of whether a sentence of incarceration was in fact
imposed or served, or a statement that no such conviction exists, for each
applicant or holder identified in subsection (4) (a).
(4) The identity of each municipality in which the applicant or holder identified in
subsection (4) (a) has operated or is operating a taxicab service, whether the right
to operate in any such municipality at any time has been suspended or revoked,
and a detailed explanation of the reasons for and the circumstances surrounding
any such suspension or revocation;
(5) The number of taxicabs for which authorization to operate is sought;
(6) The make, type, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, registration
plate number and seating capacity (including the driver) of each taxicab for
which authorization to operate is sought;
(7) Documentation that each taxicab is properly insured as required in section 5; and
(8) Their rate fare schedule, unless the setting of rates is established by the Board of
Selectmen.
Sec. 5. INSURANCE
(A) Each taxicab shall be insured for the period over which the taxicab license is to
remain in force, insuring persons and property from liability for injuries and
damages resulting from the use and operation for such taxicab. The minimum
insurance requirements for vehicles used to transport passengers for hire will be
those set forth in Title 29-A M.R.S.A Section 1611 (2).
(B) The underwriter, who insures each taxicab placed in operation by the holder, shall
immediately notify the Town of Skowhegan, in writing, when:
(1) The policy has not been renewed or is cancelled by the holder; or
(2) The underwriter terminates the policy.
(C) The holder of a taxicab license shall notify the underwriter of the requirements as set
forth in section (5) (B) no later than the same day the policy is scheduled to go into
effect.
Sec. 6. APPEAL OF DENIAL OF TAXICAB LICENSE.
If an applicant for a taxicab license is denied by the Chief of Police, the unsuccessful
applicant may appeal such denial to the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) days after
320
notification thereof is mailed to the applicant. An appeal from the decision of the Board of
Selectmen may be taken to the Superior Court as provided by applicable law.
Sec. 7. FARE SCHEDULE POSTED; BOARD OF SELECTMEN SETTING RATES OF
FARE; RATE REVIEW COMMITTEE.
(A) Taxicabs other than limousines. All taxicabs must conspicuously display within the
interior of the taxicab a rate schedule which is visible to passengers in the front and
rear seating compartment. Such rate schedule will indicate the fees for the
following:
(1) Cost per mile or part thereof; and
(2) Transporting more than one passenger to the same destination; and
(3) Handling luggage or groceries; and
(4) Minimum call out after normal operating hours; and
(5) Passenger requests to stand and wait.
(B)With the exception of limousines, the Board of Selectmen reserves the right to set
rates of fare for all taxicabs licensed by the Town after a public notice and hearing;
(C) A rate review committee is an advisory board comprised of three (3) people who are
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The committee will meet upon the request of
the Town Manager or Chief of Police. The committee will report its findings and
make recommendations to the full Board of Selectmen regarding rates of a fare for
holders approved to operate in the Town. The rate review committee will base its
report, findings and recommendations on the following local issues and factors:
(1) Mill rate;
(2) Unemployment rate;
(3) The holders business related expenses;
(4) Cost of living adjustment;
(5) Impact to citizens who rely on taxicabs for their primary or secondary
source of transportation.
(6) Rates comparable with other municipalities of like size and/or valuation.
Sec. 8. IDENTIFICATION AS TAXICAB.
321
In addition to the exterior lights required by law, each taxicab shall be equipped with an
identity light attached to its roof. Such identity light shall be constructed in one unit not
exceeding eight (8) inches in height and twenty-three (23) inches in length and shall consist of an
illuminated plate or cylinder upon which is printed “taxicab” or the name of the owner. Such
identity light shall be illuminated during the period between sunset and sunrise when the taxicab
is available for hire. Each taxicab shall be identified by the permanent placement on the exterior
of one door on each side of the taxicab one of the following:
(A) The name of the owner and word “taxicab” or “taxi” or “cab” in letters at least two
and one-half (2 ½) inches high; or
(B) A graphic design, logo, or insignia at least eight (8) inches in diameter and which
contains the owner’s name or trade name and the word “taxicab” or “taxi” or “cab”.
(C) This section does not apply to limousines.
Sec. 9. SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE; HEARING.
A taxicab license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Selectmen for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days if the holder
thereof has:
(A) Knowingly made an incorrect statement of a material nature in support of its
application; or
(B) Terminated, allowed to lapse, or fails to meet the minimum requirements for taxicab
vehicle insurance as specified under section 5; or
(C) Consistently demonstrated a conscious disregard in the operation of his/her taxicab
service for the public health, safety and welfare, and for the safe care, custody and
transportation of passengers; or
(D) Consistently been operating in violation of section 10 of this Ordinance relating to
taxistands and solicitation; or
(E) If so equipped, the taximeter or any part affecting the operation of the taximeter has
been adjusted to intentionally misrepresent the distance actually traveled by the
taxicab or other information required to be measured by the taximeter, by or with the
knowledge of the holder; or
(F) Failed to provide those vehicle accessories needed for the safe operation and
transportation of passengers by a taxicab driver who has a physical disability; or
322
(G) Failed to conspicuously post the taxicab license identification placard within the
interior of the vehicle.
Sec. 10. TAXISTANDS AND SOLICITATION.
The Board of Selectmen may assign to each and every licensed taxicab owner a suitable
taxistand space on public streets and ways.
(A) Standing in other than designated areas prohibited. In other than assigned taxistand,
no holder shall permit their licensed taxicab to solicit passengers in any public place,
street, lane, avenue, drive or square.
(B) Passenger solicitation. No driver of a taxicab shall solicit any passenger or
passengers within fifty (50) feet of such assigned taxistand except while parked
therein.
Sec. 11. TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE OF
PERMIT; APPEAL UPON DENIAL OF APPLICATION; IDENTIFICATION
CARDS; TERM OF PERMIT.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or limousine for hire in the Town
without first having obtained a taxicab driver’s permit in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Such permit shall only be valid until December 31st of the current year unless earlier
suspended or revoked. Permits shall be renewed annually in the same manner and subject to the
same terms and conditions as an initial application. A taxicab driver’s permit may be issued by
the Town’s Board of Selectmen upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to deny a taxicab driver’s permit if the
applicant has not fulfilled or met the requirements as set forth in section 11 (A) (1-6), section 11
(B) (1,2), section 12 (A) or has disqualifying criminal or motor vehicle conviction as set forth in
section 12 (B) (C) (D). In order to be valid, a taxicab driver’s permit application must be
approved by the chairman of the Board of Selectmen or his/her designee and shall be numbered
in the order issued. Renewed driver permit applications shall receive the same number as was
issued with the original permit.
(A) Application for permit. Application for taxicab driver’s permit shall be made on a
form furnished by and filed with the Skowhegan Police Department. A nonrefundable
permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany the application. For new
taxicab driver’s permit applications submitted within ninety (90) days prior to the
expiration of the driver permit year, the nonrefundable permit fee shall be twelve dollars
and fifty cents ($12.50). A completed application form shall be signed, verified by the
applicant and contain:
(1) The address of the applicant for purposes of any and all notices and other
mailings required to be given under this Ordinance;
323
(2) A record of conviction for any criminal offense punishable by
incarceration for any period of time, regardless of whether a sentence of
incarceration was in fact imposed or served, or a statement that no such
convictions exist;
(3) The identity of each municipality in which the applicant has operated a
taxicab for hire, whether the right to operate in any such municipality has
ever been suspended or revoked, and a detailed explanation of the reasons
for and circumstances surrounding any such suspension or revocation;
(4) A record of conviction of any moving violation, the date of such
conviction, the punishment imposed, and the location of the court in which
such conviction was entered, or a statement that no such conviction exists;
(5) Authorization by the applicant to all persons and governmental agencies
having information relevant to subsection(A) (1) through (A) (4) above to
release upon request of the police department such information which may
aid their determination of whether to issue, suspend or revoke a taxicab
driver’s permit; and
(6) Such other information as the applicant deems appropriate or as the police
department may reasonably require to protect the public health, safety and
welfare, and to ensure the safe care, custody and transportation of
customers.
(b) Evidence in support of application. In addition to filing a completed application
form, an applicant for a taxicab driver permit must satisfy each of the following
requirements;
(1) Present a valid State of Maine operator’s license;
(4) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his/her designee, by
submission of two (2) letters of character references, that the applicant is
at present of such good moral character that he/she can be entrusted with
the safe care, custody and transportation of taxicab passengers; provided,
that conviction of any criminal offense identified in subsection (A) (2)
above shall create a rebuttal presumption that the applicant does not
satisfy the requirements of this paragraph.
(c) Identification card. An identification card will be issued to the taxicab driver bearing
the name and photograph of the permittee and the driver permit number. An
identification card is not valid unless it bears the signature of the Town Clerk or
his/her designee. Identification cards must be conspicuously visible upon the
clothing of the permittee at all times while operating a taxicab within the Town of
Skowhegan.
324
Sec. 12. DENIAL OF TAXICAB DRIVER PERMIT.
An application for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be denied if the applicant;
(A) Is under the age of eighteen (18) or does not have a valid State of Maine operator’s
license; or
(B) Has a disqualifying criminal record based on a conviction in the State of Maine for
crimes of felony murder, manslaughter, gross sexual assault, kidnapping or an equivalent
offense in another State.
(C) Has a disqualifying criminal record based on a conviction within the past three (3)
years for burglary, elevated aggravated assault, aggravated assault, unlawful sexual
contact, visual sexual aggression against a child, sexual misconduct with a child
under fourteen (14) years of age, theft by deception or unauthorized taking or
transfer where the value of the property exceeds two-thousand dollars ($2,000.00),
perjury, robbery, aggravated promotion of prostitution, unlawful trafficking in
scheduled drugs, aggravated trafficking or furnishing of scheduled drugs, unlawfully
furnishing scheduled drugs and trafficking in hypodermic apparatuses or an
equivalent offense in another State.
(D) The applicant has been convicted during the preceding two (2) years of operating or
attempting to operate a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or drugs, operating to endanger or an equivalent offense in another State.
Sec. 13. APPEAL OF DENIAL OF PERMIT.
If an applicant for a taxicab drivers permit is denied by the Chief of Police, the
unsuccessful applicant may appeal such denial to the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) days
after notification thereof is mailed to the applicant. An appeal from the decision of the Board of
Selectmen may be taken to the Superior Court as provided by applicable law.
Sec. 14. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF TAXICAB DRIVER PERMIT.
The Board of Selectmen may, after notice to the permittee and public hearing, suspend
for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or revoke the permit of a taxicab driver if the
Board of Selectmen find:
(A) That the permittee has been convicted of a traffic or criminal violation while
transporting a passenger in a taxicab; or
(B) That the permittee has consistently failed to wear the identification card issued to
him as required under section (11) (C) of this Ordinance; or
325
(C) That the permittee has a disqualifying criminal conviction as indicated in section 12
(B) (C) (D) of this Ordinance; or
(D) That the permittee in one or more instances knowingly took a longer route to the
requested destination than was necessary, unless so requested to do so by the
passenger; or
(E) Knowingly conveyed any passenger to a place other than that to which the passenger
specified; or
(F) Transporting any person other than the passenger first engaging the taxicab without
the expressed consent of such first passenger; or
(G) Upon demand of a passenger, failing to render to such passenger a receipt for the
amount paid. Such receipt shall bear the name of the owner, name of the taxi, the
date of the transaction and the amount paid; or
(H) The permittee has a physical disability and is operating a taxicab which isn’t
modified with the accessories needed for the safe operation of the vehicle and
transportation of passengers; or
(I) If so equipped, adjusts the taximeter to intentionally misrepresent the distance
traveled by the taxicab or other information required to be measured by the
taximeter.
Sec. 15. TAXIMETER
(A) Each taxicab, which is equipped with a taximeter tested, approved, and
sealed by the sealer of weights and measures, shall accurately measure the distance
traveled by the taxicab and the fare being charged. Said taximeter shall be adjusted to
accurately calculate no more than the maximum posted rates of fare as set forth in section
7 or by the Board of Selectmen. The taximeter shall clearly show the fare in clear and
distinct figures and shall clearly show the type of fare being charged mileage and/or time.
The taximeter shall be placed so that the dial thereof is in plain view of the passenger
while being transported in such taxicab and shall be illuminated during the period
between sunset and sunrise to enable the passenger to read the figures indicated thereon.
If so equipped, taximeters shall be permanently affixed to the taxicab and sealed by the
sealer of weights and measures. Upon request, it shall be the responsibility of the holder
to submit his/her taxicab or taxicabs for inspection to the sealer of weights and measures,
Chief of Police or Town Manager. If upon inspection of the taximeter, the sealer of
weights and measures determines that the taximeter meets the requirements of this
section, he/she shall then issue a statement to the holder indicating the same.
(B) After public notice and hearing, the Board of Selectmen may require all taxicabs
326
licensed to operate in the Town to be equipped with taximeters.
(C) The holder shall be responsible for any and all fees associated with the testing by and
the approval of the taximeter by the sealer of weights and measures.
(D) This section does not apply to limousines.
Sec. 16. PENALTIES
(A) Any holder who violates any provision of section 2 of this Ordinance commits a civil
violation for which a forfeiture not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) may be
adjudged for each and every offense. Any such civil forfeiture may be in addition to any
suspension or revocation imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 9.
(C) Any taxicab driver who violates any provisions of section 11 of this Ordinance
commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture not to exceed three hundred dollars
($300.00) may be adjudged for each separate offense. Any such civil forfeiture may
be in addition to any suspension or revocation imposed in accordance with the
provisions of section 14.
Sec. 17. TEMPORARY TAXI DRIVER AND TAXICAB PERMITS
Within fourteen (14) days from the date of the application and upon the approval from the Chief
of Police and the Town Manager, or their designees, temporary taxi driver and taxicab permits
may be issued pending final approval from the Board of Selectmen. Persons issued temporary
taxi driver and taxicab permits must comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Final approval of taxi driver and taxicab permits by the Board of Selectmen must occur within
sixty (60) days of the receipt of the application.
Upon written notice, temporary taxi driver permits may be revoked by the Chief of Police and
the Town Manager, or their designees, for violations of Sections 9 and 14. Temporary taxi
driver permits shall be revoked for violations of Sections 12 (b), (c), or (d).
Upon written notice, temporary taxicab permits may be revoked by the Chief of Police and the
Town Manager, or their designees, for violations of Section 3. Temporary taxicab permits shall
be revoked for violation of section 5 (a).
Sec. 18. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and if any provision shall be declared to
be invalid or void, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall remain in full force
and effect.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
ORDINANCE FOR THE RECALL OF ELECTED MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS
Adopted, Special Town Meeting, October 25, 2001
SECTION 1. Applicability and Establishment
Any elected Official of the Town of Skowhegan, except school Board members, may be recalled
and removed from office as herein provided.
SECTION 2. Petitions for Recall
a. Recall shall be initiated by petition.
b. The petition for recall must contain only signatures of the registered voters of the Town of
Skowhegan, equal to ten percent (10%) of the number of votes cast in Skowhegan in the last
Gubernatorial election.
c. The petition shall be addressed to those members of the Board of Selectmen having no
interest in the subject matter of the petition, but the petition shall in every case, be filed with
the Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk.
d. The petition shall state the name and office, or offices, of the person whose removal is being
sought.
e. If recall of more than one official is being sought there shall be a separate petition for each
official whose removal is being sought.
f. Each page of the petition shall be ruled, and each line shall provide a space for the voters’
signatures, address and printed name.
g. All pages of a single petition shall be filed as one document. The Town Clerk or Deputy
Town Clerk shall not file the petition until at least one person supplies contact information on
behalf of the petitioners.
SECTION 3. Clerk’s Certification
Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the petition the Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk
shall certify the signatures contained on the petition and shall determine if the petition meets all
of the requirements as set forth in Section 2 of this Ordinance. Should the petition be found
insufficient, the petition will be retained in the Town Clerk’s Office and the person who filed the
petition will be notified.
SECTION 4. Calling the Recall Election
a. If the petition is certified by the Town Clerk or Deputy Town Clerk to be sufficient, he or she
will submit the same with his or her certification to the Board of Selectmen at their next
regular meeting and shall notify the official or officials whose removal is being sought of
such action.
b. The Board of Selectmen upon receipt of the certified petition shall within ten (10) days time
of receipt order an election by secret ballot, pursuant to 30-A MRSA §2528, to be held fortyfive
(45) days thereafter.
c. No petition for recall will be accepted during the first ninety (90) days or during the last
ninety (90) days of a multi year term.
d. Once a recall petition has been called and failed, no recall may be filed within ninety (90)
days after such vote.
SECTION 5. Ballots for Recall Election
Unless the official, or officials, whose removal is being sought have resigned within ten (10)
days of receipt of the petition by the Board of Selectmen, the ballots shall be printed and shall
read “SHALL ________________________ BE RECALLED FROM THE OFFICE
OF________________?” (with the name of the official whose recall is being sought inserted in
the blank space.) If the petition seeks the recall of a person from more than one office, each
office must be named.
SECTION 6. Result of the Election
In the event of an affirmative vote for removal, such vote shall take effect the day following the
day of voting.
SECTION 7. Vacancies to be Filled
Any vacancy resulting from the removal from office under this ordinance shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Maine State statutes.
Give under our hands this ________ day of __________
Adopted by the voters the ________________
1
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SEWERAGE ORDINANCE
Adopted Annual Town Meeting March 7, 1994
Amended at the Annual Town Meeting March 8, 2004
Amended at the Annual Town Meeting March 6, 2006
ARTICLE I
Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health and general welfare of the citizens
of the Town of Skowhegan by regulating and restricting the construction and use of sewerage
systems and the accumulation, transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage in such a manner
that the creation of any sewerage system, whether public, private or industrial, shall not result in
pollution, health hazard or other nuisance.
ARTICLE II
Scope
Hereafter any person owning any building or structure within the Town of Skowhegan
which is the source of sewage and/or industrial wastes or who proposes to erect such building or
structure shall conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and the State of Maine Plumbing
Code.
ARTICLE III
Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this
Ordinance shall be as follows:
SECTION 301. “A.S.T.M.” shall mean American Society for Testing and Materials.
SECTION 302. “B.O.D.” (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at 20ºC., expressed in milligrams per liter.
SECTION 303. “Builder” shall mean any person, persons, or corporation who undertakes to
construct, either under contract or for resale, any habitable building unit, either residential,
commercial or industrial.
SECTION 304. “Building Drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning eight (8) feet outside the
inner face of the building wall.
2
SECTION 305. “Building Sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to a public
sewer, private sewer, or individual sewage-disposal system.
SECTION 306. “Combined Sewer” shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
SECTION 307. “Developer” shall mean any person, persons, or corporation who undertake to
construct simultaneously or in planned sequence more than one building unit, either residential,
commercial or industrial, on a given tract or land subdivision.
SECTION 308. “Engineer” shall mean the Professional Engineer retained by the Town of
Skowhegan. In the event the Town has not retained an Engineer, the term “Engineer” as used
herein will be construed to mean the Superintendent of Sewers.
SECTION 309. “Garbage” shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
SECTION 310. “Industrial Wastes” shall mean liquid wastes resulting from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
SECTION 311. “Natural Outlet” shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.
SECTION 312. “Owner” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, person,
or group having title to real property.
SECTION 313. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
SECTION 314. “pH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of Hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
SECTION 315. “Private Sewer System” shall mean any sewer that collects sewage from two or
more building sewers on private property owned separately or jointly, and discharges to a public
sanitary sewer.
SECTION 316. “Properly shredded garbage” shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
SECTION 317. “Public Sewer” shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
3
SECTION 318. “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SECTION 319. “Selectpersons” shall mean the duly elected Board of Selectpersons, or their
authorized deputy or representative.
SECTION 320. “Sewage” shall mean any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution.
SECTION 321. “Sewage Treatment Plant” shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SECTION 322. “Sewage Works” shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SECTION 323. “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SECTION 324. “Shall” is mandatory, “May” is permissive.
SECTION 325. “Storm Sewer” shall mean a sewer used for conveying rain water, surface water,
condensate, cooling water or similar liquid wastes, exclusive of sewage and industrial waste.
SECTION 326. “Superintendent” shall mean the Superintendent of the Water Pollution Control
Plant of the Town of Skowhegan, or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SECTION 327. “Suspended Solids” shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
SECTION 328. “Town” shall mean the Town of Skowhegan, Maine.
SECTION 329. “Watercourse” shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers Required
SECTION 401. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Town, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of said Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste.
SECTION 402.It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse, either directly or through
any storm sewer, within the Town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Town, any sewage,
4
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 403. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
SECTION 404. The owner of any building used for human occupancy, employment, recreation,
or any other purpose requiring the disposal of sewage, situated within the Town and abutting on
any street, or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required, at
his/her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within ninety
(90) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is located
within one hundred (100) feet of the property line; provided that nothing in this section shall
require the owner of any such building to acquire any real property or easement therein for the
sole purpose of making such connection.
SECTION 405. Vacant lot owners abutting on streets with an existing public sanitary sewer line,
are hereby required to connect directly with the public sewer upon fifteen (15) days written
notice by the Code Enforcement Officer if the particular street involved is scheduled for hot
bituminous paving within six (6) months.
ARTICLE V
Private Sewage Disposal
SECTION 501. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
404, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with
the requirements of the Maine State Plumbing Code, dealing with subsurface wastewater
disposal rules.
SECTION 502. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 404, direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer in compliance with this Ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with gravel or other
suitable material or removed and disposed of properly.
SECTION 503. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the authorized representative of the Maine State
Department of Health.
5
ARTICLE VI
Fees
SECTION 601. (This section and Table 1 become effective September 1, 2004) Any person
who, seeks to connect to the Town of Skowhegan wastewater collection system is hereby
required to pay a Capacity Reserve Fee. The Capacity Reserve Fee for the connection of each
new single-family dwelling (220 gallons per day), including the connection of each new
individual apartment unit and the connection of each new condominium unit, shall be $1,760.00.
For all other new connections, the fee shall be determined by assigning a contributing flow
value, in gallons per day, to the new connection based on Table I of this ordinance, dividing this
value by 220 gallons per day; and multiplying the result by $1,760.00. The minimum
contributing flow shall be set at 220 gallons per day. A facility not listed in Table I will be
charged $8.00 per gallon of effluent, based on metered water use or engineering calculations.
In the case of a change of use, redevelopment, expansion or, modification of an existing use, the
Capacity Reserve Fee shall be based on the net calculated increase in the contributing flow,
based on Table I of this ordinance. No fee credit shall be given for a calculated decrease in flow.
A Capacity Reserve Fee shall not be charged for any reconnection if the reconnection does not
cause a net increase in the contributing flow, based on the use as described in Table I of this
ordinance.
The fee shall be paid prior to connection to the Town of Skowhegan wastewater collection sewer
system. In the case of a change in use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an
existing use, the fee shall be paid prior to receiving the final Town approval of the proposed
change, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use.
The fees collected are being deposited to the Capital Reserve Capacity Reserve Fee Account.
6
Table I
Type of facility Design flow per user or unit
Assembly areas 2 gpd per seat
Bakery 50 gpd per bakery plus 10 gpd per employee
Beauty salon 50 gpd per chair
Bed and breakfast 125 gpd per establishment
Boarding houses 125 gpd per house plus 25 gpd per boarder
Bottle club 5 gpd per seat
Bus service areas 5 gpd per passenger plus 10 gpd per employee
Butcher shop 50 gpd per shop plus 10 gpd per employee
Cafeteria 10 gpd per seat plus 10 gpd per employee
Children’s camps, day and night 10 gpd per camper plus 10 gpd per staff person
Churches 2 gpd per seat for general seating and 5 gpd per
seat for seats in a dining area
Dance hall 5 gpd per attendee plus 10 gpd per employee
Day care facilities 10 gpd per child plus 10 gpd per adult
Eating place, fast food, no seats, no full
meals, and no china service
50 gpd or 1 gpd per meal served plus 10 gpd
per employee (whichever is larger)
Eating place, fast food, no full meals, and
no china service
10 gpd per inside seat plus 5 gpd per outside
seat plus 10 gpd per employee
Ice Cream Stands, ice cream only with no
seats
75 gpd per stand plus 10 gpd per employee
Restaurant, one or two meals per day (e.g.
breakfast and lunch)
10 gpd per indoor seat plus 5 gpd per outdoor
seat plus 10 gpd per employee
Restaurant, three or more meals per day
(e.g. breakfast, lunch, and dinner)
15 gpd per indoor seat plus 10 gpd per outdoor
seat plus 10 gpd per employee
Employees at place of employment with no
showers
10 gpd per employee
Health clubs 5 gpd per participant plus 10 gpd per employee
Hospitals 100 gpd per bed plus 10 gpd per employee
Hotels and motels with private baths 50 gpd per bedroom plus 10 gpd per employee
Laundry, self-service 300 gpd per machine plus 10 gpd per employee
Medical offices, clinics, and dental offices 40 gpd per medical staff plus 5 gpd per patient
plus 10 gpd per office employee
Nursing Homes 75 gpd per bed plus 10 gpd per employee
Parks and picnic areas, public rest rooms
and no showers
5 gpd per attendee plus 10 gpd per employee
Rental cabins and cottages 25 gpd per bed plus 10 gpd per employee
Rental cabins, housekeeping 25 gpd per cabin, plus 25 gpd per bed
School, elementary 5 gpd per student plus 10 gpd per teacher and
other employees.
7
School, junior high 5 gpd per student plus 10 gpd per teacher and
other employees
School, high 10 gpd per student plus 10 gpd per teacher and
other employees
School, boarding 50 gpd per student plus 10 gpd per teacher and
other employees
Service stations 250 gpd per 1st set of fuel pumps plus 150 gpd
per each additional set of fuel pumps plus 10
gpd per employee
Shopping centers or stores, public rest
rooms and showers
200 gpd per water closet plus 10 gpd per
shower plus 10 gpd per employee. Design
flows for any eating places or butcher shops
shall be determined and added to total design
flow.
Taverns/Bars (including but not limited to,
pubs, billiard halls, etc.)
10 gpd per seat plus 10 gpd per employee
Tennis and racquetball courts 150 gpd per court plus 10 gpd per employee
Visitors center 5 gpd per visitor plus 10 gpd/employee (This
includes libraries, museums, similar uses)
SECTION 602. There shall be two (2) classes of Building Sewer Connection Fees: (a) for
residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case the Owner or his/her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. A permit, tap-in, and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for an
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid at the time an application is filed.
SECTION 603. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sewage or industrial wastes carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved
mechanical means and discharged to the building sewer.
SECTION 604. All excavations for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work
unless otherwise approved by the Road Commissioner. Pipe laying and backfill shall be
performed in accordance with accepted construction practices. No backfill shall be placed until
the work has been inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the trench is filled before
inspection the Code Enforcement Officer may require it to be re-excavated for inspection. No
person may make any opening into a paved street for the purpose of installing a building sewer
without first obtaining a written road opening permit from the municipal office. The person
opening the street shall be responsible for filling and compacting the opening with gravel in a
manner acceptable to the Road Commissioner. The Town will resurface the street opening or
contract for same under the supervision of the Road Commissioner. The fee for a road opening
permit shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), however if the actual cost of resurfacing the
opening exceeds this amount the person making the opening shall be billed for any balance.
8
SECTION 605. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. All pipe joints
shall be made in strict conformance with the pipe manufacturer’s installation instructions. The
transition joint between pipes of different materials shall be made with adapters and joint
materials approved by the Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 606. All costs and expense incidents to the installation, connection and maintenance
of the entire length of building sewer shall be borne by the Owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer. The method of connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer will be dependent upon the type of pipe material used and in all cases shall be approved by
the Road Commissioner.
SECTION 607. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Road Commissioner
when the building sewer is ready for connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Road Commissioner or his/her representative.
SECTION 608. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the Road Commissioner.
SECTION 609. When any building sewer is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institutional or
public building, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings, or which, in the
opinion of the Road Commissioner, will receive sewage or industrial wastes of such volume or
character that frequent maintenance of said building sewer is anticipated, then such building
sewer shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. The Road Commissioner shall
determine if and where this type of connection to the public sewer is required. Connections to
existing manholes shall be made as directed by the Road commissioner. If required, a new
manhole shall be installed in the public sewer pursuant to Section 704, and the building sewer
connection made thereto as directed by the Road Commissioner.
SECTION 610. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement
Officer, to meet all requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 611. The diameter of the building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches, and
shall have a slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot. Any exceptions shall require the prior
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
SECTION 612. All buildings connected to the public sewer shall have a backflow valve or
check valve installed in the building drain or building sewer positioned so as to prevent any
backflow of sewage into the building. In addition all buildings which have sewer inspection
ports shall have a cover capable of sealing the port gastight. This cover must remain in place at
all times.
9
SECTION 613. The ends of building sewers which are not connected to the building drain of the
structure for any reason, shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper, masonry plug or
other means approved by the Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer.
ARTICLE VII
Sewer Extensions
SECTION 701. The design of extensions to the sanitary or storm sewer system must anticipate
and allow for flows from all possible future extensions or developments within the immediate
drainage area. The Town will submit plans and specifications for all proposed sanitary sewer
extensions to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection for review and approval prior
to construction.
SECTION 702. Property owners may propose extensions to the public sewer within the Town
by drafting a written petition with the necessary signatures as determined by the Selectpersons.
The Selectpersons shall consider the cost and benefits of the extension, the method of financing
its construction, its conformance to any approved plans for future development within the Town,
its impact upon existing infrastructure and utilities and any other factors they deem appropriate
before voting whether to present the proposal to the Town for approval.
SECTION 703. The owner, builder or developer constructing a private sewer extension must
pay for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental thereto. Each building sewer
must be installed and inspected in accordance with Article VI of this Ordinance and the entire
sewer must be subject to periodic inspection by the Town during installation. Private sewer
extensions will be operated, maintained and repaired by the owner, builder or developer unless
and until the extension is accepted as a public sewer under the provisions of Section 706 of this
Ordinance. Private sewer extensions shall not be connected to the public sewer until:
a. The completed extension has passed all testing requirements set forth in
this Ordinance.
b. The Engineer supervising construction has certified that the extension was
constructed in accordance with the plans and all specifications in this
Ordinance.
c. All the expenses incurred by the Town to review the construction plans
and to inspect and monitor construction are paid; and
d. Reproducible Mylar record drawings of the completed sewer have been
provided to the Town.
SECTION 704 Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following provisions. Minimum
internal pipe diameter shall be eight (8) inches. Joints for pipe shall employ “O” ring gaskets of
the “snap-on” type. Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and shall
provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint such that the requirements of Section
10
705 are met. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
Pipe shall be firmly and evenly bedded on a minimum of six (6) inches of granular
material with stone size not exceeding 1½ inches. Pipe thickness and field strength shall be
calculated on the following criteria:
Safety Factor 1.9
Load Factor 1.7
Weight of Soil 120 lbs/cu. ft.
Wheel Loading 16,000 lbs.
Utilizing the above information, design shall then be made as outlined in Chapter IX of
the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, “Design and Construction of
Sanitary and Storm Sewers”.
Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at intervals not
exceeding three hundred (300) linear feet. The manholes shall be constructed with precast
concrete bases satisfactory to the Superintendent and precast 4-foot diameter concrete barrel
sections with eccentric tapered top section, as specified by ASTM C-478. The manhole frame
and cover shall be the standard design of the Town and shall be set with no less than two (2)
courses of brick underneath to allow for later adjustment in elevation. All joints shall be sealed
against infiltration. Manholes shall be constructed with forged aluminum safety type steps cast
into the walls of the precast sections.
SECTION 705. All sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final leakage test before they will be
approved and sewage flow accepted from them by the Town. Where groundwater is high or
other conditions make the testing of sewers by the methods outlined below impractical the Road
Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer may elect to accept infiltration measurements or
other alternative methods of testing. The contractor, owner, builder or developer shall furnish, at
his/her own expense, the necessary facilities for acceptance testing including labor and
equipment. All testing will be done under the supervision of the Road Commissioner or Code
Enforcement Officer or certification provided to the Town that acceptance testing had been
performed in accordance with this Article by a firm or individual qualified to perform such
testing. This certification will also specify the date the test was performed, the methods and
equipment utilized and the results of each test.
In the event of a testing failure the contractor shall, at his/her own expense, determine the
source of the leakage and repair or replace all defective materials or workmanship.
All force mains shall be tested hydrostatically for one (1) hour at a pressure of one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the pressure to which the pipe will normally be subjected. In no
case shall the test pressure be less than fifty (50) pounds per square inch. The rate of leakage
shall not exceed one hundred (100) gallons per mile of pipe per 24 hours per inch of nominal
diameter of the pipe being tested.
11
All manholes shall be tested for water tightness immediately after assembly by
performing a vacuum test prior to backfilling. The manhole lifting holes and pipe lines shall be
plugged prior to the test. A test head shall be placed at the inside of the top of the cone section
and the seal inflated in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. A vacuum of ten
(10) inches of mercury shall be drawn and the vacuum pump shut off. With the valves closed,
the time shall be measured for the vacuum to drop to nine (9) inches. The manhole shall pass if
the time is greater than sixty (60) seconds for forty-eight (48") inch diameter manholes, seventyfive
(75) seconds for sixty (60")inch and ninety (90) seconds for seventy-two (72") inch diameter
manholes.
Gravity sewers shall be tested with a low pressure air test using Cherne Air-Loc
equipment as manufactured by Cherne Industrial, Inc. of Edina, Minnesota or approved equal.
Equipment used shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a. Pneumatic plugs shall have a sealing length equal to or greater than the
diameter of the pipe to be inspected.
b. Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal pressures without requiring external
bracing or blocking.
c. All air used shall pass through a single control panel.
d. Three individual hoses shall be used for the following connections:
1. From control panel to pneumatic plugs for inflation.
2. From control panel to sealed line for introducing the low pressure air.
3. From sealed line to control panel for continually monitoring the air
pressure rise in the sealed line.
All pneumatic plugs shall be seal tested before being used in the actual low pressure air
test. One length of pipe shall be laid on the ground and sealed at both ends with the plugs to be
checked. Air shall be introduced into the plugs to twenty-five (25) psig. The plugs shall hold
against this pressure without bracing and without movement of the plugs out of the pipe.
After a manhole to manhole reach of pipe has been backfilled and cleaned, and the
pneumatic plugs have been checked by the above procedure, the plugs shall be placed in the line
at each manhole and inflated to twenty-five (25) psig. Low pressure air shall be introduced into
this sealed line until the internal air pressure reaches four (4) psig greater than the average
backpressure of any groundwater that may be over the pipe. At least two minutes shall be
allowed for the air pressure to stabilize.
After the stabilization period (3.5 psig minimum pressure in the pipe), the air hose from
the control panel to the air supply shall be disconnected. The section of line being tested shall be
termed “acceptable” if the time required in minutes for the pressure to decrease from 3.5 to 2.5
psig (greater than the average backpressure of any groundwater that may be over the pipe) shall
not be less than the time shown for the given diameters in the following table.
12
Pipe Diameter in Inches Minutes
4 2.0
6 3.0
8 4.0
10 5.0
12 5.5
15 7.5
18 8.5
21 10.0
24 11.5
SECTION 706. The owner of a privately constructed sewer may request that the Town take over
ownership of the extension provided that all of the following conditions have been met.
a. The owner must establish that the sewer, including pump stations and other
equipment, meets all requirements of this Article regarding design of sewer
extensions as existing and in force at the time the Town agrees to take over
ownership.
b. The owner shall have the sewer tested to establish that it meets or exceeds the
standards set forth in this Article unless, the Road Commissioner or Code
Enforcement Officer certifies that such tests are not feasible, in which case the
Road Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer shall specify alternative
methods of testing.
c. The Town shall determine the extent to which a transfer of real property
associated with the sewer extension may be accomplished by easement or by
conveyance of a fee interest. All easements shall be conveyed by good and
sufficient easement deeds in a form acceptable to the Town. All fee interests shall
be conveyed by warranty deed. Regardless of whether an easement or fee is
conveyed, the conveyance shall be free of any and all claims or encumbrances.
Further, the owner of the sewer extension shall provide the Town with a survey in
recordable form describing any interest in real property which the owner proposes
to convey to the Town.
d. At the time of the transfer the owner shall execute a written warranty in a form
acceptable to the Town guaranteeing that the extension meets each and every
requirement contained herein, and that for a period of twelve (12) months from
the date of the transfer, the sewer extension and all equipment associated with it
will operate without the need for any repairs other than normal maintenance.
Further, the owner will provide the Town with a bond or letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Town which will be payable in the event that the extension is
repaired during warranty period and the owner does not make timely payment for
those repairs.
13
e. The owner shall pay all costs or expenses, including but not limited to attorney’s
and engineering fees, which the Town incurs in order to accomplish the transfer
of ownership of a sewer extension.
ARTICLE VIII
Use of the Public Sewers
SECTION 801. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees
(150º) Fahrenheit (sixty-five degrees (65º) Centigrade).
(b) Any waters or wastes which contain grease or oil or other substances that will
solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32º)
and one hundred-fifty (150º )degrees Fahrenheit.
( c) Any waters or wastes containing fats, greases, or oils, whether emulsified or not,
exceeding an average of fifty (50) parts per million (four hundred seventeen (417)
pounds per million gallons) other soluble matter.
(d) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous gas such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or
nitrous oxide or other substance, which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(f) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(g) Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastic, cardboard, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry,
lime residues, beer or distillery slops, whey, chemical residues, paint residues,
cannery waste, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
(h) Any waters or wastes, acid and alkaline in reaction, having corrosive properties
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works. Free acid and alkalies must be neutralized, at all times, within a
permissible pH range of 6.0 to 9.5.
14
(i) Any cyanides, in excess of two (2) parts per million by weight as CN.
(j) Any long half-life (over 100 days) toxic radioactive isotopes, without a special
permit.
(k) Any waters or wastes that for a duration of fifteen (15) minutes has a
concentration greater than five (5) times that of “normal” sewage as measured by
suspended solids and B.O.D. and/or which is discharged continuously at a rate
exceeding one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute except by special permit.
Normal sewage shall be construed to fall within the following ranges:
Constituents Permissible Range
Suspended Solids 180 to 350 ppm
B.O.D. 140 to 300 ppm
Chlorine Requirements 5 to 15 ppm
(l) Arrangements shall be made with the Superintendent to accept septic tank
pumpings at the treatment facility.
(m) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters or wastes
containing a toxic or poisonous substance, a high chlorine demand or suspended solids in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters or the effluent
of the Town’s sewage treatment plant. Such toxic substances shall be limited to the
average concentrations listed hereinafter in the sewage as it arrives at the treatment plant
and at no time shall the hourly concentration at the sewage treatment plant exceed three
times the average concentration. If concentrations listed are exceeded, individual
establishments will be subject to control by the Superintendent or Engineer in volume
and concentration of wastes discharged.
Limits of Toxic Substances in Sewage
Iron, as Fe 5.0 ppm
Chromium, as Cr (hexavalent) 3.0 ppm
Copper, Cu 1.0 ppm
Chlorine Requirements 15.0 ppm
Phenol 10.0 ppm
Cyanide, as CN 0.5 ppm
Cadmium, as Cd 0.5 ppm
Zinc, as ZN 0.5 ppm
Nickel 1.0 ppm
(n) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sewer. Storm water and all
15
other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the Town.
SECTION 802. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when the above set limits
for those substances are exceeded or when, in the opinion of the Engineer, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection and shall comply with the State Plumbing Code.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place
shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
SECTION 803. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the Owner, at his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and shall be readily
accessible and open to inspection by the Superintendent at any time.
SECTION 804. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) a 5-
day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per million, or (b) containing more than
350 parts per million of suspended solids, or (c) containing more than 15 parts per million of
chlorine requirement, or (d) having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily
sewage flow of the Town, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and
Engineer. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent and Engineer, the Owner shall
provide, at his/her expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to, (1) reduce the
Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight, or (2) reduce the chlorine requirements to 15 parts per million, or (3) reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in
Section 801, or (4) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans,
specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Engineer, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. Failure to comply
with one or more of the remedial procedures as required by the Engineer will constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 805. Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the Owner at his/her expense.
SECTION 806. When required by the Engineer, the Owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
16
approved by the Engineer. The manhole shall be installed by the Owner at his/her expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
SECTION 807. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in Sections 801 and 804, shall be determined in accordance
with “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage”, upon suitable samples
taken at control manhole provided for in Section 806. In the event that no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
SECTION 808. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment,
subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
SECTION 809. All of the preceding standards are to apply at the point where the industrial
wastes are discharged into the public sanitary sewerage system and any chemical or mechanical
corrective treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion before the wastes
reach that point. The laboratory methods used in the examination of all industrial wastes shall be
those set forth in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage”, published by the American Public Health Association. However, alternate methods for
the analysis of industrial wastes may be used subject to mutual agreement between the
Selectpersons and the producer of such wastes. The frequency and duration of the sampling of
any industrial waste shall not be less than once every three months for a 24-hour period.
However, more frequent and longer periods may be required at the discretion of the
Selectpersons.
ARTICLE IX
Protection from Damage
SECTION 901. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the
Town sewage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest
under charge of disorderly conduct.
SECTION 902. A contractor must present a certificate of insurance showing minimum liability
coverage of $300,000 for bodily injury to one person and $1,000,000 for bodily injury to more
than one person and $300,000 for property damage before a permit will be issued for
construction of public sewers or sewer extensions. Construction of sewer extensions may require
higher coverage if so recommended by the Engineer.
17
ARTICLE X
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
SECTION 1001. The Superintendent, the Road Commissioner, the Code Enforcement Officer,
the Engineer, and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and
identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 1002. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
SECTION 1101. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance. Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance
except Section 901 shall be served by the Town with notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
SECTION 1102. Any person, individual, firm, corporation, or partnership who fails to comply
with the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the fines and other penalties imposed
under 30-A MRSA Section 4452. The continued violation of any provision of any section of this
ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day such violation of any
provision hereof shall continue.
SECTION 1103. As an alternative, upon violation of this ordinance, the proper authorities of
the Town, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
including an injunction to prevent such unlawful use, construction, or maintenance of cesspools,
septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, pipes or drains to restrain, correct or abate such violation
to prevent the occupancy of any building structure or land where said violations of this ordinance
are found.
SECTION 1104. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become
liable to the town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town by reason of such
violation.
18
ARTICLE XII
Sewer Appeals
SECTION 1201. The Board of Selectpersons is here by authorized to have the following
powers and duties to be exercised only upon written appeal by a party aggrieved by a decision of
the Superintendent, the Road Commissioner, the Town Health Officer or the Code Enforcement
Officer insofar as such decision arises from requirements of this ordinance:
A. To determine whether the decisions of the said officers are in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance, and to interpret the meaning of this
ordinance in Cases of uncertainty.
B. To grant variances from the terms of this ordinance where there is no
substantial departure from the intent of the ordinance and/or where necessary
to avoid undue hardship.
C. To permit an exception to this ordinance only when the terms of the
exception have been specifically set forth by the Town.
D. Unless prevented by illness or absence from the State
1. The Superintendent and Road Commissioner shall attend all
hearings pertaining to the public sewerage system.
2.The Code Enforcement Officer shall attend all hearings
pertaining to the private sewerage systems.
3.The Health Officer shall attend such hearings as he may be
involved in.
E. The officer concerned shall present to the Board of Selectpersons all plans,
photographs, or other factual material which is appropriate to an
understanding of the appeal.
F. The Selectpersons shall not continue hearings on an appeal to a future date
except for good cause. Written notice of the decision of the Board shall be
sent to the appellant and to the officer concerned, forthwith. Failure of the
Board to issue such notice within 30 days of the date of the hearing shall
constitute a denial of said appeal.
SECTION 1202. Appeal Procedure
A. Any person and any municipal department aggrieved by the decision of the
Superintendent, The Road Commissioner, the Town Health Officer or the
19
Code Enforcement Officer, which decision arises from provisions of this
ordinance, may appeal such decision to the Board of Selectpersons.
B. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the decisions of the Superintendent, the
Road Commissioner, the Town Health Officer or the Code Enforcement
Officer, the appeal shall be entered at the office of the Town Clerk
upon forms to be approved by the Board of Selectpersons. The appellant shall
set forth in the form the grounds of his/her appeal and shall refer to the
specific provisions of the Sewerage Ordinance involved. Following the
receipt of any appeal, the Town Clerk shall notify forthwith the officer
concerned and the Town Manager.
C. An aggrieved party may appeal from the decision of the Board of
Selectpersons to the Superior Court as provided by the laws of the State of
Maine.
SECTION 1203. After a decision has been made by the Board of Selectpersons, a new appeal
of similar import shall not be entertained by the Board until one year shall have elapsed from the
date of said decision, except that the Board may entertain a new appeal if the Chairman believes
that, owing to a mistake of law or misunderstanding of fact, an injustice was done, or if he
believes that a change has taken place in some essential aspect of the appeal.
20
ARTICLE XIII
Severability
SECTION 1301. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
SECTION 1302. The validity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
ARTICLE XIV
Ordinance in Force
SECTION 1401. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
Town of Skowhegan
Sex Offender Residency Restriction Ordinance
Adopted at Town Meeting June 11, 2018
ARTICLE I - TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Town of Skowhegan Sex Offender Residency Restriction
Ordinance."
ARTICLE II - FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
The Town promotes and strives to create a safe environment for its citizens to live and raise families
and considers the promotion of the safety and welfare of children to be of paramount importance.
The Town recognizes that sex offenders who prey upon children may have a high rate of
recidivism. Notwithstanding the fact that certain persons convicted of sex offenses or sexually
violent offenses are required to register pursuant to the Maine Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act of 1999, 34-A M.R.S.A. § 11201 et seq., as may be amended in the future, the
Town finds that further protective measures are necessary and warranted to safeguard places where
children congregate. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide such further protective measures
while balancing the interests and residential needs of sex offenders.
ARTICLE III - AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3014, as may be amended in the future.
ARTICLE IV - DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DESIGNATED SEX OFFENDERS - Persons convicted of Class A, B or C sex offenses committed
against persons who had not attained 14 years of age at the time of the offense, regardless of
whether the offense was committed in the State of Maine or another jurisdiction.
RESIDENCE - The temporary or permanent occupation or use of a place, including, but not limited
to, a domicile, for the purpose of living, residing or dwelling. The residence shall be deemed to
include all the land or property within the limits of the property parcel on which the residence is
situated.
RESTRICTED PROPERTY - The real property consisting of the entire property parcel on which a
public or private elementary, middle or secondary school is located or any safe zone as designated
by the Town of Skowhegan in accordance with state law, 30-A MRSA, section 3253.
Sex Offender Residency Restriction Ordinance June 11, 2018
2
Also the real property comprising a municipally owned or state-owned property that is leased to a
nonprofit organization for purposes of a park, athletic field or recreational facility that is open to the
public where children are the primary users.
Current “safe zones” that apply are: Bucky Quinn Ball Field on South Factory Street, Pat Quinn
Ball Field on East Maple Street, Memorial Field on East Maple Street, Carl Wright Ball Fields at
the Community Center, the Community Center, and Lake George Regional Park.
SETBACK - A seven-hundred-fifty-foot (750ft) buffer surrounding restricted property.
ARTICLE V - RESTRICTED PROPERTY MAP; RESTRICTIONS:
The Planning Department, with the assistance of the Police Department, shall prepare and file with
the Town Clerk and Police Department an official map showing restricted property, as defined by
this ordinance. The map is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this ordinance. [1]
The Planning Department, with the assistance of the Police Department, shall by July 1 of each year
recommend updates to the map to the Town Selectboard to reflect any changes in the locations of
any restricted property and setbacks. The Town Selectboard may amend the restricted property
official map by Town Selectboard order, and any amended official map shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and the Police Department. In the event of any conflict between the map and the text of
this ordinance, the ordinance text shall control.
[1] Note: Said map is on file in the Town Clerk’s office.
No designated sex offender shall reside within the setback of any restricted property. Licensed
nursing homes or other licensed medical facilities are excluded from this ordinance so necessary
medical care can be provided.
ARTICLE VI - EXCEPTIONS
A designated sex offender maintaining a residence within the setback of a restricted property is not
in violation of this ordinance if the residence was established and consistently maintained as a
residence prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance. A designated sex offender is not in
violation of this ordinance if the restricted property is created, moved or enlarged and such
creation, movement or enlargement results in a designated sex offender residing within the setback
of a restricted property, as long as the residence was in place and consistently maintained prior
thereto.
ARTICLE VII - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A designated sex offender who, 30 days after actual receipt of written notice sent by regular mail or
hand delivered from the Town acting by and through its Police Department, is in violation of this
ordinance shall be subject to an action brought by the Town to enforce the requirements of this
ordinance. The Town may file a legal action against the violator seeking any and all remedies to
which it is entitled pursuant to state and local laws, including, without limitation, declaratory and
injunctive relief.
Sex Offender Residency Restriction Ordinance June 11, 2018
3
The Town also may seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500 per day. Each day of violation
shall constitute a separate violation. In the event the Town is the prevailing party in any action
under this ordinance, it shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and
the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the Town. All civil penalties shall inure to the
benefit of the Town of Skowhegan.
ARTICLE VII - SEVERABILITY
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
1
Chapter 19
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
Amended March 10, 1997 (MAP ONLY)
Amended March 7, 1998 (MAP ONLY)
Amended March 8, 1999
Amended July 20, 1999 (MAP ONLY)
Amended March 12, 2001
Amended March 10, 2003
Amended March 6, 2006 (MAP ONLY)
Amended June 8, 2009 (MAP INCLUDED)
Amended June 7, 2010 (MAP ONLY)
Amended June 10, 2013
Amended June 9, 2014 (MAP ONLY)
2
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1. PURPOSES
The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions; to
prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other
wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and maritime industries; to
protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to
conserve shore cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve
natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in
shoreland areas.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38, sections 435-
449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance applies to all land areas within two hundred and fifty ( 250') feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of any great pond or river; within two hundred and fifty
(250') feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; and within seventyfive
(75') feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a stream. This Ordinance
also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure
extending below the normal high water line of a water body or within a wetland.
SECTION 4. A. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE AND ORDINANCE
AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance, which was adopted by the municipal Legislative Body on March 11, 1991, shall
not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection. A certified
copy of the Ordinance and Ordinance Amendment, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk,
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection for approval. If the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection fails to act on this Ordinance or Ordinance
Amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance or Ordinance
Amendment, it shall be deemed approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period
shall be governed by the terms of this Ordinance or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance or
Ordinance Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
3
SECTION 5. AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be accessible
to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at
the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
SECTION 7. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the
municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
SECTION 8. AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Legislative Body. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the
Municipal Legislative Body and shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If
the Commissioner fails to act on any amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of
the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) days period shall be governed by the
terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
SECTION 9. DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map: The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby
divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Maps which are
made a part of this Ordinance:
1. Resource Protection
2. Limited Residential
3. Limited Commercial
4. General Development
5. Wetlands Protection
6. Stream Protection
B. Scale of Map: The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less
than: one (1) inch = two thousand (2,000) feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated
and a legend indicating the symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
4
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map: The Official Shoreland Zoning Map
shall be certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the
municipal office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map: If amendments, in accordance with
Section 8, are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland
Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty
(30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
SECTION 10. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map, district boundary lines are
property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the
shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of district
boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
SECTION 11. LAND USE REQUIREMENTS
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded,
moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
SECTION 12. NON-CONFORMANCE
A. Purpose: It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
non-conforming conditions that existed before the effective date of the Ordinance or
amendments thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in
Section 12.
B. General:
1. Transfer of Ownership: Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred,
and the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the nonconforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Repair and Maintenance: This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep
and maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs
or renovations that do not involve expansion of the non-conforming use
or structure and such other changes in a non-conforming use or structure as federal,
state, or local building and safety codes may require.
NOTE: See Section 17 for the definitions of non-conforming structures, nonconforming
uses and non-conforming lots.
5
C. Non-Conforming Structures:
(1) Expansions: A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after
obtaining a permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such
addition or expansion does not increase the non-conformity of the structure, and is in
accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) below.
(a) Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not
meet the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirements may be
expanded or altered as follows, as long as all other applicable standards
contained in this Ordinance are met.
i. Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet of the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland is
prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the
water body or wetland setback requirement.
ii. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland
than the principal structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not
increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary stream or wetland
setback requirement.
iii. For structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum
combined total floor area for all structures is 1,000 square feet, and the
maximum height of any structure is 20 feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater.
iv. For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal high-water line
of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified
as GPA, the maximum combined total floor area for all structures is 1,500
square feet, and the maximum height of any structure is 25 feet or the
height of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except that any portion of
those structures located less than 75 feet form the normal high- water line or
upland edge of a wetland must meet the floor area and height limits of division
(iii).
For the purposes of subparagraph (a), a basement is not counted toward floor area.
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a
non-conforming structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed
such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board or its designee, basing its decision on the
criteria specified in paragraph 2 Relocation, below; that the completed
6
foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure;
and that the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more
than three (3) additional feet.
(1-A) Special expansion allowance. Existing principal and accessory structures that
exceed the floor area or height limits set in divisions (iii) and (iv) above may not be
expanded, except that the limits may be exceeded by not more than 500 square feet
provided that all of the following requirements are met.
(a) The principal structure is set back at least 50 feet from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland.
(b) A well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation extends at least 50 feet in
depth as measured from the normal high-water line, tributary stream or upland
edge for the entire width of the property. A “well-distributed stand of trees
adjacent to a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, is defined as maintaining a rating score of 24 or more in each
25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined by the
following rating system.
Diameter of tree at 4 ½ feet above ground level (inches)
Points
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 - < 8 in. 2
8 - < 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a “welldistributed
stand of trees and other vegetation” is defined as maintaining a
minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the
landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation
removed except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed
down to the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this
Ordinance;
v. Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot
by 50-foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in
diameter.
7
If a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation meeting the
requirements of this subparagraph is not present, the 500 square foot special
expansion allowance may be permitted only in conjunction with a written plan,
including a scaled site drawing, by the property owner, and approved by the
planning board or its designee to reestablish a buffer of trees, shrubs, and other
ground cover within 50 feet of the shoreline
(c) Adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and rivers flowing to great ponds
classified GPA, except for the allowable footpath, there exists complete
natural ground cover, consisting of forest duff, shrubs, and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation within 50 feet of the normal high-water line. Where
natural ground cover is lacking, the area must be supplemented with leaf or
bark mulch and plantings of native shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and
provide for effective infiltration of storm water.
(d) A written plan by the property owner, including a scaled site drawing, is
approved by the Planning Board, and is developed, implemented, and
maintained to address the following mitigation measures for the
property within the shoreland zone.
(i) Unstabilized areas resulting in soil erosion must be mulched, seeded, or
otherwise stabilized and maintained to prevent further erosion and
sedimentation to water bodies and wetlands.
(ii) Roofs and associated drainage systems, driveways, parking areas, and
other non-vegetated surfaces must be designed or modified, as necessary,
to prevent concentrated flow of storm water runoff from reaching a water
body or wetland. Where possible runoff must be directed through a
vegetated area or infiltrated into the soil through the use of a dry
well, stone apron, or similar device.
(1-B) Planting requirements. Any planting or revegetation required as a condition to the
Special Expansion Allowance must be in accordance with a written plan drafted by a
qualified professional, be implemented at the time of construction, and be designed to
meet the rating scores contained in paragraph (b) and the ground cover requirements
of paragraph (c) when the vegetation matures within the 50 foot strip. At a minimum,
the plan must provide for the establishment of a well-distributed planting of saplings
spaced so that there is at least one sapling per 80 square feet of newly established
buffer. Planted saplings may be no less than three (3) feet tall for coniferous species
and no less than six (6) feet tall for deciduous species. The planting plan must
include a mix of at least three native tree species found growing in adjacent areas,
with no one species making up more than 50% of the number of saplings planted
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board or its designee, based on adjacent
stand comparison. All aspects of the implemented plan must be maintained by the
8
applicant and future owners.
(1-C) Filing and reporting requirements. Written plans required pursuant to this
section must be filed with the registry of deeds of the county in which the
property is located. A copy of all permits issued pursuant to this section must
be forwarded by the municipality to the department within 14 days of the
issuance of the permit.
2. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of
the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board or its designee, and provided that the applicant demonstrates
that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State
law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a
new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case
shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more nonconforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider the size of the lot,
the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on
the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on
-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove vegetation
within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning
Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed
vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed must
be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least
one native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than
five trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of
the number of trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from
the water or wetland than the trees that were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed
or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at
least the same size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was
disturbed, damaged, or removed must be reestablished within the setback area.
The vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation
and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location
of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation, which may consist of
grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
9
3. Reconstruction or Replacement: Any non-conforming structure which is located less
than the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which
is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or
removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a permit is obtained within
one (1) year of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that
such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board or its designee in accordance with the purposes of this
Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase
its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the
required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as
allowed pursuant to Section 12(C) (1) above, as determined by the non-conforming
floor area and volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If
the total amount of floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or
reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated or
reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the setback
requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order to
replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted in accordance with
Section 12(C) (2) above. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is
removed by 50% or less of the market value, or damaged or destroyed by fifty percent
(50%) or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and
repair may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained, from the Code
Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback
to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in
addition to the criteria in Section 12 (C) (2) above, the physical condition and type of
foundation present, if any.
4. Change of Use of a Non-Conforming Structure: The use of a non-conforming
structure may not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have no greater
adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or
adjacent properties and resources than the existing use. In determining that no greater
adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require written documentation
from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion
and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual
and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain management,
archaeological and historic resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities,
and other functionally water dependent uses.
D. Non-Conforming Uses:
10
1. Expansion: Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that nonconforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board,
be expanded within existing residential structures or within expansions of such
structures as allowed in Section 12 (C)(1)(a) above.
2. Resumption Prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming
use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by
a conforming use, may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that
the Planning Board may, for good cause shown by the applicant grant up to a one
year extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply to the resumption
of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure has been used or
maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5) year period.
3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the
subject and adjacent properties and resources, than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse
impact shall be made according to criteria listed in Section 12 (C)(4) above.
E. Non-Conforming Lots:
1. Non-Conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot
in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot area, lot
width and shore frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or other
requirements not involving lot area, lot width or shore frontage shall be obtained by
action of the Board of Appeals.
2. Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots
do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or
structure exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or
together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-
A through 4807-D and State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are
complied with.
3. Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels
are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirements of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or
more of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure the lots shall be combined
to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements.
SECTION 13. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
11
A. Resource Protection District: The Resource Protection District includes area in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological
ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This District shall include the following areas
when they occur within the limits of the shoreland zone, exclusive of the Stream
Protection District and the Wetland Protection District, except that areas which are
currently developed and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited Commercial or
General Development, need not be included within the Resource Protection District.
1. Areas within two hundred fifty (250') feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands, and wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are
rated “moderate” or “high” value waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including
nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
(DIF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer
maintained by either MDIF&W or the Department as of December 31, 2008. For the
purposes of this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers” shall
mean areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are
contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the
water level of the great pond or river during the period of normal high water.
“Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are considered to be part of that
great pond or river.
2. Flood plains along rivers and flood plains along artificially formed great ponds along
rivers, defined by the hundred (100) year flood plain as designated on the Federal
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by
soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
3. Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of twenty (20%) percent
or greater.
4. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric
soils, which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not
surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
5. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or riverbed
movement.
B. Limited Residential District: The Limited Residential District includes those areas
suitable for residential and recreational development. It includes areas other than those in
the Resource Protection District, Wetlands Protection District, or Stream Protection
District, and areas, which are used less intensively than those in the Limited Commercial
District, and the General Development Districts.
12
C. Limited Commercial District: The Limited Commercial District includes areas of mixed,
light commercial and residential uses, exclusive of the Stream Protection District and
Wetlands Protection District, which should not be developed as intensively as the
General Development Districts. This district includes areas of two (2) or more
contiguous acres in size devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and
commercial uses. Industrial uses are prohibited.
D. General Development District: The General Development District includes the following
types of areas:
1. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or
intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not
limited to the following:
a. Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating, or other industrial activities;
b. Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities,
or other commercial activities; and
c. Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but
not limited to amusement parks, racetracks, and fairgrounds.
2. Areas otherwise discernable as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial
or recreational uses.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential
development. However, no area shall be designated as a General Development
District based solely on residential use.
In areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and adjacent to rivers flowing to
great ponds classified GPA, the designation of an area as a General Development
District shall be based upon uses existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.
There shall be no newly established General Development Districts or expansions in
area of existing General Development Districts adjacent to great ponds classified
GPA, and adjacent to rivers, which flow to great ponds, classified GPA.
E. Wetland Protection District: The Wetlands Protection District includes all land areas
within two hundred fifty (250') feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland not rated “moderate” or “high” value by the Maine Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as of December 31, 2008.
F. The Stream Protection District: The Stream Protection District includes all land areas
within seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
stream, exclusive of those areas within two hundred and fifty (250') feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of a great pond or river or within two hundred and
fifty (250') feet, horizontal distance of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland. Where a
13
stream and its associated shoreland area is located within two hundred and fifty (250')
feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall be
regulated under the terms of the shorelands district associated with that water body or
wetland.
14
SECTION 14. TABLE OF LAND USES
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall conform
with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The District designation for a
particular site shall be determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable
land use standards).
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector.
Abbreviations:
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
LC - Limited Commercial
GD- General Development
WP- Wetland Protection
SP - Stream Protection
15
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES DISTRICTS
SP RP LR LC GD WP
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not
requiring structures such as
hunting, fishing and hiking.
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on
existing roads and trails.
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Forest management activities
except for timber harvesting and land
management roads.
Yes PB Yes Yes Yes Yes
4. Timber harvesting Yes CEO Yes Yes Yes Yes
5. Clearing or Removal of vegetation
for approved construction and other
allowed uses.
CEO CEO Yes Yes Yes CEO
6. Fire prevention activities Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7. Wildlife management practices Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
8. Soil and Water conservation
practices
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
9. Mineral exploration No Yes? Yes? Yes? Yes? CEO
10. Mineral extraction including sand
and gravel extraction
No PB? PB PB PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
12. Emergency Operations Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
13. Agriculture Yes PB Yes Yes Yes Yes
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB Yes Yes PB
16
LAND USES DISTRICTS
SP RP LR LC GD WP
15. Principal Structure and uses
A. One and two family residential
B. Multi-unit residential
C. Commercial
D. Industrial
E. Governmental, Institutional &
Professional
F. Small non-residential facilities
for educational, scientific or
nature interpretation purposes
PB?
No
No
No
No
PB?
No(12)
No
No
No
No
PB
CEO
PB
No?
No
PB?
CEO
CEO
PB
PB
No
PB
CEO
CEO
PB
PB
PB
PB
CEO
PB
No
No
No
PB
PB?
16. Structures accessory to allowed
uses
PB? PB CEO CEO YES CEO
17. Docks, bridges, and other
structures and uses extending over
or below the normal high water
line or within a wetland:
A. Temporary
B. Permanent
SP
CEOm
PB
RP
CEO
m
PB
LR
CEO
m
PB
LC
CEO
m
PB
GD
CEOm
PB
WP
CEO
m
PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residence
to Year round residences LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
19. Home Occupations PB No PB CEO Yes PB
20. Private sewerage disposal systems
for allowed uses
LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
21. Essential services PB? PB? PB PB PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined to allow
uses
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
17
LAND USES & DISTRICTS
23. Public and private recreational
areas involving minimal
structural development
SP
PB
RP
PB
LR
PB
LC
CEO
GD
CEO
WP
CEO
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds No No? PB PB PB No
26. Road and driveway construction PB No? PB PB PB No
27. Land Management Roads Yes PB Yes Yes Yes Yes
28. Parking facilities No No? PB PB PB No
29. Marinas PB No PB PB PB No
30. Filling and earthmoving of less
than 10 Cubic Yards
CEO CEO Yes Yes Yes CEO
31. Filling or earthmoving of greater
than 10 Cubic Yards
PB PB CEO CEO CEO CEO
32. Signs Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
33. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a
CEO permit
CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
35. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB
permit
PB PB PB PB PB PB
1. In RP not allowed within seventy-five feet (75') horizontal distance of the normal high
water line of great ponds, except to remove safety hazards.
2. Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than one hundred (100)
square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3. In RP not allowed in areas so designed because of wildlife value.
4. Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of
Appeals.
5. Functionally water dependent use and uses accessory to such water dependent uses only.
6. See further restrictions in Section 15(L)(2).
7. Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to flood plain criteria in which
case a permit is required from the PB.
18
8. Except as provided in Section 15(H) (3).
9. Allowable uses in pre-existing residential structures shall maintain the architectural
integrity of the structure and any addition or replacement building will conform to the
architectural style of the original building.
10. Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and
campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective district.
11. Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit
is required.
12. Except as provided in Section 16 (E)*
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to 38, M.R.S.A. section 480-C, if the activity
occurs in, on, or adjacent to any freshwater wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook and
operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing, or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
SECTION 15. LAND USE STANDARDS
All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the following provisions, if
applicable:
A. Minimum Lots Standards:
1. Minimum Lot Area Minimum Shore
(Square Feet) Frontage (in feet)
Residential per dwelling unit:
a. Within the Shoreland Zone not
served by municipal sewer and water 40,000 200
b. Within the Shoreland Zone when the lot
is served by municipal sewer and water 10,000 100
Governmental, Institutional, Professional,
Commercial, and Industrial per principal
structure:
a. Within the Shoreland Zone not served
19
by municipal sewer and water 60,000 300
b. Within the Shoreland Zone when a lot is
served by municipal sewer and water 20,000 100
Public and Private Recreational Facilities:
a. Within the Shoreland Zone 40,000 200
2. Land below the normal high water line of water body or upland edge of a wetland and
land beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward
calculating minimum lot area.
3. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a
separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of
land
on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
4. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100') feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland shall be equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with
the proposed use.
5. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental institutional,
commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or
established on a single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use.
B. Principal and Accessory Structures:
1. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred
(100') feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of great ponds
classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds classified GPA, and seventy-five
(75') feet, horizontal distance, from he normal high water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in the General
Development District the setback from the normal high water line shall be at least
twenty-five (25') feet. In the Resource Protection District the setback requirement
shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads, parking spaces or
other regulated objects specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback
requirement specified above shall apply.
In addition:
20
(a) The water body, tributary stream or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to
structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls nor to other functionally water
dependent uses.
(b) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it
is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary
stream or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a
single accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar
equipment. Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor
eight (8) feet in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream
as practical and shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the
shoreline or tributary stream than the principal structure.
2. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are
permitted in the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, Limited Commercial,
Wetlands Protection, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed thirty-five
(35') feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission
towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
3. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures including
basements shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the one hundred
(100) year flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined
by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
4. The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty (20%) percent of the lot or a
portion thereof, located within the shoreland zone, including land area previously
developed, except in the General Development District adjacent to rivers that do not flow
to great ponds classified GPA, where lot coverage shall not exceed seventy (70%)
percent.
4. Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure
setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of
the following conditions are met:
a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
b) The wall(s) is (are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a
site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be
stabilized with vegetative plantings;
d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
21
e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year flood plain on rivers, streams,
wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types
identified as recent flood plain soils;
f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the follow
characteristics;
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation.
Where natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or
bark mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and
provide for effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required,
measured perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a
wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standard in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the
buffer;
6. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may
be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline
access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided; the structure is limited to a
maximum of four (4') feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or over
the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38, section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates
that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Below the Normal High Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland:
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and
constructed so as to control erosion.
22
2. The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity
and be consistent with the surrounding character and use, of the area.
5. No new structure shall be built on, over, or abutting a pier, wharf, or other
structure extending beyond the normal high water line of a water body or within a
wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as
an operational necessity.
6. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, or other structure
extending beyond the normal high water line shall be converted to residential
dwelling units in any district.
7. Except in the General Development District, structures built on, over or abutting a
pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high water line
of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20') feet in height
above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or over
water bodies shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38, M.R.S.A., section 480-C.
Permits may also be required from the Army Corps of Engineers if located in
navigable waters.
D. Campgrounds: Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed
under State licensing procedures and the following:
1. Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of
land, not including roads and driveways, for each site, except that in Resource
Protection district, the minimum site size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet. Land supporting wetland vegetation, land with slopes greater than
twenty percent (20%), and land below the normal high water line of a body of
water shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
2. The area intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter or utility
and service building shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100') feet,
horizontal distance from the normal high water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75')
feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland, except that in the Resource
Protection district, no permanent structures may be placed within two hundred
and fifty (250') feet of the protected resource.
23
E. Individual Private Campsites: Individual, private campsites not associated with
campgrounds are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less,
may be permitted.
2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle
or tent platform, shall be set back one hundred (100') feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high water line of a great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great
pond classified GPA, and seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland.
3. Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational
vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel
pad, and no structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
4. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar
shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
5. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of
sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the
Local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from
the receiving facility or landowner is required.
6. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one
hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures
shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in
compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless
served by public sewage facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses: The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers
and streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
(1).Auto washing facilities
(2).Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3).Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
(4).Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers other than
amounts normally associated with individual households or farms.
(5).Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6).Dry cleaning establishments
24
(7).Electronic circuit assembly
(8).Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9).Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10).Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same
property as use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11).Photographic processing
(12).Printing
G. Parking Areas:
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirements
for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities, in Districts other than the
General Development may be reduced to no less than fifty feet (50') horizontal
distance from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board finds that no
other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary stream.
2. Parking areas shall be off street and shall be adequately sized for the proposed use as
specified in the most recent edition of the Transportation and Engineering Handbook
Institute of Transportation Engineers. All parking areas also shall be designed to
prevent storm water runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream
or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
3. In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall
apply:
a. Typical Parking Space: Approximately ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet (20')
long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty feet
long (40').
b. Internal Travel Aisles: Approximately twenty feet (20') wide.
H. Roads and Driveways: The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads
and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
1. Roads and driveway shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') horizontal
distance, from the normal high water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river
that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and seventy-five feet (75') horizontal
distance from the normal high water line of other water bodies, tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists. If no other
reasonable alternative exists the road and/or the driveway setback requirement shall
be no less than fifty feet (50') horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the
applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not
limited to the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch
25
relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty percent (20%), the road and/or driveway setback
shall be increased by ten feet (10') horizontal distance, for each five percent (5%)
increase in slope above twenty percent (20%).
Section 15 (H)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or
driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located nearer to
the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity. Roads and driveways
providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully
with the requirements of Section 15(H)(1) except for that portion of the road or
driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
2. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless
of its setback from a body of water.
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except that
the Planning Board may grant a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide
access to permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved
by the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District, upon a finding that no
reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district. When a road
or driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway
shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one
(1) vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for
erosion and sedimentation control contained in Section 15(Q).
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than (10%) percent except for short
segments of less than two hundred (200') feet.
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least fifty
(50') feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow point of the
ditch or culvert and the normal high water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage, which is directed to an un-scarified
buffer strip, shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turn-outs shall be
installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips
before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway or ditch.
26
To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and water turn-outs shall be spaced along the
road, or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0 - 2 250
3 - 5 200 - 135
6 - 10 100 - 80
11 - 15 80 - 60
16 - 20 60 - 45
21 + 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the
grade is ten (10%)percent or less.
c. On sections having slopes greater than ten (10%) percent, ditch relief culverts
shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30?) degree angle downslope from a line
perpendicular to the centerline of the road or driveway.
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to
allow for effective functioning, and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized
with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turn-outs and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular
basis to assure effective functioning.
I. Signs: The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection,
Wetlands Protection, Stream Protection, and Limited Residential Districts:
1. Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed, provided
that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two
(2) signs per premises. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the
premises shall be prohibited.
2. Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premises, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
3. Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area
relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
27
4. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to
number provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20') feet above the ground.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff:
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water
runoff from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where
possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces
and wooded areas shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration
of storm waters.
2. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
K. Septic Waste Disposal:
1. All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing
or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill
extensions, shall not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high water line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and
b) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
NOTE: The Rules, among other requirements, include: The Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems, excluding full extensions, to be
constructed no less than one hundred (100') horizontal feet from the normal high
water line of a perennial water body. The minimum setback distance for a new
subsurface disposal system may not be reduced by variance.
L. Essential Services:
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public
ways and existing service corridors.
2. The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not
allowed in a Resource Protection, Wetlands Protection, or Stream Protection District,
except to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except where the
28
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
3. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and
related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit, if a
substantially similar replacement is used.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction: Mineral exploration to determine the nature or
extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other
methods which create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of
ground surface. A permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for
mineral exploration, which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations, including test
pits and holes shall be immediately caped, filled or secured by other equally effective
measures, to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by the Planning Board before a
permit is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to
fulfill the requirements of Section 15 (M) (4) below.
2. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features,
shall be permitted within one hundred (100') feet, horizontal distance of the normal
high water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, and within seventy-five (75') feet of the normal high water line of any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Extraction
operations shall not be permitted within seventy-five (75') feet of any property line,
without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
3. (Repealed)
4. Within twelve (12) month following the completion of extraction operations at any
extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one
hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve
(12) month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with
the following:
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an
approved location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site
may be buried or covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be two to one (2:1) slope or flatter.
29
c. Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil
or loam shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the
stabilization project.
5. In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with
mineral extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
N. Agriculture:
1. All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure
Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on
November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-
4209).
2. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100') feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond classified GPA, or a river flowing to a great pond classified
GPA or within seventy-five (75') feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or wetlands. Within five (5) years of the effective date of this
Ordinance, all manure storage areas within the shoreland zone must be
constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated storm water. Existing facilities, which do not meet the setback
requirement, may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision within the
above five (5) year period.
3. Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000)
square feet in surface area, or the spreading, disposal or storage of manure within the
shoreland zone shall require a Soil and Water Conservation Plan to be filed with
the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said Plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
4. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one hundred (100') feet, horizontal
distance, or the normal high water line of a great pond classified GPA; within
seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within
twenty-five (25') feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands.
Operations in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance and not in
conformance with this provision may be maintained.
5. After the effective date of this Ordinance, newly established livestock grazing areas
shall not be permitted within one hundred (100') feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line of a great pond classified GPA; within seventy-five (75') feet,
horizontal distance of, other bodies, nor; within twenty-five (25') feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams, and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with
ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback
30
provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance
with a Soil and Water Conservation Plan.
O. Timber Harvesting
Timber Harvesting – Statewide Standards
(1) Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting timber harvesting and
related activities must take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline
integrity, the occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of water body
and tributary stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil
lying within water bodies, tributary stream and wetlands. If, despite such precautions, the
disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body
and tributary stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil
lying within water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
(2) Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted such that
slash or debris is not left below the normal high-water line of any water body or tributary
stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Section 15(O-1)(2) does not apply to minor,
incidental amounts of slash that result from timber harvesting and related activities
otherwise conducted in compliance with this section.
(a) Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to
stabilize exposed soil, may be left in place, provided that no part thereof extends
more than 4 feet above the ground.
(b) Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland: and
(ii) Between 50 feet and 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line or upland edge of a wetland, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must
be disposed of in such a manner that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet
above the ground.
(3) Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate tree cover and shall be
conducted so that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained. This requirement may be
satisfied by following one of the following three options:
(a) Option 1 (40% volume removal), as follows:
(i) Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the total volume on each acre of
trees 4.5 inches DBH or greater in any 10 year period as allowed. Volume may
be considered to be equivalent to basal area;
31
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of rivers,
streams, and great ponds, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland, there must be no cleared openings. At distances
greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
river or great pond or upland edge of a wetland, timber harvesting and related
activities must not create single cleared openings greater than 14,000 square
feet, they must be at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared
openings will be included in the calculation of total volume removal. Volume
may be considered equivalent to basal area.
(b) Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), as follows:
(i) The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least 60 square
feet per acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of
which 40 square feet per acre must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches DBH;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation
including existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of water
bodies, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of wetlands,
there must be no cleared openings. At distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a river or great pond or upland edge
of a wetland, timber harvesting and related activities must not create single
cleared openings greater than 14,000 square feet, they must be at least 100
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings will be included in the
calculation of the average basal area. Volume may be considered equivalent to
basal area.
(c) Option 3 (Outcome based), which requires: An alternative method proposed in
an application, signed by a Licensed Forester or certified wildlife professional,
submitted by the landowner or designated agent to the State of Maine Department
of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry (Bureau) for review and approval, which
provides equal or better protection of the shoreland area than this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form required by 12M.R.S.A.
chapter 805, subchapter 5 which option they choose to use. If landowners choose Option 1 or
Option 2, compliance will be determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen. If
landowners choose Option 3, timber harvesting and related activities may not begin until the
Bureau has approved the alternative method.
32
The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of trees is retained
through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located randomly or systematically to
provide a fair representation of the harvest area.
(4) Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies to the
construction, maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in shoreland areas.
(a) Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not use river,
stream or tributary stream channels as travel routes except when surface waters
are frozen and snow covered, and the activity will not result in any ground
disturbance.
(b) Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent sediment
and concentrated water runoff from entering a water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Upon termination of their use, skid trails and yards must be stabilized.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral soil within 25
feet, horizontal distance, of any water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On
slopes of 10 percent or greater, the setback for equipment operation must be
increased by 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10 percent. Where slopes
fall away from the resource, no increase in the 25-foot setback is required.
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be
used to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
Such techniques may include the installation of sump holes or settling basins,
and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water
turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(5) Land Management Roads. Land management roads, including approaches to
crossings of water bodies, tributary stream channels, and freshwater wetlands, ditches and
other related structures, must be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent
sediment and concentrated water runoff from directly entering the water body, tributary
stream or wetland. Surface water on or adjacent to water crossing approaches must be
diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid sedimentation of the watercourse or
wetland. Because roadside ditches may not extend to the resource being crossed,
vegetative filter strips must be established in accordance with the setback requirements of
Section 15 (O-1)(7) of this rule.
33
(a) Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and fill must be
set back at least:
(i) 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great
pond, river or freshwater wetland;
(ii) 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of streams;
and
(iii) 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of tributary
streams
(b) The minimum 100 foot setback specified in Section 15(O-1)(5)(a)(i) above
may be reduced to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, and the 50 foot
setback specified in Section 15(O-1)(5)(a)(ii) above may be reduced to no less
than 25 feet, horizontal distance, if, prior to construction, the landowner or the
landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction
that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used
to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such
techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins,
and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to
avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. If, despite
such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
(c) On slopes of 10 percent of greater, the land management road setback must be
increased by at least 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet,
horizontal distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10 percent.
(d) New land management roads are not allowed within the shoreland area along
Significant River Segments as identified in 38 M.R.S.A. section 437, nor in a
Resource Protection District, unless, prior to construction, the landowner or the
landowner’s designated agent makes a clear demonstration to the Planning
Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative route exists outside the
shoreland zone, and that the new road must be set back as far as practicable from
the normal high-water line and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(e) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water control
installations associated with roads must be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning. Drainage structures shall deliver a dispersed flow of water
into an unscarified filter strip no less than the width indicated in the setback
requirements in Section 15(O-1)(7). Where such a filter strip is impracticable,
appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include the installation of sump
holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts
34
and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the
disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(f) Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water control
installations required in Section 15(O-1)(5)(e) must continue until use of road is
discontinued and the road is put to bed by effective installation of water bard or
other adequate road drainage structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to
avoid surface water flowing over or under the water bar, and extending a
sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not reenter the road
surface.
(g) Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of presently existing
roads conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1). Any nonconforming existing
road may continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the nonconforming
conditions are not made more nonconforming.
(h) Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need not
conform to the setback requirements of Section 15(O-1)(5)(a) if, prior to
extension or enlargement, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent
demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative
exists and that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are
not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must
be corrected.
(i) Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements,
persons undertaking construction and maintenance of roads and river, stream and
tributary stream crossings must take reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation
of surface waters.
(6) Crossings of waterbodies. Crossings of river, steams, and tributary streams must
allow for fish passage at all times of the year, must not impound water, and must allow
for the maintenance of normal flows.
(a) Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied and used for the
circumstances for which they are designed, methods including but not limited to
the following are acceptable as a means of calculating the 10 year and 25 year
frequency water flows and thereby determining water crossing size as required in
Section 15(O-1): and The United States Geological Survey (USGS) Methods;
Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating the Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in
Maine for Selected Recurrence Intervals. U.S. Geological Survey. Water
35
Resources Investigation Report 99-4008. 45pp.
(b) Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or enlargement of presently
existing water crossings must conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1). Any
nonconforming existing water crossing may continue to exist and be maintained,
as long as the nonconforming conditions are not made more nonconforming;
however, any maintenance or repair work done below the normal high-water line
must conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1)
(c) Other Agency Permits. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving
the design, construction, and maintenance of crossings on waterbodies other than
a river, stream or tributary stream may require a permit from the Land Use
Regulation Commission, the Department of Environmental Protection, or the US
Army Corps of Engineers.
(d) Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings of freshwater wetlands identified by
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat
require prior consultation with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Notice of Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water crossing construction
maintenance, alteration and replacement activities in shoreland areas must be
given to the Bureau prior to the commencement of such activities. Such notice
must contain all information required by the Bureau, including:
(i) a map showing the location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit from
state or federal agencies, a copy of the approved permit of permits; and
(iv) a statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary and
permanent crossings will be constructed, maintained, and closed out in
accordance with the requirements of this Section.
(f) Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a bridge or culvert
sized according to the requirements of Section 15(O-1)(6)(g) below. Streams and
tributary streams may be crossed using temporary structures that are not bridges
or culverts provided:
(i) concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or tributary stream;
(ii) sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
(iii) there is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or stream or tributary
stream channel;
(iv) fish passage is not impeded; and,
(v) water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
36
Subject to Section 15(O-1)(6)(f)(i-v) above, skid trail crossings of streams
and tributary streams when channels of such streams and tributary streams
are frozen and snow-covered or are composed of a hard surface which will
not be eroded or otherwise damaged are not required to use permanent or
temporary structures.
(g) Bridge and Culvert Sizing. For crossings of river, stream and tributary stream
channels with a bridge or culvert, the following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an
opening sufficient in size and structure to accommodate 10 year frequency
water flows or with a cross-sectional area at least equal to 2 ½ times the
cross-sectional area of the river, stream, or tributary stream channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in
Section 15(O-1)(6)(g)(i) if techniques are effectively employed such that
in the event of a culvert or bridge failure, the natural course of water flow
is maintained and sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream is
avoided. Such crossing structures must be at least as wide as the channel
and placed above the normal high-water line. Techniques may include, but
are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
1. use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground conditions;
3. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream and tributary stream bed
elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or according to the
culvert manufacturer’s specifications, whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by
riprap or other suitable means to reasonably avoid erosion of material
around the culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed under Section
15(O-1), but located in flood hazard areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be designed and constructed under the
stricter standards contained in that community’s National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP). For example, a water crossing may be required to pass a
37
100-year flood event.
(v) Exception. Skid trail crossings of tributary streams within shoreland
areas and wetlands adjacent to such streams may be undertaken in a
manner not in conformity with the requirements of the foregoing
subsections provided persons conducting such activities take reasonable
measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the occurrence of
sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream banks, stream
channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If, despite
such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of
water, or the disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and
soil lying within ponds and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
(h) Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and related
activities, or upon the expiration of a Forest Operations Notification, whichever is
earlier, the following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and tributary stream
crossings by skid trails must either be removed and areas of exposed soil
stabilized, or upgraded to comply with the closeout standards for land
management roads in Section 15(O-1)(6)(i) below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must either
be removed immediately following timber harvesting and related
activities, or, if frozen into the river, stream or tributary stream bed or
bank, as soon as practical after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks and approaches to
crossings of water bodies and tributary streams must be immediately
stabilized on completion of harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or snow
-covered, as soon as practical after snowmelt. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
(i) Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the water control features
must continue until use of the road is discontinued and the road is put to bed by
taking the following actions:
(i) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage
structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to reasonably avoid surface
water flowing over or under the water bar, and extending sufficient
distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not reenter the road
surface.
38
(ii) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or dismantled
and removed in a manner that reasonably avoids sedimentation of the
water body of tributary stream.
(iii) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be discontinued shall
satisfy one of the following requirements:
1. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in size and
structure to accommodate 25 year frequency water flows;
2. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a cross-sectional area
at least 3 ½ times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream or
tributary stream channel; or
3. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to reasonably avoid
sedimentation of the river, stream or tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(7) Slope Table
Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road setbacks must be
maintained as specified in Section 15(O-1), but in no case shall be less than
shown in the following table.
Average slope of land between exposed mineral Width of strip between exposed
Soil and the shoreline (percent) mineral soil and shoreline
(feet along surface of the ground)
1 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting:
1. In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of
vegetation within the strip of land extending seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal
distance, inland from the normal high water line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall
be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
39
2. Except in areas as described in Section (P) 1, above, and except to allow for the
development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one hundred (100')
feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high water line of a great pond
classified GPA, and seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal distance, from any other
waterbody, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of
vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet
in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is
not present) as measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width as measured between tree
trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared line of sight to the
water through the buffer strip is not created.
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a welldistributed
stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the
purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) a “well-distributed stand of trees ” adjacent to a
great pond classified GPA or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified
GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of twenty-four (24) or more in
each twenty-five (25') foot by fifty (50') foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area
as determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4½ feet
Above Ground Level (inches) Points
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 - <8 in. 2
8 - <12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a “well-distributed
stand of trees ” is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of sixteen (16) per
twenty-five (25') foot by fifty (50’) rectangular area.
NOTE:As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a twenty-five (25') foot by
fifty (50') foot plot contains four (4) trees between two (2") and four (4") inches
in diameter, two (2) trees between four (4") and eight (8") inches in diameter,
and three (3) trees between eight (8") and twelve (12”) inches in diameter, and
two trees over twelve (12”) inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(4x1)+(2x2)+(3x4) +(2x8) = 36 points.
Thus, the twenty-five (25') foot by fifty (50') foot plot contains trees worth thirty
six (36) points. Trees totaling twelve (12) points (36-24-12) may be removed
from the plot provided that no cleared openings are created.
40
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the
landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation
removed except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed
down to the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this
Ordinance;
vi. Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot
by 50-foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in
diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15 (P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as
retaining existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover
and retaining at least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four
and one half (41/2) feet above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle
area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in
diameter can be removed until 5 saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than forty (40%) percent of the
total volume of trees four (4") inches or more in diameter, measured at
4½ feet above ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under
three (3') feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest
duff layer, shall not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a foot
path or other permitted uses as described in Section 15 (P) paragraphs two (2) and
two (2)(a) above.
d. Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
e. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm
damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees result in the creation of cleared
openings. These openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless
existing new tree growth is present. Section 15(P) (2) does not apply to those
portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as
long as cleared areas, are limited to the minimum area necessary.
3. At distances greater than one hundred (100') feet, horizontal distance, from a great
pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and seventyfive
(75') feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of any other water
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, , there shall be allowed on
any lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40%)
percent of the volume of trees four (4") inches or more in diameter, measured 4½ feet
41
above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted
uses shall be included in the forty (40%) percent calculation. For the purposes of
these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to,
principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, twenty-five (25%) percent of the lot area within the
shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including
land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the General Development
District.
4. Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not
be enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
5. Fields and other cleared openings, which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or
other woody vegetation, shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15(P).
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control:
1. All activities, which involve filling, grading, excavation, or other similar activities
which result in unstabilized soil conditions, and which require a permit shall also
require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit
with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and
fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall
be followed as closely as possible.
3. Erosion and Sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the
activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be
minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one
(1) week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and
mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall
42
occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five
hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of
vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may
be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation
into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales
and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion and from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed and
constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm or greater, and
shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
R. Soils: All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or
structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental
impacts, including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water
pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste
disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses,
shall require a soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by statecertified
professionals. Certified persons may include Maine Certified Soil Scientists,
Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other
persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil
properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil
and surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of
ledge, drainage conditions, and other pertinent data, which the evaluator deems
appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to
counteract soil limitations where they exist.
S. Water Quality: No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters
of the State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or
substances, will impair designated uses or the water classified of the water body, tributary
stream or wetland.
T. Archaeological Sites: Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or
soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the national
Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority shall be submitted
by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at
least twenty (20) days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The
permitting authority shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to
rendering a decision on the application.
SECTION 16. ADMINISTRATION
43
A. Administering Bodies and Agents:
1. Code Enforcement Officer: A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or
reappointed annually by July 1st.
2. Board of Appeals: A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 2691.
3. Planning Board: A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions
of State law.
B. Permits Required: After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in
the district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an
existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued non-conforming use. A person who is
issued a permit pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while
the work authorized by the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being
replaced
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the
water, and the crossing does not block fish passage in the water-course.
(2) Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit
required by other law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application:
1. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site
plan, on a form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as
indicated in Section 14.
2. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of
right, title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or
contractor of the owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit
hereunder, certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct.
3. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board,
as appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
4. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a
completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved
by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the
44
proposed structure or use would require the installation of a subsurface sewage
disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits: Within thirty-five (35) days of the date of receiving
a written application, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in
Section 14, shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a complete
application, or, if the application is incomplete, that specified additional material is
needed to make the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement
Officer, as appropriate, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit
applications in writing within thirty-five (35) days of receiving a completed application.
However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the
application shall occur within thirty-five (35) days after the first available date on the
Planning Board’s agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within thirtyfive
(35) days of the public hearing, if one is held. Permits shall be approved if the
proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this
Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in
conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall
approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based
on the information presented that the proposed use:
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
2. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
4. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or
other wildlife habitat;
5. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland
waters;
6. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the
comprehensive plan;
7. Will avoid problems associated with flood plain development and use; and
8. Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions
shall be stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a
45
structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate
any other local ordinance or regulation or statute administered by the municipality.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16.D, above, excepting
structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than the location within the Resource
Protection District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and
recorded in the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the
adoption of the Resource Protection District.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along rivers and artificially
formed great ponds along rivers, based on detailed flood insurance studies and as
delineated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps; all buildings, including basements,
are elevated at least one foot above the 100-year flood-plain elevation; and the
development is otherwise in compliance with any applicable municipal flood-plain
ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps,
it is deemed to by ½ the width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions of
all principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This
limitation shall not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependant structures, are set back from the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to
the greatest practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining
the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the
slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed, the proposed building site’s elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its
proximity to moderate-value and high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit: Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a
substantial start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that
period. If a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the
applicant shall have one additional year to complete the project, at which time the permit
46
shall expire.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service: A public utility, water district, sanitary district or
any utility company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in
the shoreland zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of
all local permits required under this or any previous Ordinance, has been issued by the
appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements have been made between
the municipal officials and the utility.
H. Appeals:
1. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals: The Board of Appeals shall have the
following powers:
a. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an
appellate basis, where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in
any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by,
the Planning Board in the administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and
decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his
or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the
enforcement of this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
b. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set
forth in this Ordinance.
2. Variances Appeals: Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
a. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including but not
limited to, lot width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback
requirements.
b. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited
by this Ordinance.
c. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(1) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15
except for the specific provision which has created the non-conformity and
from which relief is sought; and
(2) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue
hardship.
The term “undue hardship” shall mean:
47
i. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted,
ii. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not the general conditions in the neighborhood;
iii. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
iv. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
d. Not withstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Board of Appeals may grant
a variance to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that
dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses
the dwelling. The board shall restrict any variance granted under this subsection
solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary
for access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability. The
board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to
the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability
lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from
the dwelling” shall include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety
or effectiveness of the structure.
e. The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in
order to ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance
to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a
variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply
with any conditions imposed.
f. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting
information supplied by applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty
(20) days prior to action prior to action by the Board of Appeals shall be made
part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
3. Administrative Appeals:
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
the Board of Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may
receive and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When
acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the
matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the law,
48
and reaching its own decision. When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the
Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may reverse the decision of
the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to specific
provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning
Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings
before the Planning Board. The Board of Appeals shall not receive or consider
any evidence, which was not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of
Appeals may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the Board of
Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board proceedings are
inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board
for additional fact finding.
4. Appeal Procedure
a. Making an Appeal:
(1) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals
by an aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or
the Planning Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in
Section 16(H)(1)(a) above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30)
days of the official, written date of the decision appealed from, and not
otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive
the thirty (30) day requirement.
(2) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a
written notice of appeal, which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why
the appeal or variance should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot line, location of existing buildings
and structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief
sought.
(3) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal, or a variance,
the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record
of the decision appealed from.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative
appeal or a request for a variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of
a complete written application, unless this time period is extended by the
parties.
b. Decision by the Board of Appeals:
49
(1) A majority of the full voting membership of the board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
(2) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(3) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals
within thirty-five (35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a
written decision on all appeals.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision,
including a statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the
Board. The Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or
hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of Environmental
Protection within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision. Copies of written
decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board,
Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
5. Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A., any aggrieved
party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
(45) days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
6. Reconsideration: In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691 (3)(F), the
Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its prior
decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10)
days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action
taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within forty-five (45) days
of the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a decision shall
require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members originally voting on the
decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, planning board, code
enforcement officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who
testified at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and
receive additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsideration decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen
(15) days after the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement:
1. Nuisances: Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
2. Code Enforcement Officer:
50
a. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. If the CEO shall find that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering
the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices
shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be maintained as a permanent
record.
b. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with all
applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The CEO shall also
investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
c. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the office,
including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of
this record shall be submitted to the Director of Bureau of Land and Water Quality
within the Department of Environmental Protection.
3. Legal Actions: The Municipal Officers, upon notice from the CEO, are hereby
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable
including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of
the municipality. The Municipal Officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby
authorized to enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of this Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action.
Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless there is
clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or
conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized Municipal
Official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the
removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and
safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
4. Fines: Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner’s agent or a
contractor, who violates any provisions or requirement of this Ordinance shall be
penalized in accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A., subsection 4452.
SECTION 17. DEFINITIONS
Accessory Structure or Use: A use or structure, which is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure or garage
attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
51
principal structure.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land
abuts land for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of
persons who have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.
Agriculture: The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and
dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental
and green house products. Agriculture does not include forest management
and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant
or animal species.
Basal Area: The area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 ½ feet above ground level and inclusive
of bark.
Basement: any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having
more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for
vehicles, and trailers.
Bureau: State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry
Campground: Any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary
living quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy: The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a “home occupation”,
defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from
the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential
buildings and/or dwelling units.
Cross-sectional area: the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average
stream or tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is
the straight line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to
the normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or
52
tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line
between the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the
bottom of the channel.
DBH: The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development: A change in land use involving alteration of the land, water, or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but
not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disruption of shoreline integrity: the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or condition
of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A shoreline
where shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or
rutted soil, an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing
waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.
Driveway: A vehicular access way less than five hundred (500') feet in length serving two (2)
single-family dwellings or one two-family dwelling or other allowed nondwelling
uses.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare,
such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and
operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or
injury.
Essential Services: Gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam; fuel, electric power or
water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables
or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines;
municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such
systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarms and police boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not
include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a use’s operating season; or the use of
more floor area devoted to a particular use.
Family: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
53
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior
walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches
and decks.
Forest management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand
improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated
activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance
of roads.
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6)
meters [approximately twenty (20') feet] tall or taller.
Forest Stand: A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
distinguishable unit.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills
and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frost walls or other base consisting of
concrete, clock, brick or similar material.
Freshwater Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
1. Of ten (10) or more contiguous acres; or of less than ten (10) contiguous acres and
adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a
natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of ten (10) acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not conform to the criteria of this definition.
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, inland waters
and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
storage buildings, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities,
waterfront dock facilities, boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or
requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that can not reasonably be located
or operated at an inland site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to
inland waters.
54
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of
ten (10) acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a
surface area in excess of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance,
where the artificially formed or increased inland body of water is completely
surrounded by land held by a single owner.
Great Pond Classified GPA: Any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to Title 38, Article 4-A,
Section 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers
that are defined as great ponds.
Ground Cover: small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Harvest Area: The area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting of
trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area affected by
a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting
unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.
Height of a Structure: The vertical distance between the mean original grade at the downhill
side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances, which have no floor area.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a
residential structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no
more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensions standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but
no limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or
structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no
further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not
be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in
nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any
portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded
laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from that water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions, which infill
irregularly, shaped structures.
Individual Private Campsite: An area of land which is not associated with a campground, but
which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10)
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited
55
to a gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Industrial: The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of
goods, or the extraction of minerals.
Institutional: A non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipality owned or operated building, structure or land
used for public purposes.
Land Management Road: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized
vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including
associated log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads.
Licensed Forester: A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter 76.
Lot Area: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus, land below the
normal high water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath
roads serving more than two (2) lots.
Marina: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also
provide accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction,
indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and
marine fuel service facilities.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both
conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
Minimum Lot Width: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot
lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which
include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more
than one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or
other like material from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away
from the extraction site.
Multi-Unit Residential: A residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling
units.
56
Native: Indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming Condition: non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendment took effect.
Non-conforming Lot: A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of
the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took
effect.
Non-conforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the District in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain
solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments took effect.
Normal High Water Line: That line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the
character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land.
Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland
vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level
of the river or great pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of
the river or great pond.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two (2) or more individuals having a joint or common interest,
or other legal entity.
Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges, and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Beyond
the Normal High Water Line or Within a Wetland:
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7)
months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or
more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal Structure: A building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
57
Principal Use: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use
on the same premises.
Public Facility: Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation
areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a
governmental body or public entity.
Recent Flood Plain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the
National Cooperative Soil Survey:
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational Vehicle: Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for
one or more persons and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer,
camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a
structure, subject to the requirements of this Ordinance, the vehicle must: 1) remain with
its tires on the ground; 2) possess a current registration sticker or plate from any State
Division of Motor Vehicles; and 3) not be longer than forty-five feet (45’), higher
than thirteen feet six inches (13’6”), nor wider than one hundred and eight inches (108”),
exclusive of any slide-out room, awning or canopy that must be retracted for over-theroad
transport.
Replacement System: A system intended to replace: 1) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the
structure, or 2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively
for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a
time, and containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile
homes, and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities regardless of
the time period rented Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Residual Basal Area: The average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Residual Stand: A stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and
related activities.
58
Riprap: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6") inches in diameter, used for erosion
control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal
to one (1) unit vertical or less.
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from that
point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square miles to its
mouth.
Road: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other
surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized
vehicles, excluding a driveway as defined.
Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of
a water body provided that:
1. In the case of electric service:
a. The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located
entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway
right-of-way; and
b. The total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000') feet.
2. In the case of telephone service:
a. The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of
telephone wires to existing utility poles, or
b. The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement
underground is less than one
thousand (1,000') feet in length.
Setback: The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high water line of a water body or
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road,
parking space or other regulated object or area.
Shore Frontage: The length of a lot bordering on a water body measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland Zone: The land area located within two hundred-fifty (250') feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of any great pond, or river; within two hundredfifty
(250') feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; or within
seventy-five (75') feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a stream.
Shoreline: The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
59
Skid Road or Skid Trail: A route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to
haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of
which requires minimal excavation.
Slash: The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of
two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States
Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15 minute
series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to
another water body or wetland within the Shoreland Area.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of person, animals, goods or
property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location
on or in the ground, exclusive of fences and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment
normally associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term
includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios and satellite
dishes.
Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30%) percent of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: Any system designed to dispose of waste or waste
water on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks;
disposal fields; grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any
other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any d
ischarge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 414, any surface waste water
disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment
system.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Timber harvesting: The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot
that has less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber
harvesting. Such cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 15 (P),
Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Timber harvesting and related activities: Timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted
to facilitate timber harvesting.
Tributary Stream: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
whether intermittent or perennial, and which is characterized by the lack of upland
60
vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of
topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock, and
which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not
include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the
natural vegetation cover has been removed by human activity. This definition does not
include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to that
portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water
body or wetland.
Upland Edge of a Wetland: The boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a
freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6)
meters (approximately twenty (20) foot) tall or taller.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, , and other plants including without limitation, trees both
over and under four (4") inches in diameter, measured at 4½ feet above ground level.
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water Body: Any great pond, river, or stream.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river,
stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or
wetland. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts,
water lines, sewer lines, and cable as well as maintenance work on these crossings.
Windfirm: Means the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist
windthrow, wind rocking, and major breakage.
Wetland: A freshwater wetland.
Woody Vegetation: Live trees or woody, non-herbaceaous shrubs.
61
Town of Skowhegan
Sign Ordinance
Adopted October 28, 2014, Special Town Meeting
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the placement of business and institutional signs
within the Town of Skowhegan in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
residents and travelers within the town.
SECTION 2. AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home Rule Powers as
provided for in Article VII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State of Maine and Title
30-A M.R.S.A., § 3001. Provisions within this ordinance are authorized under the Maine
Traveler Information Services Act, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1914.
SECTION 3. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of law to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
SECTION 4. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with, or is inconsistent with, another provision
of this ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision shall
control.
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective on October 28, 2014.
SECTION 6. PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT
Any person, firm, or corporation being the owner or having control over a structure found to be
in violation of this ordinance shall by subject to a civil penalty in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. §4452(3). Each day such a violation is in existence shall constitute a separate offence.
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 1. APPLICABILITY
A. This ordinance shall apply to signs erected or placed within the Town of Skowhegan for
commercial or institutional purposes, except as provided in subsection (C), below. This includes
replacement of signs where the replacement includes relocation, addition or expansion of sign
area. Repair or repainting of existing signs to the extent that the signs remain in the same
location and size as they existed, is not subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
B. This ordinance shall apply to all changeable message signs, regardless of whether they
were in existence on the effective date of this ordinance.
C. This ordinance shall not apply to the following categories of sign:
1. Displays and signs placed in, on, or behind windows.
2. Flags, banners, sidewalk sandwich boards, or other displays commonly removed at the
end of a business day.
3. Signs which are in place for fewer than sixty (60) days per year.
4. Signs in support of a political candidate or election issue.
SECTION 2. PERMIT REQUIRED
A permit from the Town of Skowhegan is required for all signs subject to the provisions of this
ordinance, and there shall be no charge. The permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer, subject to the procedures in Section 3 of this Article, except that signs associated with
development subject to the Skowhegan Site Plan Review Ordinance are considered permitted to
the extent that they comply with the approval of the development under that ordinance.
SECTION 3. PERMITTING PROCEDURE
A. An applicant for a permit shall submit an application to the office of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The application shall contain an image of the sign or signs to be placed, a
rough site layout showing the placement of the sign(s), and a brief narrative description of the
proposed sign(s).
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or reject the application for a sign permit
and issue the permit if approved within five (5) working days of its submittal. Any conditions
applying to the approval of the permit shall be stated in writing. If an application is rejected, the
reasons for rejection shall be stated in writing.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve an application and issue a permit for any
signs which comply with the standards set forth in Article 3 of this Ordinance.
D. Signs shall be erected in substantially the manner described in the application.
SECTION 4. APPEAL AND VARIANCE
A. The applicant for a sign permit or any party aggrieved by the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer may appeal the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer to the Town of
Skowhegan Board of Appeals. Appeals shall be heard as administrative appeals.
B. An applicant for a sign permit may request a variance from dimensional standards in
Article III of this ordinance. Variance requests shall be heard by the Town of Skowhegan Board
of Appeals under the conditions provided for in 30-A M.R.S.A. §4353(4).
ARTICLE III. STANDARDS FOR SIGN PLACEMENTS
SECTION 1. GENERAL STANDARD
All signs shall conform to the standards of the Maine Traveler Information Services Act, 23
M.R.S.A. §1901 et seq. or successor statue, except as provided below. Unless licensed as an
Official Business Directional Sign in accordance with 23 M.R.S.A. §1918, or successor statute,
signs must be located on the property of the business or institution offering the goods or service
being advertised, except that signs are permitted to advertise community events provided that the
owner of the sign receives no compensation for the advertising.
SECTION 2. LOCATION AND PLACEMENT OF FREE-STANDING SIGNS
A. In order to maintain vehicle and pedestrian safety, signs shall not be placed at a height or
location which obstructs views from the road of sidewalks or driveway entrances.
B. Signs shall not be placed within five (5) feet of a property line, and shall not be erected
more than twenty (20) feet in height as measured from the elevation of the road centerline.
C. Signs shall be sufficiently affixed to the ground to withstand strong winds.
D. Free-standing signs are not permitted on the Flatiron Block. The Code Enforcement
Officer is authorized to waive this prohibition upon a showing that visibility is not affected,
sidewalk access is not impeded, and a freestanding sign is the best option.
SECTION 3. CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGNS
A. The message displayed on a sign shall not change more often than once every ten (10)
seconds. Signs which display exclusively time and temperature may change once every four (4)
seconds.
B. No lighting element within a changeable message sign may flash, blink, or change color
with a duration of less than one-half (1/2) second. This means that messages are not permitted to
scroll, travel, or be otherwise animated. Video or graphic animation is prohibited. Messages are
permitted to dissolve or blend provided they do so without flashing.
C. Illumination between the hours of sunset and sunrise shall not exceed five hundred (500)
nits. Sign capable of producing more than 500 nits shall be equipped with a daylight sensor or
timer so that illumination will be reduced during regulated hours.
ARTICLE IV: DEFINITIONS OF TERM USED IN THIS ORDINANCE
Words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their ordinary dictionary meaning,
except as provided below.
CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN: A sign containing a text or graphic display which changes
on a regular or periodic basis, whether electronically, digitally, mechanically or by other means.
COMMUNITY EVENT: An organized gathering of limited duration sponsored by a
governmental or non-profit organization and located within the Town of Skowhegan.
FLATIRON BLOCK: Water Street between the Margaret Chase Bridge and Commercial Street,
Commercial Street between Water Street and Madison Ave., and Madison Ave. between
Commercial Street and Water Street.
FREE STANDING SIGN: A sign which is physically separated and not attached to a building.
NIT: A unit of luminance commonly used in sign illumination, which is equal to one candela
(one candle) per square meter.
SIGN: Any structure, fixture, graphics, illustration, statue, or other device visible from off the
premises designed or intended to advertise, identify, attract attention to, or convey information
regarding any goods, product, service, business, location, institution, or activity.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SITE PLAN REVIEW ORDINANCE
(Approved Town Meeting, 3/13/95)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/9/98)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/8/99)
(Amended Town Meeting, 7/20/99)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/13/00)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/12/01)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/11/02)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/10/03)
(Amended Town Meeting, 3/8/04)
(Amended Town Meeting, 6/9/08)
SECTION I GENERAL
A. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Site Plan Review Ordinance” of the Town of
Skowhegan, Maine, and will be referred to as “this ordinance”.
B. AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of Article VIII, part 2, section 1 of
the Maine Constitution; the provisions to Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 3001 (Home Rule); the
State’s Growth Management Law, Titles 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4311 et.seq. or successor
statutes.
C. PURPOSE
The site plan review provisions set forth in this Ordinance are intended to protect the public
health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community, and conserve the environment
by assuring that non residential construction is designed and developed in a manner which
assures that adequate provisions are made for traffic safety and access; emergency access; water
supply; sewage disposal; management of stormwater, erosion, and sedimentation; protection of
the groundwater; protection of historic and archaeological resources; minimizing the adverse
impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the project harmoniously into the fabric of the
community.
D. APPLICABILITY OF SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. A person who has right, title, or interest in a parcel of land must obtain site plan approval
prior to commencing any of the following activities on the parcel or undertaking any
alteration or improvement of the site including grubbing or grading.
1.1 The construction or placement of any new building or structure for a nonresidential
use, including accessory buildings and structures, if such buildings or
structures have a total area for all floors of five thousand (5,000) square feet or
more, or which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height, exclusive of flagpoles,
antennae intended for non-commercial use, and similar structures
1.2 The expansion of an existing non-residential building or structure, including
accessory buildings, if the enlargement increases the total floor area, for all floors,
within a five (5) year period by more than twenty (20) percent of the existing
total floor area or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is greater.
1.3 The conversion of an existing building in which five thousand (5,000) or more
square feet of total floor area are converted from residential to non residential use.
1.4 The establishment of a new non-residential use, occupying more than one acre,
even if no buildings or structures are proposed, including uses such as gravel pits,
cemeteries, golf courses, and other nonstructural nonresidential uses. Such uses
are major developments.
1.5 The conversion of an existing use, in whole or in part, to non-residential use if the
new use changes the basic nature of the existing use such that it increases the
intensity of on or off-site impacts of the use subject to the standards and criteria of
site plan review described in Section III.
1.6 The construction or expansion of paved areas or other impervious surfaces,
including buildings, structures, walkways, access drives and parking lots
involving an area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more within any five (5)
year period.
1.7 The construction or installation of a sign, including replacements, which is greater
than thirty-two (32) square feet and not included as part of a development already
subject to review under this ordinance.
2. The following activities shall not require site plan approval. Certain of these activities
will, however, require the owner to obtain a plumbing permit and/or other State or local
approvals:
2.1 The construction, alteration, or enlargement of a single family or two-family
dwelling, including accessory buildings and structures.
2.2 The placement, alteration, or enlargement of a single manufactured housing or
mobile home dwelling, including accessory buildings and structures on
individually owned lots.
2.3 Reconstruction or replacement of nonresidential structures provided such
reconstruction or replacement approximates the original structure in floor area and
is not an expansion under Section I, D, 1.2 of this Ordinance, and provided such
reconstruction or replacement is substantially complete within 12 months of the
destruction or demolition of the original structure.
2.4 Agricultural activities, as defined, including agricultural buildings and structures.
2.5 Timber harvesting and forest management activities.
2.6 The establishment and modification of home occupations that do not result
in changes to the site or exterior of the building.
2.7 Activities involving nonresidential buildings or activities that are specifically
excluded from review by the provisions of this section.
3. In instances where there is a question of whether an activity is subject to review under
this ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make the determination.
E. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with, or is inconsistent with, another provision
of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the more restrictive provision
shall control.
F. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
G. EFFECTIVE DATE.
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be the date of Adoption by the Legislative Body of the
Town.
H. AMENDMENTS
Amendments of this ordinance may be initiated by the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board,
or by petition as provided in Title 30-A M.R.S.A._2522 or successor statute.
No proposed amendments to this ordinance shall be referred to the Town Meeting until the
Board of Selectmen or the Planning Board, have held a public hearing on the proposal, notice of
which shall be posted at least fourteen (14) days prior to such hearing and advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two (2) times with the date of first
publication being at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing and the second at least seven (7)
days prior to the hearing.
The proposed amendments shall be adopted by a simple majority vote of the Town Meeting.
SECTION II APPLICATION
A. REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The review and approval authority for site plans shall depend on the classification of the project:
1. Major Developments
The Planning Board is authorized to review and act on all site plans for major developments.
In considering site plans under this section, the Planning Board may act to approve,
disapprove, or approve the project with such conditions as are authorized by this Section.
2. Minor Developments
In lieu of Planning Board action, for minor developments the Staff Review Committee is
authorized to review all site plans and may approve, disapprove, or approve the project with
such conditions as are authorized by this Section. Where a minor development displays
unique characteristics or is likely to create unusual impacts, the Committee may choose to
forward it to the Planning Board with its recommendations for Planning Board action.
B. STAFF REVIEW COMMITTEE
1. Staff Review Committee Established
There is hereby created a Staff Review Committee. The Staff Review Committee shall
consist of the Planner (or other person designated by the Planning Board), Road
Commissioner, Code Enforcement Officer, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and a Skowhegan
Economic Development Board Member or their designees and may include other department
heads, in a non-voting capacity, based on the nature of the proposed project.
2. Operation of the Staff Review Committee
A person designated by the Planning Board shall serve as Chair of the Staff Review
Committee and shall be responsible for calling meetings of the Committee, presiding at its
meetings, and maintaining the records of the Committee.
If any member of the Staff Review Committee is unable to attend any meeting of the
Committee, he/she may designate another member of the department to serve in his/her
place. Such designation must be in writing and shall apply only to that meeting. This
designee shall have the same power and authority as the member.
The Staff Review Committee shall meet as needed. Meetings of the Committee must be
advertised in the same manner as those of other Town committees and must be open to the
public.
If a vacancy exists in any of the positions serving on the Committee, the Town Manager shall
name an interim committee member with appropriate expertise in the respective department,
until such vacancy is filled.
C. CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall classify each project as a major or minor development.
Minor developments are smaller scale, less complex projects for which a less complex
review process is adequate to protect the Town’s interest. Major developments are larger,
more complex projects for which a more detailed review process and additional information
are necessary.
Minor developments shall include applicable projects involving the construction or
addition of between five thousand (5,000) and ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross
non-residential floor area, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or more, of impervious
surface with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building or structure, or
applicable projects involving only the installation of paved areas or signs, or applicable
projects involving the conversion of existing buildings or structures from one use to
another without enlargement of the gross floor area.
Major developments shall include applicable projects involving the construction or
addition of buildings or structures with more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
gross non-residential floor area, projects that require a traffic movement permit from
MDOT, or other applicable projects requiring review which are not classified as a minor
development.
2. An applicant may request that the Code Enforcement Officer classify a project prior to
submission of an application. In this case, the applicant must make a written request for a
classification. This request must include the following information:
(1) The names and addresses of the record owner and the applicant and the
applicant’s legal interest in the property.
(2) The location of the project, including the tax map and lot number.
(3) A brief description of the proposed activities in such detail as to allow a
classification to be made.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of a site plan application or a request for a
classification, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant, and the Chair of the
Planning Board of the classification of the project in writing.
When the Code Enforcement Officer has classified a project based upon a request for
classification rather than an application, the subsequent application must be consistent with
the activities described in the request for classification. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
review such application to determine if the classification is still correct and may reclassify
the application if the scope of activities has been changed.
3. At any time prior to substantive review of the application, the applicant or Chair of the
Planning Board may request a review of the determination of classification. If such a review
is requested, it shall be conducted at the next regularly-scheduled Planning Board meeting.
The applicant may appear to describe his project, but no review of the merits of the
application shall be conducted.
D. REVIEW PROCEDURES
1. Procedures for Minor Developments
1.1 Preapplication Conference
Applicants for site plan review of a minor development are encouraged to schedule a
preapplication conference with planning staff. The purpose of this meeting is to
familiarize the applicant with the review procedures and submission requirements, and
approval criteria, and to familiarize the planning staff with the nature of the project. Such
review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or proceeding under Title 1
M.R.S.A. §302 (or successor statute), and the merits of an application shall not be
considered.
In connection with the preapplication review, the planning staff may suggest that an onsite
inspection be held to familiarize the Staff Review Committee with the project site.
The on-site inspection shall be attended by the applicant or the applicant’s representative
and members of the Staff Review Committee.
1.2 Application Procedure
The property owner or his/her representative must submit a formal minor development
application for review and approval.
Upon receipt of the application, the planning staff shall provide the applicant with a dated
receipt showing the nature of the application and the fees paid. Within five (5) working
days of receipt of an application for a minor development, the planning staff shall review
the application and determine if the application meets the submission requirements. The
planning staff shall review any requests for a waiver from the submission requirements
and shall act on these requests prior to determining the completeness of the application.
If the application is complete, the planning staff shall notify the applicant and the Chair
of the Planning Board in writing of this determination and the action on any waivers, and
shall provide copies of the application to the Code Enforcement Office, Road
Commissioner, Police Department and Fire Department. If the application is incomplete,
the planning staff shall notify the applicant in writing of this determination, specify what
additional materials or information are required to complete the application, and advise
the applicant that the revised application package will be re-reviewed for completeness
when it is resubmitted.
If the application is deemed to be complete, the planning office shall notify all
landowners within 500 feet of the site, by first-class mail, that an application has been
filed. This notice shall contain a brief description of the proposed activity and the name
of the applicant. It shall advise landowners that a copy of the application is available for
inspection and that written comments on the application will be received and considered
by the Staff Review Committee, and provide the date, time, and place of the Committee
meeting at which the application will be considered. Failure of a person to receive such
notice shall not be grounds for delay of any consideration nor denial of the application.
1.3 Staff Review Committee Meeting
Within fifteen (15) working days of the application being determined to be complete, the
Staff Review Committee shall meet to consider the application. The applicant, Chair of
the Planning Board and media shall be notified in writing of the date, time and place of
the meeting.
The applicant and/or his/her representatives shall be allowed to make a presentation on
the application, address any comments made by the staff or public, and present any
proposed revisions to address these issues.
Any members of the public may comment on the application or ask questions of the
applicant and/or his/her representatives.
The Staff Review Committee shall consider if the application complies with the standards
and criteria of this ordinance. If the Committee finds that the application conforms to
these requirements, it shall make written findings of fact and it shall vote to approve;
approve with conditions deemed advisable to assure compliance with the approval
standard and performance standards of this Ordinance; or deny the application. Approval
by the Committee shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the
Committee present and voting. The applicant, Chair of the Planning Board, the Planning
Board and any interested partied who commented on the application or attended the
Committee meeting shall be notified in writing of the Committee’s action. The minutes
of the Committee shall be adequate notification.
1.4 Planning Board Review of Staff Review Committee Decision
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Staff Review Committee may seek a review
by the Planning Board. A review must be requested within ten (10) days of the
committee’s decision. A request for a review must be filed in writing and specify why
the appellant believes the action of the Staff Review Committee was in error.
If a review is requested, it shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of
the Planning Board. The appellant, the applicant, and interested parties shall be notified
in writing of the Board meeting. The planning office shall provide members of the
Planning Board with copies of the application, supporting material, any staff review
comments, public comments, and minutes of the Staff Review Committee meeting at
which the application was considered.
The Planning Board shall conduct the review consistent with the procedures for
reviewing a major development, but may forego the requirement for a public hearing.
The planning office shall notify the appellant, the applicant, and all persons who
participated in the review of the decision of the Planning Board.
2. Procedures for Major developments
2.1 Preapplication Conference
Applicants for site plan review of a major development are required to schedule a
preapplication conference with planning office staff. The purpose of this meeting is to
familiarize the applicant with the review procedures, submission requirements, and
approval criteria, and to familiarize the planning staff with the nature of the project. Such
review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application or proceedings under Title 1
M.R.S.A. §302. No decisions relative to the plan may be made at this meeting.
At the time of the preapplication conference, the applicant shall present a preliminary site
plan illustrating the proposed project, together with a narrative briefly describing the
proposed site, including its location, size, and general characteristics and the nature of the
proposed use and potential development. The applicant should also be prepared to
discuss any issues or questions about existing municipal regulations and their
applicability to the project, and any anticipated requests for waivers from the submission
requirements.
2.2 Site Inventory and Analysis
Applicants for projects classified as major developments must submit a site inventory and
analysis for Planning Board review. This review must be completed prior to the
preparation and submission of a site plan review application.
The Planning Board shall review the site inventory and analysis with the applicant and
shall authorize the submission of the formal application when the site analysis is
complete.
1) Site Inventory and Analysis Procedure
Upon receipt of a site inventory and analysis, the planning office shall give a dated
receipt to the applicant. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the submission, the
planning office shall determine whether it contains all of the items required by
section II.E.1 of this ordinance. If the submission is determined to be incomplete,
the office shall notify the applicant in writing of this finding, shall specify the
additional material required to make the submission complete, and shall advise the
applicant that the Planning Board will not conduct a review until the additional
information is submitted. These steps shall be repeated until the application is
found to be complete.
When the submission is determined to be complete, the office shall notify the
applicant in writing of this finding and place this item on the agenda for review by
the Planning Board. The material shall also be provided to the members of the Staff
Review Committee.
As part of the Site Review and Analysis, the Planning Board shall hold an on-site
inspection of the proposed project to review the existing conditions, field verify the
information submitted and investigate the development proposal. The Planning
Board may schedule this visit either before or after the first meeting at which the
application is considered. The Planning Board may decide not to hold an on-site
inspection when the site is snow covered. If a review is pending during a period
when there is snow cover, the deadline by which the Planning Board shall take final
action on the application may be extended, which extension shall not exceed thirty
(30) days after the Planning Board is able to conduct an on-site inspection.
Written notice of the date of review of the Site Inventory and Analysis, as well as
the on-site inspection, shall be provided to the applicant, to members of the Staff
Review Committee, and all landowners within 500 feet of the proposed site.
Within forty-five (45) days of the Planning Board finding that the Site Inventory
and Analysis submission is complete, the Planning Board shall complete its review
of the submission and notify the applicant in writing of its findings.
2) Site Inventory and Analysis Review
The review of the Site Inventory and Analysis shall be informational and shall not
result in any formal approval or disapproval of the project by the Planning Board.
The Board shall review the submission to determine if the information provides a
clear understanding of the site and identifies opportunities and constraints that help
determine how it should be used and developed. The outcome of the review
process shall be a determination by the Board of the issues and constraints that must
be addressed in the formal site plan review application.
The Board shall also act on any requests for waivers.
If the proposed development is a “large scale retail development” as defined by 30-
A M.R.S.A. sec. 4366, or successor statute, the Site Inventory and Analysis Review
shall also include the commissioning of a comprehensive economic impact study, in
accordance with the requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. sec. 4367.
2.3 Site Plan Review Application
The applicant shall, within sixty (60) days, or within another time limit mutually agreed
to by the Planning Board and the applicant, file a formal site plan review application with
the planning office.
(1) Upon receipt of a formal site plan review application, the planning office shall
issue a dated receipt to the applicant.
(2) Within ten (10) days of the receipt of a formal development review application,
the planning office will review the material and determine whether or not the
submission is complete. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
office shall notify the applicant in writing of this finding, and specify the
additional materials required to make the application complete. The notification
will advise the applicant that the application will not be considered by the
Planning Board until the additional information is submitted. These steps shall be
repeated until the application is found to be complete.
(3) When the planning office determines that the application is complete, it shall
notify the applicant in writing of this finding, forward the application to the Staff
Review Committee, and place the item on the agenda of the Planning Board for
hearing and review at its next regularly scheduled meeting, consistent with
meeting notice requirements for public hearing in subsection (5), below.
(4) Prior to consideration of the application by the Planning Board, the Staff Review
Committee shall review the application and make recommendations to the
Planning Board.
(5) The planning office shall give written notice of the date, time and place of the
public hearing at which the application will be considered, to the applicant and to
all owners of record of land within 500 feet of the site to be developed, notice to
be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation Skowhegan at least once, the date
of publication shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
(6) The Planning Board may hold another on-site inspection to verify and investigate
the information provided by the application. The Planning Board may schedule
this visit either before or after the public hearing. If an application is pending
during a period when there is snow cover, the Planning Board may request that
the applicant agree to extension of the review period to allow an on-site
inspection. Written notice of the on-site inspection shall be provided to all parties
receiving notice of the pending application.
2.4 Public Hearing Procedures
(1) The Chair of the Planning Board or his/her designee shall chair the public hearing.
The Chair shall open the public hearing by identifying the application and
explaining the purpose of the hearing and the procedures to be followed.
(2) The purpose of the public hearing is to allow the applicant and affected property
owners to provide information as part of the record that the Planning Board will
use in considering its action on the application. Testimony presented at the
hearing should be related to factual information about the application and related
submissions and the project’s compliance with this Ordinance or other municipal
ordinances.
(3) The Chair shall provide the applicant or his/her representative with an opportunity
to make a presentation at the beginning of the hearing. The planning office staff
shall then present any comments or recommendations from the Staff Review
Committee. The Chair shall then allow the members of the Planning Board to ask
questions of the applicant and for the applicant to answer those questions.
Following Board questions, the Chair shall open the public hearing to the public
for statements, information submissions, or questions about the project. At the
close of the public comment period, the Chair shall afford the applicant an
opportunity to answer any questions raised by the public, rebut any statements or
information submitted, and cross-examine anyone offering testimony on the
application. The Chair may allow the applicant this opportunity after each
member of the public testifies if that is deemed to be desirable. At the conclusion
of the applicant’s response, the hearing shall be closed.
2.5 Final Action on the Application
The Planning Board shall take action on the application within thirty (30) days of the
public hearing. The Planning Board shall act to deny, to approve, or to approve the
application with conditions. The Planning Board may impose such conditions as are
deemed advisable to assure compliance with the criteria for approval and performance
standards of this ordinance. The vote to deny, approve, or approve with conditions shall
constitute final action on the application.
Prior to issuing its decision, the Planning Board shall make written findings of fact that
establish whether the proposed development does or does not meet the criteria for
approval, performance standards and other requirements of this Ordinance.
The Planning Board shall notify the applicant and interested parties of the action of the
Planning Board including the findings of fact and any conditions of approval. This
requirement can be met through the distribution of minutes of the meeting containing the
findings of fact and decision of the Planning Board.
2.6 Final Approval and Filing
Upon an affirmative vote by a majority of the Planning Board members present and
voting, the application shall be deemed to have final approval. The approved site plan,
which may be altered only to incorporate or note conditions of approval determined by
the Planning Board, shall be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board.
A copy of the site plan as approved and signed must be submitted for filing with the
Skowhegan planning office. Any plan not so filed within thirty (30) days of the date
upon which such plan is approved and signed by the Planning Board shall become null
and void. The Planning Board, by vote, may extend the filing period for good cause.
3. Fees
3.1 Site Inventory and Analysis Fee
Prior to submitting a site inventory and analysis for a major development, the applicant
must pay a non-refundable review fee. This fee must be paid to the Town of Skowhegan,
and evidence of payment of the fee shall be included with the submission.
3.2 Application Fee
An application for site plan review must be accompanied by an application fee. This fee
is intended to cover the cost of administrative review and processing of the application,
including notification, advertising, mailings, and similar costs. The fee shall not be
refundable. This application fee must be paid to the Town of Skowhegan, and evidence of
payment of the fee must be included with the application.
3.3 Technical Review Fee
In addition to the application fee, the applicant for site plan review must also pay a
technical review fee to defray the legal and technical cost of the application review. This
fee must be paid to the Town of Skowhegan and must be deposited in the Planning Board
Trust Account, which shall be separate and distinct from all other municipal accounts.
The application will be considered incomplete until this fee is paid. The Planning Board
may reduce the amount of the technical review fee or waive it if it determines that the
scale or nature of the project will require little or no outside review.
The technical review fees may be used by the Planning Board to pay for reasonable costs
incurred by the Planning Board, at its discretion, which relate directly to the review of the
application pursuant to the review criteria. Such services may include, but need not be
limited to, consulting engineering or other professional fees, attorney fees, recording fees,
and appraisal fees. The Town shall refund all of the remaining monies, including accrued
interest, in the account after the payment of all costs and services related to this review.
Refund of remaining monies shall be made no later than sixty (60) days after final action
on the application. Such refund shall be accompanied by a final accounting of
expenditures from the fund.
The monies in the Planning Board Trust Account shall not be used by the Planning Board
for any enforcement purposes nor shall the applicant be liable for costs incurred by or
costs of services contracted for by the Planning Board, which do not relate directly to the
applicant’s project.
3.4 Establishment of Fees
The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time and after consultation with the Planning
Board, establish the appropriate fees following posting of the proposed schedule of fees
and public hearing.
E. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. Site Inventory and Analysis Submission Requirements
The site inventory and analysis is intended to provide both the applicant and the Planning
Board with a better understanding of the site and the opportunities and constraints
imposed on its use by both the natural and built environment. It is anticipated that this
analysis will result in a development plan that reflects the conditions of the site; those
areas most suitable for the proposed use will be utilized, while those that are not suitable
or present significant constraints will be avoided to the maximum extent possible.
Therefore, the submission requirements provide that the applicant submit basic
information about the site and an analysis of that information.
The site inventory and analysis submission must contain, at minimum, the following
information:
(1) The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the record owner and the applicant.
(2) The names and addresses of all consultants working on the project.
(3) Evidence of right, title, or interest in the property.
(4) Evidence of payment of the site inventory and analysis fee.
(5) Eight (8) copies of an accurate scale ”Existing Features Plan” of the parcel at a scale
of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch showing as a minimum:
a. The name of the development, north arrow, date and scale.
b. The approximate boundaries of the parcel.
c. The relationship of the site to the surrounding area.
d. The topography of the site at an appropriate contour interval depending on
the nature of the use and character of the site (in many instances, submittal
of the U.S.G.S. 10' contours will be adequate);
e. Major natural features of the site and vicinity, including wetlands, streams,
ponds, floodplains, groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats and
fisheries or other important natural features (if none, so state).
f. Existing buildings, structures, or other improvements on the site and
within fifty feet (50') of property lines. (if none, so state).
g. Existing streets, rights-of-way, restrictions or easements on the site (if
none, so state).
h. The location and size of existing utilities or improvements servicing the
site (if none, so state).
i. A High Intensity soil survey of any portion of the site located in a resource
protection district or wetland and a Medium Intensity soil survey in all
other areas.
(6) Eight (8) copies of a “Site Analysis Plan” at the same scale as the Existing
Features Plan highlighting the opportunities and constraints of the site. This plan
should enable the Planning Board to determine: which portions of the site are
unsuitable for development or use; which portions of the site are unsuitable for
on-site sewage disposal if public sewerage is not available; which areas of the site
have development limitations (steep slopes, flat, soil constraints, wetlands,
aquifers, wildlife habitat, fisheries, scenic vistas, floodplains, drainage, etc.) to be
addressed in the development plan; which areas may be subject to off-site
conflicts or concerns (i.e., noise, lighting, traffic, etc.); and which areas are
intended for development.
(7) Eight (8) copies of a narrative describing the existing conditions of the site, the
proposed use and the constraints or opportunities created by the site. This
submission should include any traffic studies, utility studies, market studies or
other preliminary work that will assist the Planning Board in understanding the
site and the proposed use.
(8) A list containing the names and mailing addresses of all owners of record of
property located within 500 feet of the site to be developed.
(9) Any requests for waivers from the submission requirements for the site plan
review application.
2. Site Plan Review Submission Requirements
Applications for site plan review must be submitted on application forms provided by the
Town. The complete application form, required fees, and the required plans and related
information must be submitted to the planning office. The applicant may choose to submit
all or a portion of the application electronically, witjh the advance consent of the planning
office.
An applicant for a major development may not submit an application until the review of the
site inventory and analysis is completed.
Applications must contain at least the following exhibits and information, unless specifically
waived in writing:
2.1 All applications
All applications for site plan review must include fully executed and signed copy of the
application for development review and evidence of payment of the application and
technical review fees.
Eight (8) copies of written materials plus eight (8) sets of maps or drawings shall be
submitted. The written materials must be contained in a bound report. The maps or
drawings must be at a scale sufficient to allow of the items listed under approval criteria,
but in no case shall be more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch for that portion of the
tract of land being proposed for development:
2.1. a General Information
(1) Record owner’s name, address, and phone number and applicant’s name,
address and phone, if different.
(2) The location of all required building setbacks, yards, and buffer.
(3) An updated list of names and mailing addresses of all property owners within five
hundred (500) feet of any and all property boundaries.
(4) Sketch map showing general location of the site within the municipality
based upon a reduction of the tax maps.
(5) Boundaries of all contiguous property under the total or partial control of the
owner or applicant regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this
time.
(6) The tax map and lot number of the parcel or parcels on which the project is to be
located.
(7) A copy of the deed to the property, an option to purchase the property or other
documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on the part of
the applicant.
(8) The name, registration number and seal of the person who prepared the plan, if
applicable.
(9) Evidence of the applicant’s technical and financial capability to carry the project
as proposed.
(10) Copies of any permits required by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection; the Maine Department of Transportation; or the Army Corps of
Engineers.
(11) A listing of waivers to submission requirements that have been requested or
granted.
2.1. b Existing Features
(1) Shoreland zoning classification(s) of the property and the location of shoreland
zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two (2) or more zoning
districts or abuts a different district.
(2) The bearings and length of all property lines of the property to be developed and
the source of this information. This requirement may be waived only if sufficient
information is available on the ground, to establish all property boundaries.
(3) Location and size of any existing sewer and water mains, culverts and drains, onsite
sewage disposal systems, wells, underground tanks or installations, and power
and telephone lines and poles on the property to be developed and on abutting
streets or land that may serve the development and an assessment of their
adequacy and condition to meet the needs of the proposed use. Appropriate
elevations must be provided as necessary to determine the direction of flow.
(4) Location, names, and present dimensions of existing public and/or private streets,
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, and rights-of-way within and 200 feet
surrounding the proposed development.
(5) The location, dimensions and ground floor elevation of all existing buildings on
the site.
(6) The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, stonewalls, graveyards, fences,
stands of trees, and other important or unique natural areas and site features,
including but not limited to, floodplains, deer wintering areas, significant wildlife
habitats, fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and
animals, unique natural communities and natural areas, sand and gravel aquifers,
and historic and/or archaeological resources, together with a description of such
features.
(7) The location, front view, dimensions, and lighting of existing signs.
(8) Location and dimensions of any existing easements and copies of existing
covenants or deed restrictions.
(9) The location of the nearest fire hydrant, dry hydrant or other water supply
for fire protection.
2.1. c Proposed Development Activity
(1) Estimated demand for water supply and sewage disposal, together with the
location and dimensions of all provisions for water supply and wastewater
disposal, and evidence of their adequacy for the proposed use, including
soils test pit data if on-site sewage disposal is proposed.
(2) The direction of proposed surface water drainage across the site, and from the
site, with an assessment of impacts on downstream properties.
(3) A plan for erosion and sedimentation control.
(4) Provisions for handling all solid wastes, including hazardous and special wastes,
with the location and proposed screening of any on-site collection or storage
facilities.
(5) The location, dimensions, and detail drawings of materials to be used in the
construction of proposed driveways, parking and loading areas, and walkways and
any changes in traffic flow onto or off-site.
(6) Proposed landscaping and buffering.
(7) The location, dimensions, and ground floor elevation of all proposed buildings or
building expansion proposed on the site.
(8) Location, front view, materials, and dimensions of proposed signs including note
of the method for securing the sign.
(9) Location and type of exterior lighting.
(10) The location of all utilities, including fire protection systems.
(11) A general description of the proposed use or activity being conducted within
different areas of the building(s) and site.
(12) An estimate of the peak hour and daily traffic to be generated by the project.
(13) If the project requires a stormwater permit from the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, or if the Planning Board or Staff Review Committee
determines that such information is necessary based upon the scale of the project
or the existing conditions in the vicinity of the project, a Stormwater Management
Plan including stormwater calculations, water quality and/or phosphorous export
management provisions.
2.1. d Approval Block
Space must be provided on the plan drawing for the signature of the Chair of the
Planning Board/Staff Review Committee and date, together with the following
words for a minor project, “Approved: Skowhegan Staff Review Committee.”;
for a major project, "Approved: Skowhegan Planning Board.”
2.2 Major Developments
In addition to submissions required for all applicants, an application for a major
development must contain the following information:
(1) A narrative and/or plan describing how the proposed development plan
is based on the site inventory and analysis.
(2) A grading plan showing the existing and proposed topography of the site
at two (2) foot contour intervals, or such other interval as the Planning
Board may determine.
(3) A Stormwater Management Plan showing:
a) The existing and proposed method of handling stormwater runoff.
b) The direction of flow of the runoff, through the use of arrows.
c) The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, dry wells,
drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers.
d) Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements
based upon the twenty-five (25) year twenty-four (24) hour storm
frequency -- required only if the project will significantly alter the
existing drainage pattern due to such factors as the amount of new
impervious surfaces (such as paving and building area) being
proposed.
e) Methods of controlling erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction.
(4) A groundwater impact analysis prepared by groundwater hydrologist for
projects involving on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities with a
capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons or more per day.
(5) The name, registration number, and seal of the architect, engineer,
landscape architect and/or similar professional who prepared the plan(s).
(6) A utility plan showing, in addition to provisions for water supply and
wastewater disposal, the location and nature of electrical, telephone, cable
TV, and any other utility services to be installed on the site.
(7) A planting schedule keyed to the site plan indicating the general varieties
and sizes of trees, shrubs, and other vegetation to be planted on the site, as
well as information pertaining to provisions that will be made to retain and
protect existing trees, shrubs, and other vegetation.
(8) A traffic impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the proposed project
on the capacity, level of service and safety of adjacent streets, if the
project or expansion will provide parking for fifty (50) or more vehicles or
generate more than two hundred (200) trips during the a.m. or p.m. peak
hour based upon the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the
Institute of Traffic Engineers.
(9) A written statement from the Water Company and the Pollution Control
Facility as to the adequacy of the water supply in terms of quantity and
pressure for both domestic and fire flows, and the capacity of the sewer
system to accommodate additional wastewater if public water or sewerage
will be utilized. If the applicant proposes to extend or expand water
supply or sewage disposal lines, the statement must also include approval
of design specifications for the system.
(10) Cost of the proposed development and evidence of the applicant’s
financial capacity to complete it. This evidence should be in the form of a
letter from a bank or other source of financing indicating the name of the
project, amount of financing available, and individual’s or institution’s
interest in financing the project or in the form of a letter from a certified
accountant or annual report indicating that the applicant has adequate cash
flow to cover anticipated costs.
3. Waiver of Submission Requirements
The planning staff, for minor developments, or Planning Board for major developments
may waive submission requirements based upon a written request of the applicant. Such
request must be made at the time of the pre-application conference or at the Site Review
and Analysis stage for major developments. A waiver of any submission requirement
may be granted only if the reviewing body finds that the information is not required to
determine compliance with the standards and criteria.
SECTION III CRITERIA AND STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL
The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board/Staff Review Committee in
reviewing applications for site plan review and shall serve as minimum requirements for
approval of the application. The application shall be approved unless the Planning
Board/ Staff Review Committee determines that the applicant has failed to meet one or
more of these criteria. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant who
must produce evidence sufficient to warrant a finding that all applicable criteria have
been met.
Each criterion is accompanied by a set of development standards. Compliance with
development standards is prima facie evidence of meeting the criteria. However,
applicants for site plan review may propose alternative designs and approaches that will
satisfy the criteria equally as well or better than the ordinance standards. In all instances,
the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that criteria have been met.
This shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the Planning Board/Staff Review
Committee to require additional evidence or meet additional standards based on
characteristics of the site or development.
A. PUBLIC SERVICE CRITERIA: The proposed development will not result in an undue
burden on the ability of the Town to provide public services:
1. Public water and sanitary treatment services, if accessible, have the capacity to serve
the development and improvements are designed to the satisfaction of these service
providers. If public water and sewer are not accessible, provision has been made to
provide private services without negatively affecting public resources.
2. Public safety and utility services have the capacity to meet the demands of the
development, and security and fire protection improvements are designed to the
satisfaction of these service providers.
3. The development will not create or generate solid, liquid, hazardous, or other types of
waste products that exceed the capacity of the Town’s waste handling systems.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Public Water Supply:
If the project is accessible to a public water supply, the applicant must secure and submit
a written statement from the supplier that the proposed water supply system conforms
with its design and construction standards, will not result in an undue burden on the
source or distribution system, and will be installed in a manner adequate to provide
estimated daily usage and fire protection flows.
If the project is not accessible to the public water supply system, the applicant will show
evidence that adequate quantity and quality of water will be delivered to the development
without negatively impacting groundwater supplies.
The planning board may require the applicant to make improvements to the public water
supply system in order to meet this criterion.
2. Sanitary Treatment Systems
The development must be provided with a method of disposing of sanitary wastes which
is in compliance with the State Plumbing Code.
(a) All sanitary sewage from the development must be discharged into a public
sanitary collection and treatment system when such facilities are accessible
(within three hundred (300) feet of the property to be developed) and have
adequate capacity to handle the projected waste generation. The sanitary
treatment district shall find that the proposed system conforms to its design and
construction standards, will not result in an undue burden on the collection or
treatment system, and will be installed in a manner adequate to serve estimated
daily flows.
(b) If the public collection system is not at the lot line, but can be extended in the
public right-of-way, the collection system must be extended by the applicant.
Such extension shall be required if the public system is within one hundred (100)
feet of a new use with a design sewage flow of less than five hundred (500)
gallons per day or within three hundred (300) feet of a new use with a design
sewage flow of five hundred (500) or more gallons per day and the system has
adequate capacity to accommodate the additional flow. The Planning Board may
waive this requirement if the use is already served by a properly functioning
subsurface disposal system that is properly sized for the projected flows, provided
that connection to the public system must occur if and when the subsurface
system needs to be replaced.
(c) If the public system cannot serve or be extended to serve a new or expanded use,
the sewage must be disposed of by an on-site sewage disposal system meeting the
requirements of the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
(d) When two (2) or more lots or buildings in different ownership share the use of a
common subsurface disposal system, the system must be owned and maintained
in common by an owners' association. Covenants in the deeds for each lot must
require mandatory membership in the association and provide for adequate
funding of the association to assure proper maintenance of the system.
(e) Industrial or commercial wastewater may be discharged to public sewers in such
quantities and/or of such quality as to be compatible with sewage treatment
operations. Such wastes may require pretreatment at the development site in
order to render them amenable to public treatment processes. Pretreatment
includes, but is not limited to, screening, grinding, sedimentation, pH adjustment,
surface skimming, chemical oxidation and reduction and dilution. The
pretreatment standards shall be determined by Pollution Control Facility.
3. Public Safety Services:
(a) The development must be designed to provide protection from the spread of fire.
At a minimum, the requirements of NFPA – 1 and NFPA – 101 must be met.
Whenever possible, a key box security system should be installed, and may be
required on some projects.
The applicant must submit evidence that proposed fire protection measures are
adequate, in the form of a written statement from the fire chief that the proposed
development will not exceed the capacity of his/her department to provide
adequate protection. The fire chief may recommend additional protective
improvements, including but not limited to fire ponds, dry hydrants, fire lanes,
separation of flammable wastes, or sprinkler systems.
(b) The development must be designed to provide security consistent with the
capacity and practices of the town police department. The applicant shall provide
a written statement from the police chief approving any proposed security
measures.
4. Utility Services
(a) The development must be provided with electrical, telephone, and
telecommunication service adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project.
(b) New utility lines and facilities must be screened from view to the extent feasible.
If the service in the street or on adjoining lots is underground, the new service
must be placed underground.
5. Waste Disposal and Storage:
(a) The proposed development must provide for adequate disposal of solid wastes.
All solid waste must be disposed of at a licensed disposal facility having adequate
capacity to accept the project’s wastes. The applicant shall present a written
statement from the Manager of the Solid Waste Disposal facility, approving the
quantity and type of waste expected to be received.
(b) The handling, storage, and use of all materials identified by the standards of a
federal or state agency as hazardous, special or radioactive must be done in
accordance with the standards of these agencies. The applicant shall identify any
wastes proposed to be generated of these types and provide evidence that they
will be disposed of in accordance with said standards.
(c) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above
ground unless they are located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, or
forty (40) feet in the case of underground storage. All materials must be stored in
a manner and location, which is in compliance with appropriate rules and
regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and other appropriate
federal, state, and local regulations.
B. TRANSPORTATION CRITERIA: The proposed development will provide for adequate
access for all users without placing an undue burden on the public transportation system.
1. The development will provide for adequate access to the site for all available modes
of travel, without creating a negative effect on the mobility of public roads.
2. The development will provide sufficient parking to provide for the needs of its users
without impact on the mobility of public roads.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Adequacy of Road System: Vehicular access to the site must be on roads which have
adequate capacity to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development.
(a) For developments which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour trips
based on the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of
Traffic Engineers, all access points as well as intersections on major access routes
to the site within one (1) mile of any entrance road which are functioning at a
Level of Service of D or better prior to the development must function at a
minimum at Level of Service D after development. If any such intersection is
functioning at a Level of Service E or lower prior to the development, the project
must not reduce the current level of service. The applicant will assume financial
responsibility for the improvements necessary to bring the level of service to this
standard and will assure the completion of the improvements with a financial
guarantee acceptable to the municipality. This standard may be waived by the
Planning Board if the project will access a road inside the urban compact
boundary and the Planning Board determines that the project will not have an
unnecessary adverse impact on traffic flow or safety.
(b) A development not meeting the above standard may be approved if the applicant
demonstrates that a public agency has committed funds to construct the
improvements necessary to bring the level of access to this standard.
(c) For roads and projects on which the Maine Department of Transportation is
responsible for issuing Traffic Movement Permits, an applicant may demonstrate
compliance with the above standard by submitting an approved Traffic Movement
Permit at the time of application.
2. Access into the Site: Vehicular access to and from the development must be safe and
convenient.
(a) Any driveway or proposed street must be designed so as to provide sight distance
of ten (10) feet for every mile per hour of posted speed limit, or two hundred fifty
(250) feet for roads without a posted speed.
(b) Points of access and egress must be located to avoid conflicts with existing
turning movements and traffic flows.
(c) The grade of any proposed drive or street must be not more than 3percent for a
minimum of forty (40) feet from the intersection.
(d) Where a lot has frontage on two (2) or more streets, the primary access to and
egress from the lot must be provided from the street where there is less potential
for traffic congestion and for traffic and pedestrian hazards. Access from other
streets may be allowed if it is safe and does not promote “shortcutting” through
the site.
(e) Where it is necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians
and/or to avoid traffic congestion, the applicant shall be responsible for providing
turning lanes, traffic directional islands, and traffic controls within public streets.
(f) Accessways must be designed and have sufficient capacity to avoid queuing of
entering vehicles on any public street.
(g) The following criteria must be used to limit the number of driveways serving a
proposed project:
i. No use which generates less than one hundred (100) vehicle trips per day
shall have more than one (1) two (2) way driveway onto a single roadway.
Such driveway must be no greater than thirty (30) feet wide.
ii. No use which generates one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips per day
shall have more than two (2) points of entry from and two (2) points of
egress to a single roadway. The combined width of all access ways must
not exceed sixty (60) feet.
(h) Access points must be located at least fifty (50) feet from the closest unsignalized
intersection and one hundred fifty (150) feet from the closest signalized
intersection, as measured from the point of tangency for the corner to the point of
tangency for the access way. This requirement may be reduced if the shape of the
site does not allow conformance with this standard.
(i) Access points in or out of a development must be separated by a minimum of
seventy-five (75) feet where possible and practicable.
(j) When accessing streets subject to Maine Department of Transportation Driveway
Rules or Entrance Rules, an applicant may demonstrate compliance with the
above standards by the submittal of an approved driveway or entrance permit with
the application.
3. Internal Vehicular Circulation: The layout of the site must provide for the safe
movement of passenger, service, and emergency vehicles through the site.
(a) Projects that will be served by delivery trucks must provide a clear route with
appropriate geometric design to allow turning and backing for a minimum vehicle
length of seventy-two (72) feet. Maneuvering and parking of delivery trucks at
loading bays/docks shall be designed not to impede normal circulation and
parking on the site.
(b) Clear routes of access must be provided and maintained for emergency vehicles to
and around buildings and the routes must be posted with appropriate signage (fire
lane - no parking).
(c) The layout and design of parking areas must provide for safe and convenient
circulation of vehicles throughout the lot.
(d) The road network must provide for vehicular, pedestrian, and cyclist safety, all
season emergency access, snow storage, and delivery and collection services.
(e) The development shall provide for convenient bicycle storage facilities, unless the
Planning Board finds that there is no significant chance that bicyclists will use the
development.
(f) Any use that provides drive-through service must be located and designed to
minimize the impact on neighboring properties and traffic circulation. No
drive-through facility shall be located in the area of the site adjacent to a preexisting
home. Communication systems must not be audible to adjacent homes.
Vehicular access to the drive-through shall be through a separate lane that
prevents vehicle queuing within normal parking areas. Adequate queuing space
must be provided to prevent any vehicles from having to wait on a public street,
within the entry from the street, or within designated parking areas. Queuing for
the drive-through must not interfere with any sidewalk or bicycle path.
4. Off-street Parking: The development shall be designed to accommodate parking for the
expected number of vehicles or provide suitable alternatives. The table below shall be
used as a guideline for parking supply. The Planning Board may modify parking
requirements consistent with the objective to reduce impervious surface and
environmental impact while avoiding on-street parking outside of the downtown area.
For uses not contemplated by the table, the publication Parking Demand (ITE, 1987 or most
recent edition) shall be consulted.
# of Spaces
Land Use Activity
Places of Residence or Accommodation -- spaces per room or dwelling unit
1/3
Dedicated Retirement Home, Nursing Care Facility
1
Overnight accommodations
1.5
Multifamily buildings
Places of Public Assembly -- spaces per seat based on maximum seating capacity
1/4
Theater, with fixed seating
1/3
Religious Institution, Restaurant (except fast food)
1/2 Convention Center, Meeting Hall, Grange, Bottle Club
Places of Commerce and Industry -- spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area.
1
Warehouses, including self-storage
1 1/2
Industrial and Manufacturing Facilities, furniture and appliance
stores
3
Grocery Stores over 5,000 sq.ft., Offices, except as noted.
3.5
Retail Sales, except as noted
5
Banks, Medical, Dental, and Veterinary Offices, Fitness Clubs,
Child Care
6
Fast food restaurant, snack bar
Public and Institutional Facilities -- spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
2
Elementary Schools, Library, Museum
4
Other education – classroom area only, Community Center,
Municipal Office.
6
Hospital
Miscellaneous -- criteria as specified
1 per 1,000 sf
Indoor Sports Facility (Tennis, Fitness, etc.) -- no spectators
1 per 4 seats, based on max
seating capacity
Stadiums, Arenas, Racetracks, and other spectator sport venues
30 per acre
Mini-golf, Go-Carts, and other Outdoor Amusements
4 per lane
Bowling Alley
3 per service bay +
1 per 10 vehicles displayed
Motor Vehicle Sales or Service
Within each development, at least one space, plus one additional space for every twentyfive
(25) spaces provided, shall be designated for use of handicapped persons.
Where the proposed development is for expansion of or addition to an existing use that
will continue, the requirement for parking spaces will include sufficient spaces for the
existing use, even if the existing use did not previously have sufficient spaces.
Where multiple uses of the lot or building are proposed the minimum requirement shall
be the sum of the requirements for the separate uses. Where a building or use consists of
multiple functions, such as a church with school, or college with offices and classrooms,
each separate function shall be calculated independently.
The Board may permit phased installation of parking spaces provided that adequate
provision is made for the development of these spaces as needed in the future. The
permit shall specify conditions for phasing, including but not limited to, permanent setaside
of adequate land area, and a schedule showing under what construction phase or
development conditions the required parking shall be provided.
Area devoted to parking for vehicles used in the ordinary conduct of the business, such as
construction vehicles, tractor-trailers, and vehicles displayed for sale, shall not be
included in the above calculations.
Within Skowhegan’s Urban Compact Area it is recognized that lot sizes and building
coverage is such that the provision of on-site parking is impractical. Developers within
this area may offer to meet their parking requirement through an agreement with the
Town for support of the municipal parking lot. The Planning Board may designate a fee
to be paid in lieu of parking, in proportion to the estimated parking generation.
5. Parking Layout and Design: Off-street parking must conform to the following standards:
(a) Parking areas must be arranged so that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into
the street.
(b) All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces must be located at least
five (5) feet from any lot line, except where standards for buffer yards require a
greater distance. Parking lots on adjoining lots may be connected by access ways
not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in width.
(c) In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow must be
indicated by signs, pavement markings or other permanent indications and
maintained as necessary.
(d) Parking areas must be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and
from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other
motor vehicles. Double stack parking may be permitted for resident parking in
conjunction with residential uses if both spaces in the stack are assigned to the
occupants of the same dwelling unit.
(e) Provisions must be made to restrict the “overhang” of parked vehicles when it
might restrict traffic flow, pedestrian or bicycle movement on adjacent walkways,
or damage landscape materials.
(f) Parking stalls and aisle layout must conform to the following standards.
Parking Stall Skew Stall Aisle
Angle (degrees) Width Width Depth Width
90 9'-0" 18'-0" 24'-0" two way
60 8'-6" 10'-6" 18'-0" 16'-0" one way
45 8'-6" 12'-9" 17'-6" 12'-0" one way
30 8'-6" 17'-0" 17'-0" 12'-0" one way
(g) Stalls designated for handicapped use shall be a minimum of 12’ 6” in width and
shall be signed or pavement marking provided.
6. Pedestrian Circulation: The site plan must provide for a system of pedestrian ways within
the development appropriate to the type and scale of development.
(a) Sidewalks must connect the major building entrances/exits with parking areas and
with existing sidewalks, if they exist or are planned for the vicinity of the project.
Sidewalks may be located either in the street right-of-way or outside of the
right-of-way in public areas. Sidewalks should link the project with residential,
recreational, and commercial facilities, schools, bus stops, and existing sidewalks
in the neighborhood or, when appropriate, to connect with amenities such as parks
or open space on or adjacent to the site.
(b) Where an existing or planned public sidewalk is interrupted by a proposed project
driveway, the sidewalk material must continue to be maintained across the
driveway, or the driveway must be painted to distinguish it as a sidewalk.
Further, if street trees exist on an adjacent property, street trees must be planted,
in a like manner, on the new site.
(c) If a sidewalk exists on property abutting the development, it shall be extended
into the development. In urban situations, widening of the sidewalk onto private
property to encourage window shopping and an improved streetscape is
encouraged. Benches, sculpture, planters and other street furniture are
encouraged.
C. NEIGHBORHOOD COMPATIBILITY CRITERIA: The proposed development will not
result in an undue adverse impact on the existing use and quiet enjoyment of properties,
both immediately abutting and within the neighborhood of the development.
1. The development will not produce noise, light, or other deleterious effects that would
constitute a nuisance to neighboring properties.
2. The development will provide a buffer against its visual impacts.
3. The development will blend, insofar as possible, with existing built-up
neighborhoods.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Exterior Lighting: Lighting may be used which serves security, safety and operational
needs but which does not directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects on abutting
properties or which would impair the vision of a vehicle operator on adjacent roadways.
(a) Lighting fixtures must be shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements are not
exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings and
so that they do not unnecessarily light the night sky. Direct or indirect
illumination must not exceed 0.5 footcandles at the lot line or upon abutting
residential properties.
(b) When practicable, exterior lighting, except security lighting, should be turned off
between 11 P.M. and 6 A.M. unless located on the site of a commercial or
industrial use which is open for business during that period.
(c) Building facades may be illuminated with soft lighting of low intensity that does
not draw inordinate attention to the building. The light source for the building
facade must be concealed, whenever possible. Building entrances may be
illuminated using recessed lighting in overhangs and soffits, or by use of
spotlighting focused on the building entrances with the light source concealed
(e.g., in landscaped areas). Direct lighting of limited exterior building areas is
permitted when necessary for security purposes.
2. Noise: The estimated sound pressure level of any continuous, regular or frequent or
intermittent source of sound produced by any activity on the site shall be limited by the
time period and by the abutting land use as listed below. Sound levels shall be measured
at least four (4) feet above ground at the property boundary of the source.
Sound Pressure Level Limits Using the Sound Equivalent Level of
One Minute (leq 1) (Measured in dB(a) Scale)
Abutting Use 7 am - 10 pm 10 pm - 7 am
Residential 55 45
Public, semipublic and institutional 60 55
Vacant or rural 60 55
Commercial 65 55
Industrial 70 60
Noise shall be measured by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, fast response.
The meter shall meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1 4- 1961)
American Standards Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters.
Construction of projects approved under this ordinance and on a site abutting any
residential use, shall limit external building activity to between the hours of 7:00 A.M.
and 10:00 P.M.
3. Buffering of Adjacent Uses: New development must provide for the buffering of
adjacent uses where there is a transition from one type of use to another use, for reducing
the impact of the development site on public streets, and for screening of mechanical
equipment and service and storage areas.
(a) Buffering must be designed to provide a year-round visual screen in order to
minimize adverse impacts. It may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms, rocks,
boulders, mounds, or a combination thereof.
(b) A development must provide sufficient buffering when topographical or other
barriers do not provide reasonable screening and where there is a need to shield
neighboring properties from any adverse external effects of the development, or
shield the development from the negative impacts of adjacent uses.
(c) The width of the buffer may vary depending on the treatment of the area. Within
densely built-up areas, a buffer with dense plantings, fencing, or changes in grade
may fit within the building setback requirement. A buffer with moderate levels of
planting should be ten (10) feet to fifteen (15) feet in width. In suburban and rural
settings, the width of the vegetated buffer should be increased to a minimum of
twenty-five (25) feet. Areas adjacent to service, loading, or storage areas should
be screened by dense planting, berms, fencing, or a combination thereof sufficient
to substantially eliminate the visual appearance of the area.
(d) Whenever the area between the street and the front of the building is used for
parking or vehicle movement, a vegetated buffer strip must be established along
the edge of the road right-of-way. This buffer strip must soften the appearance of
the site from the road and must create defined points of access to and egress from
the site. The width of the buffer strip must increase with the setback of the
building as follows:
Building Setback Buffer Width
<50 feet 10 feet
50-74 feet 15 feet
75-99 feet 20 feet
100 feet or more 25 feet
Where the buffer width cannot be achieved, a low wall, fence, or hedge may be
used to create the buffer.
(e) Outdoor storage areas, external machinery, and areas used for the storage or
collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or other articles of salvage
or refuse must have sufficient setbacks and screening (such as a stockade fence or
a dense evergreen hedge) to provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their
impact on abutting residential uses and users of public streets. All dumpsters or
similar large collection receptacles for trash or other wastes must be located on
level surfaces, which are paved or graveled. Where the dumpster or receptacle is
located in a yard which abuts a residential or institutional use or a public street, it
must be screened by fencing or landscaping.
(f) Where a potential safety hazard to children is likely to arise, a physical barrier
sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises must be provided and
maintained in good condition.
4. Landscape:
(a) The landscape must be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical by
minimizing tree removal, disturbance and compaction of soil, and by retaining
existing vegetation insofar as practical during construction. Extensive grading
and filling must be avoided as far as possible.
(b) Landscaping must be provided as part of site design. The landscape plan for the
entire site must use landscape materials to integrate the various elements on site,
preserve and enhance the particular identity of the site, and create a pleasing site
character. The landscaping should define street edges, break up parking areas,
soften the appearance of the development, and protect abutting properties.
Landscaping may include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, groundcovers,
perennials, and annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art,
walls, fences, paving materials, and street furniture.
(c) Landscaping around and within parking lots shades hot surfaces and visually
“softens” the hard surface look of parking areas. Parking areas should be
designed and landscaped to create a pedestrian-friendly environment. A
landscaped border should be created around parking lots. Any parking lot
containing forty (40) or more parking spaces should include one (1) or more
landscaped islands within the interior of the lot. There should be at least one (1)
island for every twenty (20) spaces. Landscaping must screen the parking area
from adjacent residential uses and from the street.
5. Business Signs:
(a) Freestanding commercial business signs should be placed at right angles to the
street so as to be viewed from both directions. Simple, geometrically shaped
signs set low to the ground should be used where practicable. The number of
words on signs should be minimized and symbols should be used to catch the eye.
Signs may be double sided.
(b) In order to maintain vehicle and pedestrian safety, signs shall not be placed at a
height or location which obstructs the view of sidewalks or driveway entrances.
Free-standing signs shall not be placed within five (5) feet of a property line, and
shall not be erected more than twenty (20) feet in height as measured from the
elevation of the road centerline.
(c) Free-standing signs shall be sufficiently secured to the ground to withstand strong
winds. (Free-standing signs which are in place for fewer than sixty (60) days per
year are considered temporary and are not subject to the requirements of this
Ordinance.)
(d) All signs shall conform to the standards of the Maine Traveler Information
Services Act, 23 M.R.S.A. sec. 1901 et seq. or successor statue.
(e) Unless licensed as an Official Business Directional Sign in accordance with 23
M.R.S.A. sec. 1918, or successor statute, signs must be placed on the property of
the business offering the goods or service being advertised.
(f) For development adjoining roads surrounding the “Flatiron Block,” signs must be
placed on the building, unless visibility is impaired and a freestanding sign is the
best option.
6. Orientation and Placement of Buildings and Structures: The layout of buildings, parking
lots, and other structures on a site shall be consistent with features of the natural and built
landscape, through the use of some or all of the techniques described in this section.
(a) Utilization of the Site - Buildings, lots, and support facilities should be located
and oriented in those portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for
development. The site design should avoid creating a building surrounded by a
parking lot.
(b) In urban, built-up areas, buildings should be placed close to the street. Where
adjacent lots have been developed, new buildings shall be set back from the street
line a distance equal to or within ten (10) feet of the average setback distance of
the adjacent buildings. For buildings on corner lots, the setback relationship of
both streets should be maintained.
(c) In undeveloped areas, buildings should be placed well back from the road so as to
conform with the rural character of the area. Where the existing site condition is
natural woodland, the buffer requirements of Section C.3.(d), above, may be met
by retaining undisturbed woodland.
(d) Where two or more buildings are proposed, the buildings should be grouped and
linked with sidewalks; tree planting should be used to provide shade and break up
the scale of the site Plantings should be provided along the building edge,
particularly where building facades consist of long or unbroken walls.
(e) The main entrance to the building should be oriented to the street unless the
parking layout or the grouping of the buildings justifies another approach, and
should be clearly identified as such through building and site design, landscaping,
and/or signage. Site furnishings such as benches and sitting walls and, if
appropriate, bicycle racks shall be encouraged. Additional plantings may be
desirable at these points to identify the building entrance and to complement the
pedestrian activity at this point.
(f) Location of Off-Street Parking - Within built-up areas, parking lots shall be
located to the side or rear of the building. Parking may be located between the
building and the street when it is not economically feasible to locate it either
behind or beside the building. The use of shared parking, shared driveways and
the cross- connection of parking lots is encouraged.
(g) Building Scale - When large new buildings or structures are proposed in built-up
areas where their scale (size) and other features may be significantly different
from that which already exists in the immediate neighborhood, care must be taken
to design the new building or structure so that it is compatible with its neighbors.
This may include making the building appear small, using traditional materials,
styles and/or proportions.
D. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CRITERIA: The proposed development will not
create or compound undue effects on natural resources or the environment.
1. The development will not result in degradation of air or water quality, including lake
and groundwater.
2. The development will not result in degradation of wetlands or other wildlife habitat.
3. The development will not cause excessive erosion or sedimentation onto adjacent
properties and downgrade resources.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, significant wildlife habitats, fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and
endangered plants and animals, unique natural communities and natural areas, and sand
and gravel aquifers must be maintained and preserved to the maximum extent. Natural
drainage areas must also be preserved by minimizing the degree of grading and filling.
The development must include appropriate measures for protecting these resources,
including but not limited to, modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of
construction, and limitation on the extent of excavation.
2. Groundwater Protection
(a) The proposed development must not adversely impact either the quality or
quantity of groundwater available to abutting properties or to public water supply
systems. Applicants whose projects involve on-site water supply or sewage
disposal systems with a capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day or
greater must demonstrate that the groundwater at the property line will comply,
following development, with the standards for safe drinking water as established
by the State of Maine.
(b) The proposed extraction of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day of water from
groundwater sources must be supported by a report from a qualified
hydrogeologist stating that: i. the quantity of water to be taken will not
substantially lower the ground water table beyond the property lines or cause
undesireable changes to subsurface flow patterns under drought conditions, and ii.
the proposed facility will not cause diminution of the quality of the aquifer from
which water is to be extracted.
(c) The operator of a groundwater extraction project shall establish a system of
regular monitoring and reporting on the quantity of water extracted and removed
from the site.
(d) Within the bounds of sand and gravel aquifers identified by the Town of
Skowhegan Comprehensive Plan, no use, disposal, or storage of toxic or
hazardous shall be permitted except in compliance with a Spill Prevention and
Management Plan, to be submitted to the Town at the time of application.
3. Water Quality Protection: All aspects of the project must be designed so that:
(a) No person shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated,
untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials of such
nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that may run off, seep,
percolate, or wash into surface or groundwater’s so as to contaminate, pollute, or
harm such waters or cause nuisances, such as objectionable shore deposits,
floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be
harmful to human, animal, plant, or aquatic life.
(b) All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and
biodegradable raw materials, must meet the standards of the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection and the State Fire Marshall's Office.
(c) If the project is located within the direct watershed of Lake George or Oak Pond,
the project must comply with the standards to manage the export of phosphorous
consistent with the standards of the DEP manual Phosphorus Control in Lake
Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development, revised May 1992, or
as further revised.
4. Erosion Control:
(a) Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies must be
minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control BMPs, published by DEP (March, 2003 or as revised).
5. Stormwater Management:
(a) Adequate provisions must be made for the collection and disposal of all
stormwater that runs off proposed streets, parking areas, roofs, and other surfaces,
through a Stormwater Management Plan.
(b) To the extent possible, the plan must retain stormwater on the site using the
natural features of the site and must not have adverse impacts on abutting or
downstream properties.
(c) Unless the discharge is directly to the Kennebec River, stormwater runoff systems
must detain or retain water such that the rate of flow from the site after
development does not exceed the predevelopment rate. The applicant must
demonstrate that on- and off-site downstream channel or system capacity is
sufficient to carry the flow without adverse effects, including but not limited to,
flooding and erosion of shoreland areas, or that he/she will be responsible for
whatever improvements are needed to provide the required increase in capacity
and/or mitigation.
(d) Any project which requires a Stormwater Management Permit from the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection must submit a copy of the approved
permit at time of application.
(e) For projects which do not require a DEP Stormwater Management Permit, the use
of Low Impact Development techniques, consistent with the publication
Stormwater Management for Maine, (DEP, January 2006 or as revised) is highly
encouraged.
(f) For projects involving structural treatments, a Stormwater Maintenance
Agreement must be submitted at the time of application. The SMA must indicate
how stormwater facilities will be maintained through the course of their projected
life.
(g) The biological and chemical properties of receiving waters must not be
degraded by stormwater runoff. The use of oil and grease traps in catch basins,
the use of on-site vegetated waterways, and vegetated buffer strips along
waterways and drainage swales, and the reduction in use of deicing salts and
fertilizers may be required.
6. Preservation of Wildlife Habitat
(a) No development shall involve the filling of wetlands that have been identified by
the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as having high or
moderate value for wildlife habitat.
(b) If an area within the proposed development site has been identified as a critical
natural area or critical habitat for endangered or threatened species, the
development will avoid impacts to that area insofar as practicable.
(c) If an area within the proposed development site has been identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Town of Skowhegan
Comprehensive Plan as a Deer Wintering Area, the developer shall consult with a
qualified wildlife biologist and incorporate measures for protection of the
resource into the development plan.
E. CULTURAL RESOURCES CRITERIA: The proposed development will not have an
undue negative impact on the cultural assets of the Town of Skowhegan.
1. The development will not result in the loss or deterioration of archeological or historical
resources of the town.
2. The development will not result in the loss of scenic and aesthetic assets.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Historic and Archaeological Resources: If any portion of the site has been identified by
the Town of Skowhegan Comprehensive Plan or competent authority as containing the
potential for historic or archaeological resources, the application shall include an
assessment of those resources. The development must include appropriate measures for
protecting those resources, including but not limited to, modification of the proposed
design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent of excavation.
1. Shoreland Development - When a proposed development is immediately visible from a
great pond, river or stream, the development must be designed so that it fits harmoniously
into the visual environment when viewed from the water body.
(a) In predominantly natural environments, site clearing must be minimized, natural
vegetation must be maintained adjacent to the shoreline to soften the appearance
of the development, and vegetation must be retained or provided to minimize the
visual intrusion of the development.
(b) In developed shoreland environments, the appearance of the new development
when viewed from the water must be compatible with the existing visual character
in terms of scale, massing, and height to the maximum extent possible.
3. View Protection: When a proposed development is located within the viewshed of an
identified view from a public street or facility, as noted in the Town of Skowhegan
Comprehensive Plan, the development must be designed to minimize the encroachment
of all buildings, structures, landscaping, and other site features on the identified view.
4. Hillside Development: When a proposed development is located on a hillside that is
visible from a public street, water body, or facility, the development must be designed so
that it fits harmoniously into the visual environment when viewed by the public from
public areas. Site clearing must be minimized and vegetation must be retained or
provided to minimize the visual intrusion of the development. The development must be
designed so that buildings, structures, and other improvements do not extend above the
existing ridgeline or alter the ridge profile significantly. This provision may be waived
for communication towers, spotting towers, and similar facilities that must be located
above the ridgeline for operational reasons.
F. COMPLIANCE CRITERION: The proposed development will comply with other
ordinances and regulations of the Town of Skowhegan regarding land use and
development.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. If the proposed project qualifies as a subdivision under the definition of the Skowhegan
Subdivision Ordinance, the review of the subdivision and site plan may be carried out
concurrently, with the approval of the site plan being completed at the same time as the
final subdivision plan. In the event of procedural conflicts, all of the requirements of
both ordinances must be followed. The Planning Board shall find that all of the criteria
of both ordinances are met in order to grant approval.
2. If any portion of the site is located within a special flood hazard area as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, all use and development of that portion of the
site must be consistent with the Skowhegan Floodplain Management Ordinance.
3. If any portion of the site is located within a shoreland zoning district as identified in the
Skowhegan Shoreland Zoning Ordinance, the development shall demonstrate compliance
with the standards of that ordinance. If the project is required to get a Planning Board
permit under the terms of that ordinance, the approval process for both ordinances may
be done concurrently. In the event of procedural conflicts, all of the requirements of
both ordinances must be followed.
G. FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL CAPACITY CRITERION: The proposed
development must demonstrate the financial and technical capacity to complete the
development and required public improvements in a timely manner.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. The applicant must demonstrate that he/she has the financial and technical capacity to
carry out the project in accordance with this ordinance and the approved plan.
(a) The application must list the names of architects, engineers, and other
professionals who were involved in the development of the project.
(b) The application must list either the names of contractors who have been engaged
to construct the project, or the process by which those contractors will be hired.
(c) The application must include the estimated cost of the project, including required
public improvements, and the source of funding sufficient to meet those costs.
2. If any public improvements are proposed or required for the development of this project,
the terms of performance guarantees must be approved as part of the application process.
Performance Guarantees will be developed in accordance with section 4.C of this
ordinance.
H. SPECIAL CRITERION: If a proposed structure exceeds thirty-five feet in height, it will
not have an undue adverse impact on public health, safety or visual resources.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. Wireless Communications Facilities
(a) Wireless Communications Facilities may be either free-standing or buildingmounted.
1. A free-standing wireless communication tower shall be a monopole-type
construction and shall not exceed one hundred seventy five (175) feet in
height.
2. A building-mounted structure shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet
above the primary roof line of the building upon which it is mounted.
(b) In order to protect public safety, the minimum horizontal distance from the base
of any freestanding tower to any property line, road, or residential structure shall
be equal to fifty (50) percent of the height of the structure. A security fence at
least eight (8) feet in height shall be installed to completely enclose the tower and
any associated buildings or structures.
(c) All wireless communication facilities shall be designed to facilitate co-location of
services. Accommodation for co-location shall be demonstrated at the time of
application.
(d) No wireless communication facility shall commence construction without a
commitment for occupancy from at least one communication service provider. If
at any time a facility has not supported a communication service provider for a
period of six (6) consecutive months, the planning board may declare the facility
abandoned and shall order its removal. If the facility tower has not been removed
within ninety (90) days of such order, the Town shall contract to remove the
tower and assess the cost to the property owner, said cost to become a lien
against the property.
(e) Visual impact of facilities shall be minimized, through choice of siting, design of
the structure itself, or structural or vegetative buffering. No signage shall be
placed on the tower itself, except for warning signs at the base. Signs on
supporting buildings and structures shall be limited to those identifying the
facility, the owner and operator, and emergency contact information.
(f) Lighting of towers and antennae shall be prohibited except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
(g) In review of the application for a wireless communication facility, the planning
board is specifically authorized to retain an expert in the field of RF engineering
to review technical details of the application. The cost of this expertise shall be
borne by the applicant through the technical review fee and such additional
assessment as is necessary.
2. WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
Proposed wind energy conversion systems shall meet the following Standards:
(a) The minimum distance between the ground and any part of a rotor blade system
shall be fifty (50) feet.
(b) All access doors to towers and electrical equipment shall be lockable.
(c) Towers shall not be artificially lighted, except as required by the FAA or other
applicable authority. All lights shall be designed to minimize visibility from the
ground to the extent allowed by the FAA or other applicable authority.
(d) Turbines shall have an automatic braking, governing, and/or feathering system to
prevent uncontrolled rotation, overspeeding, and excessive pressure on the tower
structure, rotor blades and turbine components caused by extremely high winds,
icing or other weather phenomena.
(e) Turbines shall be equipped with a fire suppression system that will extinguish any
fire located in the nacelle portion of the turbine.
(f) The tower and all ground-level equipment such as transformers and substations
shall be enclosed within a security fence at least eight (8) feet in height. The
fence shall be placed a minimum distance from the tower of three times (3x) the
radius of the rotor blades.
(g) Prior to the start of construction an applicant shall provide the town proof of
adequate liability insurance.
(h) All wiring between generating facilities and transformers or substations shall be
underground unless the developer provides evidence that underground wiring is
unfeasible.
(i) Setbacks:
1 If a facility is to be sited on existing farmland, towers shall be a minimum
setback distance from all surrounding property lines equal to 1.25 times
the height of the tower. No structural development other than that directly
connected with the facility, will be permitted in the setback zone.
2 Facilities on non-farmland will be required to meet a minimum setback
distance from all property lines equal to 1.5 times the height of the tower
plus the length of one blade.
3 Towers shall be set back at least 2,500 feet from wildlife sanctuaries or
wetlands of high value for waterfowl and wading bird habitat as identified
by Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(j) Towers and turbines shall not contain advertising except for reasonable
identification of the manufacturer or operator of the wind energy facility.
Appropriate warning signs shall be placed on electrical equipment and facility
entrances.
(k) The installation shall minimize visual impact, through choice of siting, design of
the structures, or structural or vegetative buffers.
(l) The facility shall avoid, to the extent practicable, the creation of artificial habitat
for raptors or raptor prey, such as a) electrical equipment boxes on or near the
ground that can provide shelter and warmth, or b) horizontal perching
opportunities on the towers or related structures.
I. ECONOMIC IMPACT CRITERION: If the proposed development is a large scale retail
development, as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. sec. 4366, or successor statute, it will not
result in an undue adverse impact on the community.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
1. A comprehensive economic impact study shall be performed by a qualified preparer and
submitted with the application for site review.
2. In order to find that there is an undue adverse impact on the community, the Planning
Board must find from the economic impact study and other evidence submitted that at
least two of the factors in the economic analysis are negative and that the overall
economic impact is negative.
3. The impact on neighboring municipalities within the comprehensive economic impact
area must be considered as well as the impact on Skowhegan.
SECTION IV POST APPROVAL ACTIVITIES
A. LIMITATION OF APPROVAL
Construction of the improvements covered by any site plan approval must be
substantially commenced within twelve (12) months of the date upon which the approval
was granted and must be substantially completed within twenty-four (24) months. If
construction has not been substantially commenced, and substantially completed, within
the specified period, the approval shall be null and void. The applicant may request an
extension of the approval deadline prior to the expiration of the period. Such request
must be in writing and must be made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
grant up to two (2), six (6) month extensions to the periods if the approved plan conforms
to the ordinances in effect at the time the extension is granted and any and all federal and
state approvals and permits are current.
B. INCORPORATION OF APPROVED PLAN
1. One copy of the approved site plan must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
prior to commencing construction of the project. All construction activities must conform
to the approved plan, including any conditions of approval and minor changes approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer to address field conditions.
2. Any project involving the construction of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
of gross floor area or fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of impervious surface, must
provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a set of construction plans showing the
building(s) and site improvements as actually constructed on the site. These “as-built”
plans must be submitted within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the project or occupancy of the building.
C. IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
1. Application
(1) Improvement Guarantee - The Planning Board/Staff Review Committee may
require the posting of an improvement guarantee in such amount and form as
specified in subsection 2 below as is reasonably necessary to ensure the proper
installation of all off-site improvements required as conditions of approval. The
nature and duration of the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal
without adding unnecessary costs to the applicant.
(2) Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer must
notify the Planning Board/Staff Review Committee of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements, and must send a copy of such notice to
the appropriate municipal officials. The respective municipal officials shall
inspect all improvements and shall file a report indicating approval, partial
approval, or rejection of such improvements with a statement of reasons for any
rejection.
(3) The Planning Board/Staff Review Committee shall approve, partially approve, or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the municipal officials.
(4) If the improvements are approved, the guarantee shall be released. Where partial
approval is granted, the developer shall be released from liability only for that
portion of the improvements approved.
2. Form of Guarantee
Improvement guarantees may be provided by a variety of means including, but not
limited to, the following:
(1) Security Bond. The applicant may obtain a security bond from a surety bonding
company authorized to do business in the state.
(2) Letter of Credit. The applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a
bank or other reputable lending institution.
(3) Escrow Account. The applicant may deposit cash or other instruments readily
convertible into cash at face value, either with the Town of Skowhegan, or in
escrow with a bank. Any such account must require Town approval for
withdrawal and must stipulate that the Town can withdraw the money upon fortyeight
(48) hour advance notice to the applicant to complete the guaranteed
improvements.
The Board of Selectmen shall review and approve all documents for form and
enforceability.
D. MINOR CHANGES TO APPROVED PLANS
Minor changes in approved plans necessary to address field conditions may be approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer provided that any such change does not affect
compliance with the standards or alter the essential nature of the proposal. Any such
change must be endorsed in writing on the approved plan by the Code Enforcement
Officer, and a report presented to the Planning board at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
E. AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS
Approvals of site plans are dependent upon and limited to the proposals and plans
contained in the application and supporting documents submitted and affirmed to by the
applicant. Any variation from the plans, proposals, and supporting documents, except
minor changes that do not affect approval standards, is subject to review and approval.
F. ENFORCEMENT
It shall be the duty of the CEO or his/her agent to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. If the CEO or his/her agent shall find that any provision of this ordinance is
being violated, he/she shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
He/she shall order discontinuance of illegal use of buildings, structures, additions, or
work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
The CEO is hereby authorized to institute or cause to be instituted, in the name of the
Town, any and all actions, legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the
enforcement of this ordinance; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent any
person entitled to equitable relief from enjoining any act contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance.
Any person, firm, or corporation being the owner of or having control or use of any
building or premises who violated any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be fined
in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. sec. 4452. Each day such a violation is
permitted to exist after notification shall constitute a separate offense. The Board of
Selectmen, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Ordinance and
recovering fines without court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal
structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given
by an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad
faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to
public health and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
SECTION V. APPEALS PROCEDURE
A. Any person whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a
permit under this Ordinance; any person whose land directly abuts land for which a
permit has been granted; or any person who has suffered a particularized injury as a result
of the granting or denial of a permit or the action of the Code Enforcement Officer, may
appeal to the Board of Appeals within thirty (30) days of the date upon which action was
taken by the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Any appeal taken to the Board of Appeals under this Ordinance shall be an appellate
review and shall be based on the evidence, testimony and information upon which the
Planning Board, or Code Enforcement Officer made their original decision. No appeal
shall be considered to be a “de novo” action.
C. Any person who participates as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with State laws within
thirty (30) days from the date of any decision by the Board of Appeals.
SECTION VI. DEFINITIONS
Construction of Terms:
All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual meanings. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular shall
include the plural.
ABUTTING PROPERTY: Any lot which is physically contiguous with the subject lot even if
only at a point and any lot which is located directly across a street or right-of-way from the
subject lot such that the extension of the side lot lines of the subject lot would touch or enclose
the abutting property. An Abutter is a person, business or other entity who is the record owner
of abutting property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is clearly
incidental and related to that of the principal building or use of the land, and which is located on
the same lot as that of the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A use or structure, which is incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated shall not
subordinate the principal use of the lot.
AGGRIEVED PARTY: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by
the granting or denial of an approval under this ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for
which approval has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered
particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such approval.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY: The cultivation of food or fiber or husbandry of animals for
sale in essentially raw form. The following are examples of activities which are not considered
within this definition and may be subject to review if meeting size thresholds: packaging,
processing, or butchering of agricultural produce, artificially heated and lighted greenhouses,
feedlot, retail sales.
BUILDING: Any permanent structure, having one or more floors and a roof, which is used for
the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When any portion thereof is separated
by a division wall without opening, then each such portion shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: The area covered by a building measured from the exterior surface
of the exterior walls at grade level exclusive of cantilevered portions of the building. Where the
building is elevated above grade level on posts or similar devices, the building footprint is the
area the building would cover if it were located at ground level.
CHANGE FROM ONE CATEGORY OF NONRESIDENTIAL USE TO ANOTHER
CATEGORY OF NONRESIDENTIAL USE: A change in the type of occupancy of a
nonresidential building or structure, or a portion thereof, such that the basic type of use is
changed, such as from retail to office or storage to a restaurant, but not including a change in the
occupants.
CURB CUT: The opening along the curb line or street right-of-way line at which point vehicles
may enter or leave the street.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction, reconstruction, conversion alteration or enlargement of
any structure, or the establishment of a new non-residential use of land. The term includes
grading and filling of land prepatory to actual construction. A developer is any person,
corporation, or other entity who engages in development activities.
ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE: An increase of the building
footprint and/or increase in the height of the structure beyond its present highest point.
Alterations of existing buildings which are required in order to meet the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and/or the State Fire Code are not considered to be
enlargements or expansions of a structure and are not required to meet otherwise applicable
setback requirements, provided the alterations are the minimum necessary to satisfy the ADA
and/or State Fire Code.
12. ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION OF USE: Any intensification of use in time,
volume, or function, whether or not resulting from an increase in the footprint, height, floor area,
land area or cubic volume occupied by a particular use. Increases which are required in order to
meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and/or the State Fire Code are not
considered to be enlargements or expansions of use.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by two
or more exterior walls.
FREE STANDING SIGN: A sign which is physically separated and not attached to a building.
Free-standing signs which are in place for fewer than sixty (60) days per year are considered
temporary and are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
GROUNDWATER: All of the water found beneath the surface of the ground. For purposes of
aquifer protection, this term refers to the subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
HISTORIC OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES: Areas identified by a governmental
agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission as having significant value as an
historic or archaeological resource; areas identified in the Town of Skowhegan comprehensive
plan; or other areas identified by qualified professional archeologist or historian.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, or profession, which is customarily conducted in a
residential structure, or on a residential property, and which is 1)clearly incidental to and
compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2)
which employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in the home.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: The area covered by buildings and associated constructed
facilities, areas which have been or will be covered by a low-permeability material, such as
asphalt or concrete, and areas such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas, which have been
or will be compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability. Common impervious
surfaces include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or
storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled,
macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A description of traffic conditions along a street or within an
intersection. Level of Service is a term used by traffic engineers to classify congestion on a scale
of “A” to “F”, with Level of Service “E” presenting an unacceptable degree of congestion.
LOT AREA: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads
serving more than two lots.
NATURAL AREAS/NATURAL COMMUNITIES, UNIQUE NATURAL
AREA/COMMUNITIES: Areas identified by the Maine Department of Conservation Natural
Areas Program as having significant value as a natural area and also any areas so identified in the
Town of Skowhegan comprehensive plan.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A building other than one which is used for purposes wholly
incidental or accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
PRINCIPAL USE: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use
on the same premises.
PUBLIC STREET: Any street or road on which travel by the general public is permitted,
regardless of whether the street is owned by the Town, State, or private entity.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR USE - a single family or two-family dwelling.
SETBACK: An area adjacent to the boundaries of a lot on which placement of buildings,
parking areas, or other structures are prohibited by law, ordinance, or private agreement; a
distance usually measured from the lot boundary, street line, or other feature.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The distance of unobstructed vision experienced by a motorist entering a
street from an access point. Sight distance is measured from a point on the driveway ten (10)
feet from the edge of the travelled way and three-and-one-half (3 ½) feet above the surface, to a
point four-and-one-quarter (4 ¼) feet above street level.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or
attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including a tent or vehicle.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMMENCED; SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED: Construction
shall be considered to be substantially commenced when any work beyond the stage of
excavation, including but not limited to, the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation has
begun. Construction shall be considered to be substantially completed when it has been
completed to the point where normal functioning, use, or occupancy can occur without concern
for the general health, safety, and welfare of the occupant and the general public. At a minimum
it shall include the completion of no less than [seventy (70)] percent of the costs of the proposed
improvements within a development and shall include permanent stabilization and/or
revegetation of areas of the site that were disturbed during construction.
URBAN COMPACT: The urban compact is a boundary of demarcation along state highways
that is intended to mark an “urban” development form, and within which the Town of
Skowhegan has been granted certain regulatory and maintenance authority. The boundaries of
the urban compact are depicted on DOT maps and on maps posted at the Skowhegan Town
Office.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which
either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained.
VEGETATION: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants.
WILDLIFE HABITAT; SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITAT: Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as having
significant value as habitat for animals and any areas identified in the municipality’s
comprehensive plan.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM: A structure built for the purpose of converting
wind energy into electrical energy for commercial purposes. The wind energy conversion
system includes all towers, turbines, powerhouses, and substations associated with provision of
electrical energy to the grid.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (“cell tower”): A tower or other structure
mounted with antennae for the purpose of broadcasting or relaying radio signals for
communications services, including commercial radio and television, telephonic and other
devices. The wireless communications facility includes support structures, antennae,
maintenance buildings, and all other buildings and structures associated with the service.
1
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
Ordinance Entitled
Regulating Storage and Land Application
and Other Residuals
not generated by the Town of Skowhegan
Adopted Special Town Meeting
August 1, 1996
Title: This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Skowhegan Sludge
Management Ordinance.”
SECTION 1: Authority. This ordinance has been adopted pursuant to the Constitution of the
State of Maine, Article VII, Part 2, and Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 30-A,
§3001.
SECTION 2: Findings and Purpose.
The Inhabitants of the Town of Skowhegan find as follows:
1. That sludge and residuals not generated by the Town of Skowhegan may contain
concentrations of heavy metals, polychlorinated biphenyls and other substances which can be
harmful to the health and safety of humans, animals, or aquatic life and the preservation and
safety of the natural environment.
2. That the topography of the Town of Skowhegan, which includes Wesserunsett Stream,
the Kennebec River, Lake George, Oak Pond, Smith Pond, Round Pond, wetlands, numerous
brooks and tributaries, and significant groundwater aquifers, make it uniquely susceptible to
environmental damage from runoff from areas where sludge and residuals have been spread
posing a special danger to those water bodies and threatening the ecological and economic wellbeing
of said Town.
3. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health and safety of the residents of the
Town of Skowhegan, to enhance and maintain the quality of its environment, and to conserve
natural resources through regulation of storage and land application of industrial wastewater
treatment plant sludge and other residuals.
SECTION 3:Definitions.
3.01 Applicant: The term “applicant” refers to the owner and/or operator of the
wastewater treatment plant or generator of the sludge or residual not generated
by the town of Skowhegan.
3.02 Aquifer: See “significant groundwater aquifer”.
2
3.03 Board: The term “Board” refers to the Skowhegan Planning Board.
3.04 DEP: DEP refers to the State of Maine, Department of Environmental Protection
and the Commissioner thereof, and /or its successor agencies.
3.05 EP Toxicity Test: The term “EP Toxicity Test” refers to the Extraction Procedure
Toxicity Test as described in Section 1.2.4 of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) document entitled Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, SW 846
(Nov. 1986).
3.06 Operator: The term “operator” refers to any person who has care, charge, or
control of a land site or storage facility site subject to this Ordinance. This person
may be the owner, an agent, a lessee of the owner, or an independent contractor.
3.07 Owner: The term “owner” refers to any person who, alone or in conjunction with
others, owns the real property upon which is located a land site or storage facility
site subject to this Ordinance.
3.08 Primary sand and gravel recharge areas: The term “primary sand and gravel recharge
areas” refers to the surface directly overlying sand and gravel formations that
provide direction replenishment of the ground water in sand and gravel and fractured
bedrock aquifers. The term does not include areas overlying formations that have
been identified as unsaturated and are not contiguous with saturated formations.
3.09 Residual(s): The term “residual(s)” refers to pulp and paper mill wastewater
treatment plant sludge, resultant ash from incineration of sludge and wood
generated from commercial or industrial facilities and all materials containing same
and available as potentially suitable materials for controlled land application
resulting in vegetative assimilation, attenuation of the components in the material, or
improved soil conditions.
3.10 Selectmen: The term “Selectmen” refers to the Skowhegan Board of Selectmen.
3.11 Significant groundwater aquifer: The term “significant groundwater aquifer” refers
to any formation of soil or fractured bedrock that contains significant recoverable
quantities of water (greater than ten gallons per minute from a properly constructed
six-inch diameter well). NOTE: reference may be made to the “Hydrogeologic Data
For Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers” map prepared by the Maine Geologic
Survey. In the event that on-site testing required pursuant to this Ordinance
identifies additional aquifers or identifies boundaries of aquifers that are different
from those mapped, the results of the on-site testing shall control.
3
3.12 Sludge: The term “sludge” refers to the solid, semi-solid or liquid residual generated
by a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant and all
materials containing same.
3.13 Temporary Field Stacking: The term “temporary field stacking” refers to short-term
stacking of materials for not longer than a period of seventy- two (72) hours before
spreading is scheduled to occur.
SECTION 4: Application For Permit.
4.01 Application Procedure.
4.01.01 An applicant wishing to deliver, store, or spread sludge or residual(s)
in the Town of Skowhegan shall file an application form with the Board. The
application shall be submitted at least 120 days before the date of first
delivery, storage, or spreading to ensure adequate time for review under this
Ordinance.
4.01.02 The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of the application at least thirty
(30) days prior to the Board meeting at which the applicant requests to be heard.
4.01.03 The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of Fifteen
Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) in the form of a bank or certified check payable to
the Town of Skowhegan, Maine, with a notation thereon stating the specific
purpose of the fee.
4.01.04 The Board shall require the applicant to deposit an amount not to exceed
Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) in an interest-bearing account in the
name of the Town of Skowhegan at a financial institution having an office in the
Town of Skowhegan using the social security number or the federal identification
number of the applicant. The purpose of this account shall be to allow the Town
to hire a professional consultant to review the application for compliance with this
Ordinance and to conduct such additional studies as may be required to assure
that the public health, safety, and natural environment will not be adversely
impacted by the proposed spreading or storage of sludge and/or residual(s).
Funds shall be withdrawn from this account by the Treasurer of the Town only
at the Selectmen’s request. Any interest earned and any remaining balance in
this account shall be returned to the applicant following approval or denial of the
application.
4.01.05 At the meeting at which it is first considered, the Board shall review the
application to determine whether it is complete or whether additional submissions
are required. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing within ten (10) days of the meeting stating what additional
submissions are necessary to begin the review process.
4
4.01.06 The applicant shall provide any additional information within thirty (30)
days from the date on which the Board gives notice that additional information
is required.
4.01.07 The application shall be considered “complete” and “filed” on the date
when all required information is furnished to the Board by the applicant.
4.01.08 A public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days from the date when
the application is complete. The Board shall cause notice of the time, place, and
date of such hearing to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, not less
than ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing to the applicant, to abutters
of the properties involved, and to owner(s) of any property within 1,000 feet of the
properties involved. Owners of abutting properties and of properties within 1,000
feet shall be those listed in the current real property tax records of the Town of
Skowhegan. Notice shall also be published at least seven (7) days prior to the
public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Skowhegan.
Notice shall also be posted in three (3) public places designated by the Board.
Failure to receive notice shall not invalidate a public hearing held, if the
requirements of this subsection have been met.
4.01.09 The Board shall recommend to the Selectmen whether the application
should be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The Selectmen shall
take final action within thirty (30) days of the issuance of a license from DEP, or
within sixty (60) days of the public hearing, whichever date is later. Final action
by the Selectmen may be approval, approval with condition (s), or denial.
4.01.10 If the applicant is denied a license by DEP, no action shall be required
by the Board. The applicant shall send or deliver a copy of the DEP approval or
denial to the Board within three (3) days of receiving it.
4.01.11 Within seven (7) days of its final action, the Selectmen shall notify the
applicant of its action and the reason(s) for such action. Approval of the
5
application, together with the conditions of approval, if any, shall constitute a
permit.
4.02 Submissions. An application to spread sludge or residual (s) not generated by the
Town of Skowhegan shall include the following:
4.02.01 A complete “Application for Sludge Utilization” prepared for DEP.
4.02.02 A fee as required by 4.01.03 of this Ordinance and a deposit into an
interest-bearing account as required by 4.01.04.
4.02.03 A map of the proposed site that clearly indicates property lines,
abutters, owners of property within 1,000 feet, existing water well locations
within 1,000 feet, areas not suitable for spreading and the reason(s) therefore,
required setbacks and the reason(s) therefore, storage areas, and proximity to
any primary sand and gravel recharge area and/or significant groundwater
aquifer.
4.02.04 A baseline soils analysis for each site. This analysis shall be
conducted in the manner recommended by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service for soils testing generally and shall include testing as
required by Appendix A of this Ordinance.
4.02.05 A Hydrogeologic analysis conducted by a certified geologist or
registered professional engineer qualified by education and experience to
conduct a hydrogeologic analysis. This analysis shall be sufficient to
determine that the application of sludge or residual (s) to the proposed site
will meet the performance standards set forth in SECTION 5 of this
Ordinance and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. A site-specific geologic literature search.
b. Aerial photo interpretation, including a photolineament
analysis, to identify potential high-yield aquifers.
b. Documentation of type, depth, yield, static water level, and
length of casing of any water wells within 1,000 feet of a
proposed spreading site.
c. Reconnaissance field mapping by a certified geologist of the
surficial and bedrock geology of the proposed site and all areas
within 1,000 feet, which field mapping shall relate any
observed bedrock outcrop fracture orientation and spacing data
to the photolineament analysis.
6
d. Documentation of the Hydrogeologic setting of the project site,
including, but not limited to, a general description of the depth
and expected seasonal variations in the depth to the first ground
water table encountered below ground surface, a description of
the general direction of ground water flow up to the point
where discharge to surface water occurs, a description of the
relationship of the site to any significant aquifers (those
producing over ten (10) gallons per minute to a properly
constructed six-inch diameter water well) including bedrock
aquifers or inferred bedrock aquifers.
e. A description of the background ground water quality at the up
gradient and down gradient edges of the proposed site. This
description shall include background levels for any constituent
regulated by this Ordinance as set forth in Appendix A.
f. A proposed ground water monitoring plan to be used just prior
to and for two years following the application of the sludge and
/or ash, including the proposed horizontal and vertical
placement of monitoring wells and all domestic wells within
1,000 feet monitored, frequency of monitoring, and precision
of measurement for each parameter to be measured.
4.02.06 A plan for the independent weekly analysis (per the schedule
required in 5.02.02 a. of the sludge or residual (s) required by Appendix A of
this Ordinance). Sampling and analysis shall be performed by a Statecertified
laboratory chosen by the Board in accordance with the DEP
document entitled, Methodology for Sampling and Analysis of PCDD’s and
PCDF’s in Sludge and Residuals, and shall be performed on all sludge or
residual(s) without regard to source.
4.02.07 A plan for the submission of the results of the tests required in
subsection b. and c. of 5.02.02 of this Ordinance.
4.02.08 A plan for the submission of the results of soil tests to be performed
just prior to and twice yearly following the application of sludge or
residual(s) for the duration of the permit sought, including the proposed
sampling schedule, sampling locations, and parameters to be measured.
4.02.09 The Board may require such other information as it deems necessary.
SECTION 5: Performance Standards
5.01 General Standards.
7
5.01.01 Storage and land application of sludge and residual (s) not generated
by the Town of Skowhegan is prohibited, unless approval has first been
obtained from the Board, the Selectmen and from DEP.
5.01.02 No sludge or residual (s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan
may be stored on site in the Town of Skowhegan except in a permanent
storage facility as provided in DEP Regulations Chapter 567 B-4. c. There
shall be no winter field stacking of sludge or residual (s) not generated by the
Town of Skowhegan. Stacking on each site shall be limited to the amount
approved for use on such site.
5.01.03 If temporary field stacking is to occur , reasonable precautions must
be taken to prevent leaching and/or dispersal of sludge or residual (s) into the
air.
5.01.04 Spreading of sludge or residual (s) shall be allowed only from May
15 to November 15 in any year. Spreading of sludge or residual (s) shall not
be allowed, if it is raining or, if the ground is saturated, frozen or snow
covered.
5.02 Testing Requirements. Subject to the approval of the application by DEP,
the Board shall recommend for approval, or conditional approval, an application
for spreading of sludge or residual (s) on land or storage for the purpose of
spreading sludge or residual (s), if the applicant agrees to comply with any
additional testing required by the Board of Selectmen, including but not limited to
the following:
5.02.01 Site Testing and Monitoring
a. Soils Analysis: The applicant shall furnish a baseline soils analysis
as required in 4.02.04 and soils testing program in accordance with
4.02.08 of this Ordinance with the initial application to the Board.
b. Water Analysis: The Applicant shall install at least two
monitoring wells on each site, the number and location of said
wells to be determined by a Board-appointed certified geologist or
registered professional engineer qualified by education and
experience to make that determination. The water in these wells
shall be tested quarterly for parameters to be approved by the
Board based on the actual constituents of the sludge or residual (s).
At the discretion of the Planning Board or at the request of the
owner of an existing well located within one-thousand (1,000) feet
of any site proposed for storage or spreading of sludge or residual
(s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan, the Board may
require baseline and annual water analysis of any well, as required
by Appendix A of this Ordinance.
8
5.02.02 Characteristics of Sludge or Residual (s) Not Generated By
Town of Skowhegan
a. The Board shall provide for the supervision of an independent
random weekly sample of sludge or residual (s) taken at the
point
of generation after the product has gone through all processing
steps necessary prior to delivery. All testing shall be in accordance
with the sixteenth edition of Standard Methods for Examination of
Water and Wastewater (1985), published by the American Public
Health Association, and the results shall be furnished to the Code
Enforcement Officer for the Town of Skowhegan and/or the Board
on a schedule approved by the Board.
b. Sludge or residual (s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan
shall be tested for pollutants as required by DEP and as required by
this Ordinance. In addition to the above requirements, the
Board
or its agent shall take a representative composite sample of the
actual product delivered to Skowhegan and test by the “EP
Toxicity Test”, as required by Appendix A of this Ordinance.
c. Sludge or residual (s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan
shall not be delivered to, stored or spread in the Town of
Skowhegan, if testing required by this Ordinance indicates
that
concentrations of heavy metals, organic compounds, or other
pollutants exceed the maximum permissible concentrations and/or
loading limits appearing in the DEP Regulations at Chapter 567
B-1.b.
5.02.03 Hydrogeologic Criteria.
a. Sludge or residual (s) shall not be delivered to, stored, or spread on
land with a slope of greater than fifteen percent (15%).
b. Where the proposed application site has a slope of fifteen percent
(15%) or less, sludge or residual (s) shall not be delivered to,
stored, or spread within the following setback areas:
(1) Residences; classified bodies of water including lakes, ponds,
and streams; water supply wells............................................300'
(2) Intermittent streams.......................................................100'
9
(3) Public Roadways, drainage gullies, property boundaries..50'
Additional setback requirements established by DEP Regulations
at Chapter 567 B - 2.b and B - 4.a. must also be met.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection “b” of this section
with respect to water supply wells, no sludge or residual(s)
containing human pathogens may be delivered to,
stored, or spread on a site closer than a two hundred
(200) day hydraulic ground water travel time from
the nearest water well used for drinking water
purposes.
d. Sludge or residual(s) shall not be delivered to, stored, or spread
over a significant groundwater aquifer, over a primary sand and
gravel recharge area, or within the recharge area of a public water
supply well.
e. Sludge or residual (s) shall not cause the State of Maine Primary
Drinking Water Standards or the National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations, which are incorporated herein by reference, to be
exceeded in the ground water at a distance greater than one
hundred (100) feet from the edge of the sludge or residual (s)
spreading boundary, or at the property line, if it is within one
hundred (100) feet of the sludge or residual (s) spreading
boundary, taking into account existing background ground water
quality under the site. The burden shall be on the applicant to
show that the spreading of sludge or other residual (s) will not
cause these standards to be exceeded.
1.02.04 Aquatic Impact Criteria
The spreading of sludge or residual(s) shall not cause the National Water
Quality Criteria (freshwater chronic criteria), established by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to protect aquatic organisms, to be
exceeded in classified water bodies that will receive runoff from the site of
spreading of sludge or residual (s), taking in account the existing quality of
those classified water bodies. The freshwater chronic criteria appear in full in
the “Guidelines for Deriving Numerical National Water Quality Criteria for
the Protection of Aquatic Organisms and Their Uses,” published in the EPA
document Quality Criteria for Water 1989, EPA 440/5-86-001. The burden
shall be on the applicant to establish that the spreading of sludge and other
residual (s) will not cause these criteria to be exceeded.
10
5.03 Additional Requirements. The Board shall not recommend approval of an
application for the spreading of sludge or residual(s) on land or the storage of
sludge or residual(s) for the purpose of spreading on land, unless:
5.03.01 The applicant agrees in writing to furnish the Code Enforcement
Officer for the Town of Skowhegan with copies of all conditions and
limitations imposed by DEP, and twenty four (24) hour advanced notice of
any changes in the composition of the sludge or residual(s), and further
testing required by the DEP and the results of those tests, and any annual
variations in site spreading or storage plans.
5.03.02 The applicant agrees in writing to notify the Code Enforcement
Officer for the Town of Skowhegan of delivery of any sludge or residual (s)
not generated by the Town of Skowhegan, to advise said Code Enforcement
Officer of the proposed spreading timetable, and the identity of the person
who is to do the actual spreading. The person spreading the sludge or
residual (s) shall notify said Code Enforcement Officer as soon as possible
prior to the actual spreading, and in any event not later than three (3) days
prior to spreading.
5.03.03 The applicant has provided the landowner and the Town with a
written statement indicating that the applicant has agreed or will agree to
indemnify the owner for any damages which may result from the spreading
of sludge or residual(s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan.
5.03.04 The applicant has entered into a written conditional buy/sell
agreement with the owner establishing a fair market value price for the land
involved in the spreading of sludge or residual(s) or the storage of sludge or
residual(s) for spreading on land and agreeing to purchase the land at that
price should damage to the land occur from such spreading and/or storage of
sludge or residual(s).
5.03.05 The applicant agrees in writing to be financially responsible should
the storage or spreading of sludge or residual(s) prove hazardous to the health
and safety of the residents, wildlife, soil, water, and/or air quality of the
Town of Skowhegan.
5.03.06 The applicant agrees in writing to provide a fence or other barrier
suitable to prevent access to the sludge or residual(s) spreading site by
animals and unauthorized individuals.
SECTION 6: Duration of Permit: Review Process
6.01 A permit issued under this Ordinance shall be valid for a period of five (5)
years from the date of issuance and shall be subject to annual review by the Board
and the Selectmen.
11
6.02 At least fourteen (14) days prior to annual review, but not more than
thirty (30) days prior thereto, the Board shall notify the applicant of the review.
6.03 As part of the annual review, the applicant shall submit the following
information to the Board in writing.
6.03.01 The names of the applicant and the landowner and the date of the
original permit.
6.03.02 A narrative describing the following:
a. The quantity of sludge or residual (s) applied the previous year and
the number of acres utilized.
b. Any problems encountered the previous year.
c. Any proposed changes in the upcoming year.
(NOTE: new acreage requires a new application).
d. Any physical or chemical changes in the sludge or residual (s).
e. A sludge or residual (s) analysis as required in the initial
application.
f. A soil Ph for each land acre to which the sludge or residual (s) was
applied.
g. The results of the quarterly water analysis required under 5.02.01
b. of this Ordinance.
h. Such other analysis as DEP, Board or Selectmen required in the
initial approval.
6.04 The applicant shall submit a non-refundable annual renewal fee of One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).
6.05 If the Board determines that the conditions of the permit were met for the
previous year, the Board shall recommend that the permit continue in effect until
the next annual review. The Board may, in its discretion, modify or revoke the
permit, if actions by the applicant or the operator were in violation of this
Ordinance, or if the Board finds that continuation of the permit is harmful to the
health and safety of humans, animals, or aquatic life and the preservation and
safety of the natural environment.
12
6.06 Any person applying or storing sludge or residual (s) not generated by the
Town of Skowhegan within the municipal boundaries at the time of the enactment
of this Ordinance pursuant to a license issued by DEP may continue to do so for
sixty (60) days from the enactment of this Ordinance By the sixty-first day
following the enactment of this Ordinance, any such person shall submit an
application to the Board as required by this Ordinance prior to continuance of the
application or storage activity.
SECTION 7: Modification of Conditions and Revocation of Permit.
If at any time, as a result of any testing required by DEP, this Ordinance, or the
Board, elements or compounds are found in quantities which may be harmful to the
health and safety of humans, animals, or aquatic life and the preservation and safety of
the natural environment, the Board may require additional testing at the applicant’s
expense and may modify the conditions applicable to any permit. If the Board as a result
of any required testing or risk assessment determines that continued storage or spreading
of sludge or residual(s) not generated by the Town of Skowhegan is harmful to the health
and safety of humans, animal, or aquatic life and the preservation and safety of the
natural environment, then it may recommend to the Selectmen such appropriate action as
it deems necessary, including limitation, modifications, or suspension or revocation of
any permit.
SECTION 8: Enforcement and Penalty
8.01 The Code Enforcement Officer for the Town of Skowhegan shall have the
right to enter all land application and storage sites at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of inspecting the site for compliance with this Ordinance.
8.02 If the Code Enforcement Officer finds violations of any permit conditions or
of any obligations imposed by the Ordinance or Chapter 567 of DEP Regulations,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice to the landowner, the
Board, the applicant, the operator (if different from the landowner) and notify
DEP.
8.03 The Board, upon finding the provisions of the Ordinance or conditions of
approval are being or have been violated, may recommend that the Selectmen
temporarily suspend the permit and the Selectmen may revoke the permit after
notice and hearing. The Selectmen may take any other action deemed necessary,
including prosecution of the code violation pursuant to Rule 80K of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure.
8.04 The applicant and/or operator who violates the Ordinance or the
conditions of approval, as well as the owner who knowingly permits such
violations to occur, shall be guilty of a civil violation and shall be subject to a
civil penalty of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Five
13
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) for each offense. Each day such violation is
permitted to exist after notification shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 9: Appeals
An aggrieved party may appeal any final action taken by the Selectmen to the
Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80D of the Maine Rules Of Civil Procedure.
SECTION 10: Validity, Severability, and Conflict with Other Ordinances
10.01 Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any
other section of this Ordinance.
10.02 Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are inconsistent with the
requirements of any other Ordinance, code or statute, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.
SECTION 11: Amendments
This Ordinance may be amended by a vote of the Town Meeting, the Legislative
Body of the Town of Skowhegan. Amendments may be initiated by a request of the
Planning Board, the Selectmen, or by petitions bearing the signatures of registered voters
in the Town of Skowhegan equal to, or in excess of , ten percent (10%) of the votes cast
by said voters in the last gubernatorial election.
APPENDIX A
TESTING PARAMETERS
1. All Soil, Water, Sludge, and Other Residual Tests shall include pH, Magnesium,
Potassium, Phosphorous, Boron, Arsenic, Chloride, Selenium, Fluoride, Sulfate,
Aluminum, Sodium, Cadmium, Copper, Nickel, Lead, Vanadium, Zinc, Silver,
Barium, Calcium, Iron, Mercury, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nitrate, Nitrite,
Ammonium, Total Kjeldahl N., Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans (PCDF’s),
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PBC’s), Total Organic Halogens (TOX),
Polychlorinated Dibenzopyrans, (All Dioxin Cogeners), Chromium (metallic,
hexavalent, trivalent).
14
2. Soil Tests shall also include cation exchange capacity, crop recommendations,
texture separate analysis, and percent organic matter.
3. Water Tests shall include color and turbidity.
4. Sludge and Other Residuals Tests shall include the percent of components present
in the test results of paragraph one (1) of this Appendix A. The percent of loss on
ignition shall also be included.
1
Chapter 31
Town of Skowhegan
Solid Waste Management Ordinance
Adopted 1994 Annual Town Meeting
Amended 1996 Annual Town Meeting
Amended 2002 Annual Town Meeting
SECTION 1. Title
This document shall be known as the “Town of Skowhegan Solid Waste Management
Ordinance.”
SECTION 2. Purpose and Authority
To ensure that wastes are properly separated to minimize the volume of waste placed at the solid
waste management facility, to encourage recycling and to enable effective management of waste,
it is necessary to regulate the disposition of waste within the Town of Skowhegan.
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as granted in Article VIII-A of the
Maine Constitution, Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3001 et. seq., and Title 38 M.R.S.A., Section
1305 et. seq.
SECTION 3. Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to all domestic, commercial, and industrial producers of solid waste
in the Town of Skowhegan.
SECTION 4. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. Amendments and Effective Date
This Ordinance may be amended as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3004 (4).
This Ordinance, and any amendments thereto, will become effective by a vote of a majority of
the voters at any regular or special town meeting.
SECTION 6. Abrogation
This Ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinances previously enacted to control the
management of solid waste.
2
SECTION 7. Definitions
The definitions set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1303 apply to this Ordinance and are
incorporated herein. Any word not otherwise defined shall have its ordinary meaning.
Staff: “Staff” means the person/persons employed by the Town of Skowhegan to work at the
Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility.
Board of Selectpersons: “Board of Selectpersons” means the Board of Selectpersons of the
Town of Skowhegan.
Licensed Commercial Hauler: “Licensed Commercial Hauler” means any person, firm or
organization that transports waste or recyclable materials in Skowhegan for a fee or other
remuneration and has met all the administrative obligations set forth in section 9.1.
Disposal Facility: “Disposal Facility” means the facility, which accepts solid waste under
contract from the Town of Skowhegan.
Operations and Maintenance Manual: “Operations and Maintenance Manual” means the manual
that is used for operations and maintenance of the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility.
Recyclable: “Recyclable” means any material that is considered recyclable in the general
provisions section of this Ordinance.
Residential Disposal Permit: “Residential Disposal Permit” means the sticker type permit that
authorizes Skowhegan residents to use the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility.
Solid Waste Management Facility: “Solid Waster Management Facility” meant the recycling
areas and transfer station located on the Steward Hill Road.
Temporary Disposal Permit: “Temporary Disposal Permit” means the permit that is issued
temporarily to non-resident taxpayers, contractors and others for access to and use of the
Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility to dispose of waste generated within the Town of
Skowhegan.
Town: “Town” means the Town of Skowhegan.
Waste Disposal Contract: “Waste Disposal Contract” means any contract between the Town of
Skowhegan and a licensed Disposal Facility.
SECTION 8. Administration
The Board of Selectpersons of the Town of Skowhegan will administer the provisions of this
Ordinance.
3
The Board of Selectpersons shall adopt, and amend, after public hearing, written Rules and
Regulations governing operation of the Solid Waste Management Facility including permitting
fees and terms for permits, right of inspection of materials, preparation of materials before dropoff
and other matters pertaining to the disposal of Solid Waste. The Rules and Regulations of
this Ordinance shall be periodically reviewed and revised to satisfy the needs of the Town as
well as State and Federal laws.
Administrative definitions and instructions shall be publicly posted to provide at least thirty (30)
days notice to residents prior to adoption.
The Board of Selectperson shall approve a structure of maximum fees, based upon the Town’s
experience with solid waste management under this ordinance.
The Board of Selectpersons shall adopt processing fees on items, other than municipal solid
waste, which provide incentives for recycling and offset increased handling costs resulting from
disposal of non-recyclable acceptable solid wastes. Fees shall be adopted based upon such
considerations as volume, type of material, and frequency of delivery.
SECTION 9. Permitting
The collection and transportation of waste and recyclable material, generated in the Town of
Skowhegan, is prohibited unless authorized by the Board of Selectpersons.
All residents who wish to deliver waste to the Solid Waste Management Facility must display a
Residential Disposal Permit, issued by the Town, on their vehicle. The vehicles current
registration is required to obtain a Residential Disposal Permit. Only one permit will be issued
to any vehicle at any time; to receive an additional permit a previous permit must be voided.
Any non-resident taxpayer, contractor, or person who wishes to use a vehicle not registered in
the Town of Skowhegan to transport waste generated within Skowhegan to the Facility, may
purchase a “Temporary Disposal Permit” for that particular vehicle. This Temporary Disposal
Permit must be with the vehicle it is assigned to at all times for inspection by a Facility
Attendant. The vehicles current registration is required to obtain a “Temporary Disposal
Permit.”
9.1
Any person who seeks to serve the Town as a commercial hauler, to collect and deliver
waste to any disposal facility or to transport recyclable materials to the Solid Waste
Management Facility, must have a valid commercial haulers license issued by the Town.
The following items must be submitted to the Town of Skowhegan when applying for a
commercial haulers license:
1. Current vehicle registrations for all vehicles that will be used in the ordinary course
of business.
4
2. A certificate of insurance generated for the Town of Skowhegan showing at a
minimum General Liability coverage of $400,000.00.
3. Annual fee for Commercial Hauler License as stated in the Rules and Regulations
section.
In addition, upon request, the following information must be provided to the Town for
review:
1. State of Maine Department of Environmental Protection Non-Hazardous Waste
Transporters License.
2. Route sheets for all routes serviced in the Town of Skowhegan.
3. Disposal tickets for up to two years prior to any request by the Town to review such
records.
SECTION 10. General Provisions
The Town of Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility is for the use of residents of
Skowhegan, non-resident tax payers, contractors generating waste from projects within
Skowhegan, commercial businesses located within Skowhegan and other entities that the
Selectpersons have a contractual agreement with.
The facility is closed on all declared legal holidays as designated under the Town of Skowhegan
Personnel Policy.
The use of the Facility by any person shall be at the strict direction of the Staff. If any person
violates any directives of the Staff that are within this Ordinance, or that have been adopted by
the Board of Selectpersons in the “Rules and Regulations” hereunder, that person will
immediately be refused access to the Facility and may be subject to prosecution and a fine as
provided for under SECTION 11 and 12 of this Ordinance.
The following items are prohibited from the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility as
well as any other disposal facility designated by this Ordinance or its Rules and Regulations:
A. Hazardous Waste;
B. Closed Containers;
5
C. Dead Animals or Animal parts;
D. Any material that may be classified as Unacceptable Waste as defined in any
contractual agreement for disposal with the Town.
Any clean up and all costs associated with proper disposal of the above mentioned
wastes, shall be borne by the person responsible for the disposition of same.
All aspects of the Operations and Maintenance Manual for the Transfer Station will be
part of the Rules and Regulations.
All aspects of the Waste Disposal Contract will be part of the Rules and Regulations.
All of the following components of the municipal solid waste stream will be source
separated for recycling purposes or for the purpose of the current method of disposal of
that item:
A. Corrugated cardboard;
B. Newspapers/telephone books;
C. Magazines
D. Brown craft paper bags;
E. Glass jars - clear, brown and green separated;
F. Cans - tin and aluminum separated;
G. Plastics - P.E.T. (polyethylene terephthalate)
H.D.P.E. (High density polyethylene) separately;
H. White goods;
I. Brown goods;
J. Tires;
K. Lead acid batteries;
L. Metals and light irons;
M. Mixed waste paper;
N. Construction/demolition debris;
O. Brush, limbs, clean wood waste; and
P. Leaves
All separation and recycling areas are designated by sign and/or instructions from staff.
No salvaging is permitted except as provided for in the Solid Waste Management Facility
“Rules and Regulations”.
The Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility is not available for the dumping of
industrial waste, rocks, debris, stumps, and Special Waste as defined in M.R.S.A. 38
Section 1303 and materials of a similar nature. Refuse is not to be deposited or left along
the road leading to the site. Persons doing so will be subject to prosecution and a fine as
provided for under SECTION 11 and 12 of this Ordinance and Maine State Law.
SECTION 11. Permit Denial, Suspension or Revocation
6
Issuance of a permit may be denied and any permit or license issued may be suspended or
revoked by the Solid Waste Management Facility Supervisor or Code Enforcement
Officer, for the following causes:
A. Violation of this Ordinance;
B. Violation of any provision of any state or local law, ordinance, code or
regulation which relates directly to the provisions of this Ordinance;
C. Violation of any license condition(s); and
D. Falsehoods, misrepresentations or omissions in the license application.
SECTION 12. Hearings
Anyone denied a permit or license, or whose permit or license is suspended or revoked
pursuant to SECTION 11, shall be entitled to notice and hearing before the Board of
Selectpersons if such request is made, in writing, within thirty (30) days of denial,
suspension or revocation.
Such hearings shall be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for
a hearing.
The permittee, licensee or applicant shall be notified, in writing, as to the date, time and
place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The permittee,
licensee or applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The Board of Selectpersons final determination relative to the denial, suspension or
revocation of a permit or license and the period of suspension or revocation shall take
effect as provided in the notice, but no later than ten (10) days after the date on which
such notice has been mailed to the permittee, licensee or applicant, and shall be
conclusive.
Notice of decision of the final determination shall set forth the reasons for the denial,
suspension or revocation and the effective dates thereof together with a statement that
such decision may be appealed as provided in the Ordinance.
Any controversy or claim arising out of, or, relating to the Board of Selectpersons
determination shall be directly reviewable by Superior Court pursuant to Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
SECTION 13. Enforcement
Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement
Officer, or the Chief of Police, depending on the type and nature of the offense
committed. Enforcement will include denial, suspension or revocation of a permit as
7
outlined in SECTION 11 and 12 and may involve any action necessary to protect the
integrity of this ordinance, including any process either civil, or criminal that is
authorized by State Statute.
The minimum fine for violating this Ordinance will be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
offense. Each day that a violation continues will be a separate offense.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY
RULES AND REGULATIONS
ADOPTED 3/8/94 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 3/8/94
AMENDED 10/11/94 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 11/12/94
AMENDED 9/26/95 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 10/26/95
AMENDED 8/27/96 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 9/27/96
AMENDED 7/8/97 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 8/8/97
AMENDED 9/8/98 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 10/8/98
AMENDED 10/13/98 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 11/13/98
AMENDED 7/27/99 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 8/27/99
AMENDED 1/26/00 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 2/26/00
AMENDED 2/12/02 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 3/14/02
AMENDED 10/22/02 SELECTMEN’S MEETING. EFFECTIVE DATE 11/22/02
I.
AUTHORITY: These rules and regulations are promulgated pursuant to the Town of
Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Ordinance.
II.
PURPOSE: To efficiently operate the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility, it is
necessary to establish rules and regulations that provide guidance to both Municipal Staff
and the public.
III.
DEFINITIONS: The definitions provided in the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management
Ordinance and in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1303 apply to these regulations. Any word not
otherwise defined shall have it’s ordinary meaning.
IV.
AMENDMENT: These rules and regulations may be amended by a majority vote of the
Selectpersons following 30 days public notice and a public hearing.
V.
RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. HOURS OF OPERATIONS
The Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility will be open as follows:
8
Summer hours: April 1 to September 30.
Tuesday’s from 7:00 A.M. to 5:45P.M.
Wednesday through Saturday from 7:00 A.M. to 3:45 P.M.
Winter hours: October 1 to March 31
Tuesday through Saturday 7:00 A.M. to 3:45 P.M.
Closed: Sunday, Monday and scheduled holidays.
B. FEES
Disposal
1. Tires:
Motorcycle $ 1.00
Race Car $ 2.00
Passenger vehicle (17" and under) $ 2.00
Truck (over 17") $ 6.50
Truck (over 17") on rim $ 10.00
Super Single $ 10.00
OFF ROAD:
Super single and small OTR 10 inch and under $ 50.00
Medium OTR 11 inch to 18 inch $ 75.00
Large OTR 19 inch and up $100.00
2. White Goods:
Freon containing appliances $ 10.00
Non-Freon containing appliances $ 5.00
3. Brown Goods:
TVs, stereos, radios, furniture, and computer monitors, etc. $ 5.00
Permits and Licenses
1. Commercial Hauler License $300.00
Reuse and Resale
Reuse and resale is encouraged as a form of recycling. An administrative fee will be
charged for items not in the designated area. Any item in the resale area will be sold
as marked.
2. A. Residential Sticker Permits $ 5.00
B. Temporary Written Permit $ 5.00
C. PREPARATION OF RECYCLABLES
The following items require source separation and special preparation before being
delivered to the Skowhegan Solid Waste Management Facility.
9
1. Corrugate cardboard:
Reasonably dry, no larger than 30" in any dimension, lose or bundled. Asian
and waxed cardboard as well as chipboard (cereal boxes, shoe boxes) are not
to be recycled with corrugated cardboard.
2. Newspaper/Telephone books:
Reasonably dry, bundled in bags or with twine, with all original inserts.
3. Mixed Paper:
All cereal boxes, shoe boxes, unwanted mail and other similar paper
materials should be reasonably dry, placed in separate storage from other
specific types of recyclable paper.
4. Magazines:
Reasonably dry, bundled with twine, separate from other types of paper.
5. Brown Paper Bags:
Reasonably dry, emptied, several placed inside one large brown paper bag.
6. Glass Jars:
Clear-Brown-Green
Rinsed, no lids, whole (not broken), separated by color.
7. Cans:
Tin and aluminum: rinsed, labels removed. Crushing is preferred, but is
optional.
8. Plastics:
P.E.T. and H.D.P.E. type plastic containers. Symbols and numbers are on
bottoms of most containers. Rinse and remove covers, crushing is preferred.
NOTE: Containers to be recycled must have symbol and correct number. All
other plastics are not collected for recycling at this time and must be disposed
of at the Transfer Station.
9. White Goods:
Major Appliances need no special preparation.
10. Lead Acid Batteries:
Must not be leaking, handled upright.
11. Metals and light irons:
Metals and light irons must have other materials removed and deposited in
designated disposal areas.
12. Office paper required by State Law:
10
Office paper must be packaged in clear/transparent bags, not to exceed
weight limit of the bag.
D. PREPARATION OF MATERIAL FOR DISPOSAL
1. All municipal household waste to be disposed of at the Waste Transfer
Station will be deposited at the facility in trash bags that are transparent
enough to allow for visual inspection of the contents.
2. Facility staff will periodically inspect Municipal Solid Waste to insure that
the items that are hazardous are not being deposited at the Waste Transfer
Station. Inspections will also be carried out to prevent disposal of recyclable
items.
3. Demolition debris will be accepted at the Waste Transfer Station under the
following conditions:
a. Prior approval will be required from the Waste Management Supervisor.
b. Material will be separated into three (3) basic elements; wood, metal,
other.
c. No load greater than two (2) cubic yards will be accepted at the Waste
Transfer Station during any 48-hour period. Quantities exceeding this
amount will be hauled directly to the designated Waste Disposal Facility.
4. Brown Goods:
Stereos, microwaves, TVs etc. do not need special preparation for disposal.
Attendants will designate the proper container for Brown Goods disposal.
5. Tires:
Tires do not require special preparation. Attendants will designate the proper
area for tire disposal.
6. Burnable brush, limbs and clean wood waste:
Brush and limbs should be no longer than twelve feet (12'). Brush and limbs
or any other part of the tree should be less than two feet (2’) in diameter.
Wood larger than two feet in diameter will require prior approval from the
Waste Management Supervisor.
7. Leaves:
Leaves will be deposited at the storage area specified by the attendant on
duty.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
Adopted: Town Meeting March 8, 1999
Amended: Town Meeting August 10, 2004
Amended: Town Meeting June 11, 2018
Amended: Town Meeting, June 10, 2019
Section 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Special Amusement Ordinance of the
Town of Skowhegan, Maine.
Section 2. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to control the dancing, or entertainment in facilities licensed by
the State of Maine to sell liquor as required by Title 28-A M.R.S.A.1054 with the exception of a
radio or other mechanical musical device.
Section 3. Repeal
All ordinances or parts thereof, inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this Ordinance are
hereby replaced.
Section 4. Severability
In the event that any section or any portion of this Ordinance shall be declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not be deemed to affect
the validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance.
Section 5. Authority
This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 28-A, M.R.S.A., Section 1054 and Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A., Section 3001.
Section 6. Enforcement
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department.
Special Amusement Ordinance Amended June 10, 2019
2
Section 7. Definitions
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the same
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
Available to the public means that the matter or performance or act may be purchased or
attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee arrangement, or for a separate fee for each
item or performance or act, or available merely by being a patron of or present in an
establishment that is licensed to sell liquor.
Dancer: means a person, other than a patron, under the licensee's control and dancing on the
licensee's premises to entertain patrons.
Disseminate means to transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
Entertainment shall include any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion for patrons or
customers of the licensed premises whether provided by professional or amateur entertainers, by
patrons, or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises, whose incidental duties
may include activities with an entertainment value.
Exotic Dancing shall mean the appearance of a person or persons, on the licensed premises, in
such a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva or
genitals or any simulation thereof, or when any female appears on a licensee’s premises in such
a manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast referred to as the aureole,
nipple, or simulation thereof. “Expose to view” shall be interpreted to mean, without limitation,
clear, see-through or clothing which is otherwise non-opaque.
Licensee shall include any person, individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other
legal entity which is the holder of a license for sale of liquor to be consumed on premises owned
by said licensee, or any agent or employee of any such license.
Material means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material or any
picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation or any statute or
other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction
or any other articles, equipment or machines.
Nudity or a State Of Nudity means the appearance of a human anus, pubic area, male genitals,
or female genitals with less than a fully opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state even if completely and opaquely covered.
Obscene shall mean to the average person applying contemporary community standards the
predominant appeal of the matter or act taken as a whole, is to prurient interest, and the matter or
act depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct or lewd exhibition of the
genitals or other body parts mentioned in this Section above, and the manner or act or
Special Amusement Ordinance Amended June 10, 2019
3
performance considered as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; or
any matter or acts or performance which are prohibited by the statutes of the State of Maine.
Performance means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance, or other exhibition, or
entertainment performed before an audience.
Performer means an entertainer who performs a dramatic or musical work for an audience.
Promote shall mean to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
Service to patron means the provision of services to customers, patrons, or any other persons
present in establishments providing food and beverages, including but not limited to hostessing,
hat-checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing,
and entertainment.
Section 8. Penalty
Except as otherwise provided by state law, anyone found guilty of violating any provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be recovered for the use of the Town of Skowhegan and
shall be subject to such other legal and equitable remedies as may be available to the Town. Each
day such violation occurs shall constitute a new and separate offense.
Section 9. General Requirements
a) A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern, or restaurant malt liquor licensee, as
defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, may charge admission.
b) With the exception of New Year’s eve festivities, all music, dancing and/or
entertainment subject to regulation under this ordinance, shall end no later than 01.00 A.M.
Music, entertainment and dancing on January 1 shall end no later than 02.00 A.M.
c) For any outdoor events, the Licensee of the premises shall contact the Chief of Police to
determine what arrangements, if any, are needed for hiring a law enforcement officer or
officers for the purpose of maintaining order and insuring the safety of the general public. The
cost of hiring an officer or officers shall be incurred by the Licensee.
Section 10. Conduct Constituting Offenses by Licensee
a) The Licensee shall not allow to remain on the premises any person or persons who are
visibly intoxicated, or any person or persons exhibiting confrontational behavior; or to permit
or gather a crowd, or audience, or patrons to witness any entertainment, amusement or show so
as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks in derogation of the public
health, safety or welfare.
Special Amusement Ordinance Amended June 10, 2019
4
b) The Licensee shall not allow on any licensed premise the making, creation, or maintenance
of excessive, unusually loud noise, which disturbs or endangers the peace, health or safety of an
individual or individuals. This is to be judged on a case by case basis at the discretion of the
Police Officer that responds to any complaint(s).
c) The Licensee shall not knowingly allow any licensed premises to be so conducted or
operated so as to be in violation of any ordinances, rules or regulations of the municipality, or
any statutes of the State of Maine.
d) The Licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises the use or occupancy thereof for
gambling or games of chances as prohibited by the statutes of the State of Maine (Title 8,
Chapter 31).
e) The Licensee, on any licensed premises, shall not:
1) Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any obscene
material; or
2) Knowingly make available to the public any obscene performance; or
3) Knowingly engage in commerce and/or for commercial gain with materials depicting
and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or excretion utilizing displays, circulars,
advertisements, or any public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the
basis of the prurient appeal; or
4) Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public view:
i) The Licensee’s or any of his agent’s or employee’s genitals, pubic hair, perineum,
anal region, or pubic hair region; or
ii) Any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the
genitals, pubic hair, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region.
5) Knowingly promotes the commission of any of the above listed acts of this section.
Section 11. Regulations for Entertainment.
The following regulations apply to the activities of performers hired by the Licensee to provide
entertainment in establishments holding a license to sell liquor:
a) No dancer shall dance in the establishment except within a designated area
that is clearly defined and separated from patrons.
b) No dancer shall dance closer than ten (10) feet from any patron.
c) There shall be no fondling, mingling, or caressing in the establishment between any
patron and any dancer with the intent to sexually arouse or excite a person’s sexual desire.
Special Amusement Ordinance Amended June 10, 2019
5
d) For establishments that have fewer than six (6) performances of adult entertainment in a
calendar year: The Licensee shall provide on the premises a separate dressing area for use
by dancers only.
For establishments that have six (6) or more performances of adult entertainment in a
calendar year: The Licensee shall provide on the premises a separate dressing area and toilet
facilities for use by dancers only.
e) Any licensed premises allowing exotic dancing shall be located at least seven hundred
and fifty (750) feet from any church, public or private school, library or any municipally
owned or state-owned park, athletic field or recreational facility that is open to the public
where children are the primary users.
For the purpose of this Ordinance, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises for exotic dancing to the nearest property line of a
church, school, library or to the nearest boundary of a park, athletic field or recreational
facility.
f) There shall be no graphic evidence on the exterior of any facility licensed under this
Ordinance of the dancers, either live or simulated, requiring the licensee, if necessary, to
black out windows or install curtains to prevent viewing of the dancers from the outside;
provided, nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the establishment from advertising, by
words, the nature of the entertainment.
Section 12. Inspections of Businesses
Whenever inspections of the licensed premises is required by ordinance, state law or is
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any town ordinance, code, regulation or state
law, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit any law enforcement officer, official or employee of the town authorized to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
STREET NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING ORDINANCE
APPROVED AT THE ANNUAL TOWN MEETING ON MARCH 11, 1996
AMENDED SPECIAL TOWN MEETING, AUGUST 2, 2001
AMENDED MARCH 8, 2004
SECTION 1: Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by
providing easy and rapid location of properties for law enforcement, fire, rescue and
emergency medical services personnel; and to establish an official street naming and
house numbering method for the Town of Skowhegan that will provide an actual physical
location, in conformity of address, between local property tax maps, mailing and other
delivery services, and the enhanced 911 telephone system.
SECTION 2: Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to and consistent with the Municipal Home Rule
Powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State
of Maine and Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 3001.
SECTION 3: Area of Applicability
This Ordinance shall apply to any street, public, or private; any building occupied or
vacant and any lot in the Town of Skowhegan.
SECTION 4: Administration
The Selectmen shall have the right to adopt guidelines to assist in the administration of
this ordinance.
SECTION 5: Authorization of Street Numbering
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Addressing Officer who shall have the sole
authorization to assign street numbers to any building or lot within the boundary lines of
the Town of Skowhegan. That number shall be the official address used for property
identification on Town records.
SECTION 6: Method of Street Numbering
A. Numbers shall be assigned every 50 (fifty) feet in rural areas, and every 10 or 25 feet
in urban areas along both sides of the road, with even numbers appearing on the left
side of the road and odd numbers appearing on the right side of the road, as the
numbers ascend from the point of origin.
B. All corner lots will be reserved a number for each street/road etc. it borders on, which
will allow for a building or vacant lot to be numbered according to the front property line.
C. Lowest numbers will start at the North Channel Bridge at the Kennebec River and
proceed sequentially toward the farthest most points.
NOTE: An exception to the above numbering system may be necessary to conform with
existing numbering systems in the contiguous towns.
D. In the event where more than one residence, commercial or industrial building is on a
lot, the rear dwelling or structure shall be numbered with a separate number.
SECTION 7: Numbers Affixed to Buildings
Upon written notification to do so from the Town, the owner or person in charge of any
residence, business, or other building shall, within thirty (30) days, cause to be affixed to
such residence, business, or other building the designated number. The number shall be
of reflective material, not less than three inches in height, and of a color that contrasts
with the background color, and placed on the building in such a manner as to be plainly
visible and legible from the street or to a person approaching from the street. Where the
building is placed at such a distance from the street or road that a number placed on it is
not plainly visible, the number shall be placed on a post or other suitable object in such a
manner as to be visible from the street. Any person who neglects or refuses so to number
such structure or erects a number other than that assigned shall be in violation of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 8: Naming System
All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named regardless of whether the
ownership is public or private. A “road” refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane,
private way, or similar paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. “Property” refers to any
property on which a more of less permanent structure has been or could be placed.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the sole authority to provide the name of a new street
that is to be maintained by the Town of Skowhegan. However, a subdivision street will
also be subject to approval by the Planning Board. All new streets to be maintained by
the Town shall have green signs.
SECTION 9: Privately Owned Ways
All private roads or ways, serving two or more numbered structures or providing access
to other privately owned ways, shall be named, approved by the Adressing Officer, and a
sign that conforms with municipal sign regulations shall be erected bearing that name.
New privately owned ways shall have blue signs. The expense of the sign shall be borne
by the owner of the property underlying the private road or way. Failure to erect such
sign shall cause the proper sign to be erected by the Town at the expense of the owner.
SECTION 10: Enforcement and Penalties
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Skowhegan. Upon finding a violation of this Ordinance, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to any or all of the owners, or persons in
charge of the residence, business or other building, stating the action necessary to achieve
compliance and a compliance date by which such action must be taken. If the person to
whom the notice is addressed does not correct the violation by the compliance date, such
person commits a civil violation for each day the violation remains uncorrected after the
compliance date and is subject to civil penalties of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent violation.
SECTION 11: Appeal
Any persons aggrieved by the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance may
appeal that action to the Town of Skowhegan Board of Appeals at any time within thirty
(30) days of notification, by informing the Town Clerk, in writing, of said appeal. No
appeal shall be considered to be a “de novo” action.
SECTION 12: Validity, Severability and Conflict with other Ordinances
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
SECTION 13: Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption, or amendment, by
vote of the municipal legislative body.
Chapter 32
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Adopted, Special Town Meeting 8/8/2000
Amended, Special Town Meeting 2/14/2012
Art. I. In General, §1 -7
Art. II. Driveways, §8 - 18
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 1. Selectmen’s authority to regulate sidewalks.
The Board of Selectmen shall have authority and shall make such regulations pertaining
to public sidewalks, as they may deem necessary for the safety, convenience and
protection of the public.
(Town Meeting, 3-10-56, §2)
Sec. 2. Enforcement.
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department or other official
duly appointed and authorized by the Board of Selectmen.
Sec. 3. Duty to remove snow, ice; duty to cover ice with sand, etc; penalty.
(a) The tenant or occupant of any store, shop, dwelling house, manufactory, hotel or
other building or any vacant lot of land bordering upon any sidewalk on the business
parts of Madison Avenue, Russell, Water, and Court Streets, and in case there shall be no
tenant, the owner or any person having the care or control of any building or lot of land
bordering upon the forenamed streets, after the ceasing to fall of any snow, if in the
daytime within four (4) hours, and if in the nighttime before 10:00 A.M. of the following
day, unless such following day be Sunday or a holiday, shall cause the same to be
removed from such sidewalk.
This provision shall be construed to extend to the removing of snow falling from any roof
upon such sidewalk; but no person shall be required to remove any snow as aforesaid on
Sunday. Such tenant, occupant or owner, whenever ice has formed upon any sidewalk, as
aforesaid, shall cause the same to be removed or to be properly covered or strewed with
sand, ashes or other suitable substance in such a manner as to render such sidewalk safe
and convenient for foot travelers.
(b) Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provisions of this section
shall be punishable upon conviction by a civil forfeiture not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for any one offense. Each day of the violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
State law reference - Authority to provide for the removal of snow and ice from
sidewalks, 30-A M.R.S.A. §3001
Sec. 4. Extending awnings, signs over sidewalks; penalty.
The owner of any building adjoining the street may extend an awning or sign therefrom
over the sidewalk to the outer edge thereof and not further; provided, that no part of the
awning, sign or fixture shall be lower than seven (7) feet above the sidewalk, and any
person who shall extend any awning or sign over any sidewalk in any other manner,
without written permission from the municipal officers, shall be subject to a civil
forfeiture not to exceed one-hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation.
Sec. 5. Maintaining tables, tents, booths, carriages in streets for sale or exhibition;
penalty.
No person shall place or maintain any table, tent, booth, or stall, or any carriage or cart in
any public street or way within the limits of the Town of Skowhegan for any sale or
exhibition without first obtaining the written permission of the Town Manager or his/her
designee. Violators of this section shall be subject to a civil forfeiture not to exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation.
Sec. 6 Transfer of merchandise over sidewalks.
On streets not otherwise restricted, merchandise may be transferred from or to trucks or
other vehicles over the sidewalk by the use of skids or planks, only when reasonably
necessary and provided the sidewalk is not unreasonably obstructed, and then only for
such period of time as is necessary, and if the sidewalk and travel thereon is obstructed
by skids or planks for an unreasonable time, any police officer in the course of his/her
duty may order such skids or planks removed, and if not removed he may remove or
cause to be removed, at the expense of the offender.
Cross reference - License and Business Regulations section 10-2.
Sec. 7. Riding bicycles, skateboards or rollerblades
No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard or rollerblades on the following sidewalks
Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Water Street
? South side from the junction of Island Avenue to the easterly side of the veteran’s
memorial.
? North side from the junction of Madison to the junction of North Ave.
Madison Avenue
? West side from the junction of Island Avenue to the junction of Elm Street.
? East side from the junction of Water Street to the junction of Russell Street
(Commercial Street).
Russell Street (Commercial Street)
? South side from the junction of Water Street to the junction of Madison Avenue.
? North side from the junction of Court Street to the junction of Madison Avenue.
Court Street
? East side from the junction of Water Street to the junction of High Street.
? West side from the junction of Russell Street to the junction of High Street.
Bloomfield Bridge
? From the junction of the River View parking lot to the junction of Mt. Pleasant
Avenue.
Penalty
(A) For a first offense, the police officer shall issue a written warning to that
person in violation of this section.
(B) For a second or subsequent offense, any person in violation of this section
commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture not to exceed twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) may be adjudged, or if the person consents, the police officer
may seize and hold the bicycle, skateboard or rollerblades for a time not to
exceed seven (7) days.
ARTICLE II. DRIVEWAYS
Article II, Repealed February 14, 2012
See:
Skowhegan Road and Entrance Design Standards Ordinance Adopted February 14,
2012, Special Town Meeting, Article #3

Town of Skowhegan
Subdivision Review Ordinance
Ordinance History:
Approved March 6, 1989
Amended March 12, 1990
Amended March 11, 1991
Amended March 9, 1992
Amended March 9, 1993
Amended March 13, 1995
Amended March 9, 1996
Amended March 10, 1997
Amended March 10, 1998
Amended March 12, 2001
Amended March 11, 2002
Amended March 10, 2003
Amended March 8, 2004
Amended March 7, 2005
Amended June 7, 2010
Amended February 14, 2012
Amended June 11, 2012
Page 1
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSES AND STATUTORY REVIEW CRITERIA
1.1 Purposes. The purposes of this ordinance are:
A. To provide for an expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed
subdivisions;
B. To assure new development in the Town of Skowhegan meets the goals and
conforms to the policies of the Skowhegan Comprehensive Plan;
C. To assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the people of the
Town of Skowhegan;
D. To protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural resources identified
in the Skowhegan Comprehensive Plan;
E. To assure that a minimal level of services and facilities are available to the residents
of new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions are capable of supporting the
proposed uses and structures;
F. To minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring properties
and on the Town of Skowhegan; and
G. To promote the development of an economically sound and stable community.
1.2. Statutory Review Criteria: When reviewing any application for a subdivision, the
planning board shall find that the criteria found in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404 have been
met. As of the enactment of this ordinance, those criteria require that the proposed
subdivision:
A. Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, it shall
at least consider:
1. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains;
2. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste
disposal;
3. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents;
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and
5. The applicable State and local health and water resources rules and regulations;
B. Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the
subdivision;
C. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be
used;
Page 2
D. Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the land’s capacity to hold
water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results;
E. Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe
conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing or
proposed and, if the proposed subdivision requires driveways or entrances onto a
state or state aid highway, located outside the urban compact area of an urban
compact municipality, the Department of Transportation has provided
documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23,
section 704 and any rules adopted under that section;
F. Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized;
G. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the Town’s ability to dispose of solid
waste if municipal services are to be utilized;
H. Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area,
aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural
areas or any public rights for physical or visual access to the shoreline;
I. Is in conformance with the duly adopted subdivision ordinance, comprehensive
plan, development plan or land use plan. In making this determination, the board
may interpret these ordinances and plans;
J. The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the standards
of this ordinance.
K. Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any pond or lake or
within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or river as defined in Title 38, sections
435 through 490, or within 250 feet of tidal waters, will not adversely affect the
quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of such body of
water.
L. Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the
quality or quantity of ground water
M. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the
applicant whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any
part of it, is in such an area, the applicant shall determine the 100-year flood
elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed
subdivision or project plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that
Page 3
principal structures in the subdivision will be constructed with their lowest floor,
including the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation;
N. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been identified on
any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these
wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done with the help of the
local soil and water conservation district;
O. All farmland within the proposed subdivision has been identified on maps
submitted as part of the application. Any mapping of farmland may be done with
the help of the local soil and water conservation district;
P. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision has been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For purposes of this
section, "river, stream or brook" has the same meaning as in Title 38, section 480-
B, subsection 9;
Q. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water management;
R. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river, stream,
brook, great pond or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title 38,
section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision have a lot depth to
shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1;
S. The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not unreasonably
increase a great pond's phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and
life of the proposed subdivision;
T. For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed
subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which part
of the subdivision is located.
U. Lands subject to liquidation harvesting. Timber on the parcel being subdivided has
not been harvested in violation of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12, M.R.S.A
section 8869, subsection 14. If a violation of rules adopted by the Maine Forest
Service to substantially eliminate liquidation harvesting has occurred, the Planning
Board must determine prior to granting approval for the subdivision that 5 years
have elapsed from the date the landowner under whose ownership the harvest
occurred acquired the parcel. The Planning Board may request technical assistance
from the Department of Conservation, Bureau of Forestry to determine whether a
rule violation has occurred, or the Board may accept a determination certified by a
forester licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 76. If the Bureau agrees to provide
assistance, it shall make a finding and determination as to whether a rule violation
has occurred. If the Bureau notifies the Planning Board that it will not provide
assistance, the Board may require a subdivision applicant to provide a
Page 4
determination certified by a licensed forester. For the purposes of this subsection,
"liquidation harvesting" has the same meaning as in Title 12, M.R.S.A section
8868, subsection 6 and "parcel" means a contiguous area within one municipality,
township or plantation owned by one person or a group of persons in common or
joint ownership.
Page 5
ARTICLE 2 - AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2.1 Authority.
A. These standards have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A., §4403.
B. These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinance of the
Town of Skowhegan, Maine."
2.2 Administration.
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Skowhegan, hereinafter called the Board, shall
administer this ordinance.
B. The provisions of this ordinance shall pertain to all land and buildings proposed for
subdivision within the boundaries of the Town of Skowhegan.
2.3 Amendments.
A. These regulations may be amended by a majority vote at a legally convened town
meeting of the Town of Skowhegan.
B. A public hearing shall be held prior to the enactment of any amendment. Notice of
the hearing shall be provided at least seven days in advance of the hearing.
2.4 Conflict with Other Ordinances
These Standards shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with
any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where
these Standards impose a greater restriction upon the use of land or structure, the provisions
of these Standards shall control.
2.5 Validity and Severability
If any section or provision of these Standards is declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
2.6 Abrogation
This Ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to control
the development of Subdivisions in the Town of Skowhegan.
Page 6
ARTICLE 3 -- DEFINITIONS
In general, words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their customary dictionary
meanings. More specifically, certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
Abutting Property: All parcels of land which share a common boundary or adjoin at any line or
point, or which are separated only by a street, right-of-way, or stream. An abutter is a person
who is the listed owner of abutting property as recorded in the Town of Skowhegan tax records.
Building Envelope: The space within a lot in which a building may be placed. A building
envelope excludes all areas which are unbuildable due to wetlands, excessive slopes, protected
areas or legal restrictions such as setbacks, separation requirements or easements.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the
required fee and all information required by this ordinance, as determined by the planning office
or by a vote by the board to waive the submission of required information.
Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive plan of the Town of Skowhegan, or any other locally
adopted policy documents including, but not limited to plans for open space, downtown
redevelopment, or historic preservation.
Drinking Water Standards: Thresholds for contaminants set by the Maine Department of Health
and Human Services. Standards have been established for contaminants which pose a health
threat (“primary”) and those which pose an aesthetic concern (“secondary”).
Driveway: A vehicular access way serving one or two dwelling units or commercial traffic of
fewer than 50 vehicle trips per day.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which is separate from other such
rooms or suites of rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and
sanitary facilities; includes single family houses, manufactured housing, and the units in a
duplex, apartment house, multi-family dwellings, and residential condominiums.
Farmland: Any area of five (5) or more acres of land that is classified as prime farmland, unique
farmland, or farmland of statewide importance by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation
Service, or is used for the production of agricultural products as defined in 7 M.R.S.A. section
152 (2).
Flood-prone Area: Those land areas which are susceptible to inundation during a 100-year flood
(a flood with a one percent probability of occurring in any given year). Flood-prone areas shall
include mapped areas of floodplain and floodway (zones A or AE). Where maps are unavailable
or of insufficient accuracy, a determination may be made by a licensed professional surveyor.
Freshwater Wetland: A freshwater wetland means freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas, which are:
Page 7
A. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence
of wetland vegetation typically adopted for life in saturated soils; and
B. Not considered part of a great pond, river, stream or brook.
These areas may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the
criteria of the subsection.
Frontage: That portion of a lot boundary which abuts a street or shoreline. A frontage
measurement consists of the horizontal distance between the points where side lot lines intersect
the street or shoreline. On lots with more than one frontage, such as corner lots, a requirement
for street frontage shall apply to only one frontage.
Hydrogeologic Assessment: An assessment of groundwater quantity, quality, availability, and
movement, for the purpose of determining whether adequate water supply exists for development
needs without significant negative impact to neighboring properties.
Level of Service: A measurement of the traffic conditions on a street, based on a scale of A-F, as
described by the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation Research Board.
Lot Length (Lot Width): The horizontal distance between front and rear (length) or side (width)
lot lines. Where lots are not rectangular, length and width shall be calculated as the average
distance between the most-parallel lines of the lot.
Medium Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey designating areas of similar characteristics with
accuracy as small as three acres. For Skowhegan, the Soil Survey of Somerset County, Maine;
Southern Part, published by the USDA, Soil Conservation Service, is recognized as a medium
intensity soil survey.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under single ownership, improved for the placement of
three or more mobile homes which are owned or leased by individuals other than the landowner.
Open Space: Land within or related to a subdivision, not within an individual lot or part of a
right-of-way, which is essentially unimproved and set aside for the common use and enjoyment
of residents of the subdivision.
Performance Guarantee: Any surety or commitment that may be accepted by the Town of
Skowhegan to assure that infrastructure improvements required as part of the subdivision
approval will be satisfactorily completed.
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as
well as an individual.
Page 8
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Skowhegan. Where the term “board” is
used in this ordinance, it shall refer to the planning board unless a different board is specifically
mentioned.
Point of Curvature: The point at which a straight line meets a curved line.
Principal Structure: Any building or structure in which the main use of the premise takes place.
Public Water Supply System: A water supply system that provides drinking water to at least 15
service connections or services water to at least 25 individuals daily.
Staff Review Committee: The committee established and described in section II.B of the
Skowhegan Site Plan Review Ordinance.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads and other
rights-of-way, as well as areas on Subdivision Plans designated as right-of-ways.
Subdivision: A subdivision shall be as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4401, with the
following modifications:
A lot of 40 (forty) or more acres shall not be counted as a subdivision lot for purpose of
review; and
A new commercial development shall be reviewed exclusively under the Town of
Skowhegan Site Plan Review Ordinance, regardless of the number of occupancies. An
existing lot or building which is to be divided into multiple lots or occupancies shall be
reviewed as a subdivision if it is not otherwise required to be reviewed under the Site
Plan Review Ordinance.
Tract, or Parcel of Land: All contiguous land in same ownership, whether or not the tract is
separated at any point by an intermittent or non-navigable stream, or a private road established
by the abutting land owners.
Traffic Impact Analysis: A study and report assessing road and traffic conditions with and
without the addition of traffic from a proposed development, and which includes an analysis of
mitigation measures necessary to address congestion or unsafe conditions on public roads.
Variance: Modification or relief of a provision of this ordinance, as granted by the Skowhegan
Board of Appeals. A variance shall only be granted in cases of undue hardship.
Vehicle Trip: A single, one-way motor vehicle movement past a point or into or out of a subject
property.
Waiver: A modification of one or more submission requirements for subdivision review, granted
by the planning board upon a finding that the submission requirement is not necessary to proper
review of the application.
Page 9
ARTICLE 4 -- PREAPPLICATION
4.1 Procedure:
The purpose of the preapplication is to provide the prospective applicant with guidance and
direction to facilitate the application process, and to inform the planning board regarding
the timing and scope of the application.
4.1.1 The prospective applicant shall submit to the Town a preapplication showing, in
simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan, which may be a free-hand
penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to describe or
outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development. The
sketch plan may be accompanied by either a copy of the assessors map or the
USGS topographic map showing the parcel to be subdivided.
4.1.2 The planning office shall schedule a preapplication review meeting with the
planning board at the first meeting consistent with the item appearing on the
published agenda (seven (7) days prior.)
4.1.3 The planning board, at the preapplication review meeting, will provide guidance
to the prospective applicant as follows:
? A determination of the scope of the application, for example, whether it
contains roads or other utilities which may require detailed information, or
whether the proposed subdivision may need permits or review by state or
federal agencies and the proposed timeline for approval;
? A determination of a suitable contour interval to be utilized on the Plan, and
whether additional submittals, such as a traffic study, erosion control plan, or
analysis of special historic or ecological resources, should be included;
? An opinion concerning any waivers to submission requirements to be
proposed by the applicant.
? An opinion on the requirement for and amount of a technical review fee.
4.1.4 The planning board may hold an on-site inspection of the property. The applicant
shall, if requested by the board, place “flagging” at the center of any proposed
streets and at the approximate intersections of the street center lines and lot
corners prior to the on-site inspection.
4.2 Rights Not Vested:
The pre-application review shall not be considered the initiation of the review process for
the purposes of bringing the Plan under the protection of Title 1 M.R.S.A § 302.
Page 10
ARTICLE 5 – REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
5.1 General
Review of subdivision applications by the Town of Skowhegan is intended to meet the
statutory requirements of 30-A M.R.S.A. §4401 et seq. and to give public service providers
adequate information for the efficient servicing of the development. The application
process is designed to permit information relevant to the development to be presented for
technical review and board approval while incurring the least financial and administrative
burden on the applicant.
5.2 Preliminary Review Procedure
5.2.1 In order to assure that the preapplication discussions between the board and the
applicant remain timely, an application shall be submitted as soon as the applicant is
prepared following the pre-application meeting. Under normal circumstances, the
application should be submitted within ninety (90) days of the pre-application
meeting; however, the board and applicant may mutually agree upon a longer time
limit provided circumstances of the property or the law have not changed.
5.2.2 A completed application shall be submitted to the Skowhegan planning office. The
planning office will provide the applicant with a dated receipt of application and
fees. The planning office shall determine whether the application contains all of the
elements required to be submitted by section 5.4 of this ordinance. The planning
office will notify the applicant within ten (10) working days if the application is
complete. If the application is not complete, the planning office will list the items
that must be submitted to form a complete application. This procedure will be
repeated until the application has been determined to be complete.
5.2.3 Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted, the planning
office shall place the application on the agenda of the board for review at its next
meeting, provided that the meeting is no less than fourteen (14) days in advance, to
allow for adequate notice. The office shall also:
? Schedule a meeting of the Staff Review Committee;
? Notify, within seven (7) days, all owners of abutting property that an application
for subdivision approval has been submitted and the time and place that the board
will meet to discuss the application;
? Publish notice of the date, time, and place of the board’s meeting in a newspaper
of general circulation within the Town of Skowhegan at least two (2) times, the
date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting; and
? When a Subdivision is located within 500 feet of a municipal boundary, notify the
Clerk and the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality involved, at least ten
(10) days prior to the meeting.
Page 11
5.2.4 The Skowhegan Staff Review Committee shall meet on a date prior to the board’s
meeting, for the purpose of providing technical advice to the board’s review. The
applicant is not required to attend this meeting; however, he/she is strongly advised
either to attend or to meet with or provide information to individual department
heads/committee members prior to the meeting to facilitate discussion and answer
questions. The staff review committee will prepare a written set of findings and
recommendations to the board by the time of its meeting to review the application.
5.2.5 Board review of the application shall be conducted in open, public session. The
conduct of the meeting shall be as follows:
? The applicant or his/her representative shall attend and give an oral presentation
concerning the application;
? The planning office will present the findings and recommendations of the staff
review committee;
? Members of the public who wish to may speak for, against, or concerning the
application. The applicant may respond to questions if permitted by the
Chairman of the board;
? The board will act on any request by the applicant to waive submission
requirements;
? The board will engage in deliberations concerning the application. The applicant
is entitled to participate in these deliberations. Members of the public may speak
during this period only at the discretion of the Chairman of the board.
? The board shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall vote to
approve or deny the application.
5.2.6 The board is not required to complete review of the application in one meeting. The
board may defer any portion of the decision-making process to a subsequent
meeting. The vote to approve or deny the application will take place no more than
thirty-five (35) days from the date of the initial meeting for board review, unless a
delay is mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the board.
5.2.7 If any portion of the Subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, the board shall offer
to meet jointly with reviewing authorities from each affected municipality to discuss
the application.
5.3 Final Review Procedure
5.3.1 Preliminary approval of the application shall be conditional. When granting
preliminary approval, the Board shall state, in writing, the conditions of such
approval. Conditions shall include, but not be limited to:
1. The final subdivision plan will contain an actual field survey of the boundary
lines of the tract and individual lots, giving complete descriptive data by
bearings and distances. The corners of the tract and all lots shall be located on
the ground and marked by monuments. The Plan shall indicate the type of
Page 12
monument set or found at each lot corner and be signed and sealed by a
licensed professional land surveyor.
2. The final plan will include final designs and cost estimates for any public
improvements (roads, utilities, etc.) proposed to be built or improved. A
performance guarantee shall be provided, in accordance with section 7.1 of this
ordinance. The performance guarantee will be approved by the Skowhegan
Board of Selectmen prior to submittal.
3. The final plan will be accompanied by a copy of any easements, rights-of-way,
offers of cession of land or facilities, articles of incorporation and bylaws of
homeowners’ associations, or other legal documents associated with the plan.
Where necessary, such documents will be approved by the Skowhegan Board
of Selectmen prior to submittal.
4. If required, the final plan will include an Erosion Control Plan, prepared in
accordance with or at least equivalent to the standards contained in the latest
revised edition of the Environmental Quality Handbook published by the U.S.
Soil Conservation Service. and a Stormwater Management Plan prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer, in accordance with or at least equivalent to
the latest revised edition of Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, published by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
5. The final plan will be accompanied by copies of permits received by the
applicant from state or federal reviewing authorities.
The final plan will show on its face the terms of any conditions imposed on approval
by the board which cannot be met by the time of final plan signing.
5.3.2 The applicant shall submit the final plan to the Skowhegan planning office. If the
plan is not received within twelve (12) months of approval of the plan by the board,
the planning office may require a new planning board review of the application
under the rules then applying.
5.3.3 The planning office shall review and certify that all of the documents and such
changes as may be required by the board’s conditions of approval have been
included. The planning office shall make this determination within ten (10) working
days of submission of the plan. The planning office shall inform the applicant in
writing that all conditions of approval have been met, or shall note deficiencies.
5.3.4 The planning office shall submit the final plan to the board for final review and
signature at the next available meeting, but not less than seven (7) days from the
time of its determination. The planning office shall note in its submission any
changes to the plan or continuing conditions of approval.
Page 13
5.3.5 The signing by the board of a Subdivision Plan shall not be deemed to constitute or
evidence acceptance by the Town of any street, easement or title to land area shown
on such Plan.
5.4 Application Submission Requirements
5.4.1 All applications shall include sufficient and legible copies for technical and
administrative review. These shall include:
? Eight (8) copies of the application, attachments, and plan drawings reduced to fit on
11 x 17 pages. Except that reports, plans, or third party permitting materials that
exceed twenty pages in length may be submitted in electronic form.
? Three (3) copies of plan drawings at a size of 24 x 36 inches. Subdivision plats
shall be drawn at a scale of no smaller than one hundred feet (100’) to the inch.
Design plans for streets, water and sewer facilities, and other infrastructure shall
include plans, profiles, and cross-sections, as appropriate.
? For the final plan only, the page for planning board signature shall be 24 x 36
inches in size and shall be presented on a reproducible, stable based transparent
original. Two (2) copies shall be provided, one to be retained by the Town and one
to be filed in the Somerset County Registry of Deeds.
? The plat of the final plan shall also be submitted in electronic form, suitable to be
imported into the Town’s GIS database.
5.4.2 Application for subdivision approval shall be submitted on a form provided by the
Town. The application shall be accompanied by the items listed in sections 5.4.3
and 5.4.4 below.
5.4.2.1 All applications shall be accompanied by a review fee in the amount specified in
the fee schedule adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
5.4.2.2 Where required, an application shall be accompanied by a technical review fee
in an amount to be specified by the board. The technical review fee is
authorized to be assessed against the applicant to pay for the cost of professional
expertise not ordinarily available to the board. To the extent that it is not used
in review of the application, it shall be refunded to the applicant upon
conclusion of the process.
5.4.3 Items to be included on the subdivision plan drawing:
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and municipality(ies) in which it is located,
together with assessor’s map and lot number(s) and street address if available.
2. Name and address of the applicant, his/her agent, and the person(s) who
prepared the application.
Page 14
3. Contour lines at the interval specified by the board, showing elevations in
relation to Mean Sea Level. (Most common contour interval is five feet (5'))
4. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property
lines, existing buildings, and other essential existing physical features.
5. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic north point, declination, and graphic
map scale.
6. The boundary lines of the tract being subdivided and the proposed lot lines
with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
7. The boundaries of all water bodies, wetlands or significant vernal pools
located on the tract, and location of any shoreland zoning boundaries affecting
the tract.
8. If any portion of the Subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of
any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on
the Plan.
9. The approximate alignment and dimensions of any road(s) proposed to be
constructed or improved to serve the subdivision.
10. The size, type, and location of water lines, sewer lines, hydrants, fire ponds,
drainage facilities, street lights, electric and telephone lines and other utilities
designed to service the subdivision.
11. The boundaries of any farmland within the tract.
12. A location map insert showing an outline of the subdivision and any
remaining portion of the owner’s property at a scale sufficient to show
adjacent roads, water bodies, municipal boundaries and other significant
features in the vicinity.
5.4.4 Items to be included with the application as attachments:
1. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property by means of a deed, lease,
signed purchase and sales agreement or similar document.
2. A copy of the deed from which the original survey was based together with
copies of all covenants or deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other
encumbrances currently affecting the property.
3. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions proposed to cover all or part of
the subdivision.
Page 15
4. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the Subdivision. When
sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface sewage disposal system,
test pit analyses, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. A
map showing the location of all test pits on the site shall be submitted. (Form
HHE 200 – Page 2 of 3)
5. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the Subdivision.
When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement from
the water company shall be submitted indicating that the company has
capacity to provide sufficient pressure and volume to the subdivision. When
water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate ground water
supply and quality shall be submitted in the form of test wells or a written
statement from either a well driller or a geologist familiar with the area.
6. A description of fire protection measures to be available within the
subdivision. Proposed sources of water not associated with the public water
supply system must be reviewed by the fire chief prior to submittal of the
application.
7. The names and addresses of owners of record of abutting property, including
any property directly across an existing public street from the subdivision.
8. A medium intensity soil survey covering the subdivision. When the medium
intensity soil survey shows soils which are generally unsuitable for the uses
proposed, the applicant shall provide a high intensity soil survey or a report by
a Registered Soil Scientist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced in
geotechnics, indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.
9. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicle trips to be generated on a daily
basis and at peak hours. For subdivisions involving forty (40) or more
parking spaces or projected to generate more than 400 vehicle trips per day, a
traffic impact analysis, prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer with
experience in traffic, shall be submitted. The Traffic Impact Analysis shall
indicate recommended improvements to maintain the desired level of service
on affected streets in the vicinity.
10. An affidavit that no timber harvesting has occurred on the tract within the
preceding five (5) years, or if it has, that it has not been conducted in violation
of rules adopted pursuant to 12 M.R.S.A. §8869(14). The affidavit may be
signed by a licensed forester or an agent of the Maine Bureau of Forestry.
11. An estimate of the costs of public improvements and a proposed form of
Performance Guarantee.
Page 16
12. Any other plans or specifications as determined by the board, necessary to
review the Subdivision, including, but not limited to, an erosion control plan,
a preliminary street construction plan and a stormwater management plan.
5.5 Waivers to Submission Requirements
5.5.1 The board may grant a waiver to a submission requirement only where it finds that
there are special circumstances of a particular development, provided the public
health, safety, and welfare are protected, and provided the waiver would not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan or this
ordinance.
5.5.2 The board may grant a waiver of the submission requirements only upon viewing the
otherwise-completed application. The submitted application shall specify any
submission requirements proposed for waiver and the reasons for the request. The
planning office will note the requested waivers in its report to the board and the
board will act on them prior to its deliberation on the application.
5.5.3 The board shall make a written record of waivers granted and the reasons for
granting them. The record shall be attached to the record of decision on the
application.
5.6 Revisions to Approved Plans
5.6.1 An applicant for a revision to a previously approved Plan shall submit the
application to the planning office. The application shall identify the subdivision and
original approval date and describe the nature of the revision being sought. If the
revision involves a change to any of the plan drawings, the revised plan drawing (s)
shall be included with the application.
5.6.2 If the proposed revision does not involve the adjustment of lot boundaries or the
creation of a new lot or unit, the planning office will act to approve or deny the
application. The planning office will make a written record of its action to attach to
the subdivision file. The planning office will act within ten (10) working days.
5.6.3 If the proposed revision does involve the adjustment of lot boundaries or the creation
of a new lot or unit, the planning office will submit the application to the board for
official review and action, in accordance with the procedure in section 5.2 of this
ordinance. The planning office may require additional items to be submitted for the
review, provided that the office shall not unreasonably impose submission
requirements not related to the requested revision.
5.6.4 The board’s scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which are
proposed to be revised. The board shall use the ordinance standards currently in
effect at the time of review of the proposed revision.
Page 17
5.7 Appeals
5.7.1 Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board or the planning office regarding any
proposed Subdivision, or any person requesting a variance to the terms of this
ordinance may appeal to the Board of Appeals created for such purposes - as
provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. §2691 et seq. Any appeal must be submitted within
thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed.
5.7.2 Any appeal taken to the Board of Appeals under this ordinance shall be an appellate
review and shall be based on the evidence, testimony and information upon which
the board or planning office made their original decision. No appeal shall be
considered to be a “de novo” action.
5.7.3 The Board of Appeals shall grant a variance only when the applicant can prove a
condition of undue hardship, as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 4353(4) or
successor statute.
5.7.4 Any person or Board aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal
such decision to Somerset County Superior Court within thirty (30) days.
Page 18
ARTICLE 6 – REVIEW CRITERIA AND STANDARDS
6.1 Interpretation of Criteria and Standards
The provisions of this article are intended to assure that each of the statutory review
criteria has been met. Each criterion is accompanied by a set of development standards.
Compliance with development standards is prima facie evidence of meeting the criteria.
However, applicants for subdivision approval may propose alternative designs and
approaches that will satisfy the criteria equally as well or better than the ordinance
standards. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate
that criteria have been met. This shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the
board to require additional evidence or impose additional standards based on
characteristics of the site or development.
6.2 Pollution
6.2.1 Criterion: Will not result in undue water or air pollution.
6.2.2 Standard:
Discharge of point source pollutants is regulated by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act. The applicant
may demonstrate compliance with this criterion if he or she is required to obtain a
permit from Maine DEP and does so.
Non-point pollutants are controlled by the proper management of storm water.
The applicant will identify all land disturbance created by development of the
subdivision, and will provide for management of storm water flows as provided in
section 6.18, below.
6.3 Sufficient Water
6.3.1 Criterion: Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of
the subdivision;
6.3.2 Standards:
6.3.2.1 The applicant shall provide a written statement from the water company that
adequate water for both domestic and fire fighting purposes can be provided
without placing an undue burden on the source, treatment facilities or
distribution system involved.
6.3.2.2 When the location of a subdivision does not allow for a financially reasonable
connection to a municipal water supply system, based on a fiscal analysis, the
Page 19
board may allow the use of individual wells or a licensed public community
water system.
6.3.2.2.1 If a public water supply system is provided by the subdivider, the
location and protection of the source, and the design, construction and
operation of the system and shall conform to the Standards of the Maine
Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144 A.C.M.R. 231). The
applicant will demonstrate that an adequate wellhead protection zone
exists and submit a wellhead protection management plan.
6.3.2.2.2 If individual wells are proposed for the subdivision, the applicant will
provide evidence of the quantity and quality of the aquifer. A test well
may be driven on the tract and test results provided to the board or the
applicant may provide test results demonstrating both quantity and
quality from at least two (2) existing wells within five hundred (500)
feet of the tract to be subdivided.
6.3.2.3 If proposed lots will not be accessible to the public water supply, the
subdivider will construct ponds, dry hydrants, or measures to provide for
adequate water storage for firefighting purposes. An easement shall be
granted to the Town granting access to the water source where necessary. If
buildings within the subdivision will be provided with sprinkler systems, the
board may reduce this requirement accordingly.
6.4 Impact on Existing Water Supplies
6.4.1 Criterion: Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if
one is to be used.
6.4.2 Standards:
6.4.2.1 When a Subdivision is to be served by a public water system, the complete
distribution system, including expansion of existing distribution lines if
necessary, shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider.
6.4.2.2 The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections
shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the water company.
6.5 Soil Erosion
6.5.1 Criterion: Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the land’s
capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
6.5.2 Standards:
Page 20
6.5.2.1 Soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies must be
minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of Maine Erosion
and Sediment Control BMPs, published by DEP (March, 2003 or as revised).
All areas of soil disturbed in the development of the subdivision will be
addressed by the provisions of the Erosion Control Plan prepared in
accordance with the above-cited manual.
6.5.2.2 Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed
from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and
building excavations.
6.5.2.3 Except for normal thinning, landscaping, and cutting trees to provide access
to sunlight, existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion and
minimize storm water runoff.
6.6 Traffic Conditions
6.6.1 Criterion: Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or
unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the highways or public roads existing
or proposed.
6.6.2 Standards:
6.6.2.1 Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the subdivision and circulation
within the subdivision in such a manner as to safeguard against hazards to
traffic and pedestrians, to avoid traffic congestion on any street, and to
provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the
subdivision. More specifically, access and circulation shall conform to the
following standards and the design criteria below:
1. Vehicular access to the subdivision should be arranged, whenever possible,
to avoid traffic use of existing residential streets.
2. Where a subdivision lot is proposed to have frontage on two or more streets,
access to the lot shall be restricted to the street where there is lesser potential
for traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic and pedestrians.
3. The street giving access to the subdivision and neighboring streets which
can be expected to carry traffic to and from the subdivision shall have traffic
carrying capacity adequate to meet Level of Service C. If streets cannot
meet this level of service, they shall be suitably improved to accommodate
the amount and types of traffic generated by the proposed subdivision.
4. If the proposed subdivision requires driveways or street entrances onto a
state or state aid highway, located outside the urban compact, the applicant
shall provide documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances
Page 21
conform to Maine DOT Chapter 299, Highway Driveway and Entrance
Rules.
5. All access ways, as well as streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other
transportation infrastructure, shall conform to the design and construction
standards of the Town of Skowhegan Road and Entrance Design Standards
Ordinance.
6. Where topographic and other conditions allow, provision on the plan shall
be made for connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use
wherever:
a. the access connection will facilitate fire protection services as approved
by the Fire Chief;
b. the adjoining tract is deeded to or otherwise under the control of the
subdivider; or
c. it would enable the public to travel between adjacent developments
without need to travel upon a street outside the subdivision.
6.7 Sewage Disposal
6.7.1 Criterion: Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal and will not cause an
unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized.
6.7.2 Standards:
6.7.2.1 The Town of Skowhegan Sewerage Ordinance requires that any development
on a lot located in proximity to existing public sewer is required to connect to it.
In the case of a subdivision, this requirement shall apply to the original parcel
before subdivision, and the applicant shall show location and design of the
system within the subdivision. The board may waive the requirement for lots
which are isolated by a watercourse or other topographical challenge from the
remainder of the subdivision. The complete system, including manholes, pump
stations, an expansion of lines outside of the subdivision, if necessary, shall be
installed at the expense of the applicant. The Supervisor of the Pollution
Control Facility shall certify that providing service to the proposed subdivision
is within the capacity of the system’s collection and treatment system. The
Road Commissioner and/or Pollution Control Facility Supervisor shall review
and approve in writing the construction drawings for the sewage system.
6.7.2.2 Where an individual subsurface wastewater disposal system is proposed, the
applicant shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface sewage
disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with
the requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
Page 22
On lots in which the limiting factor has been identified as being within twelve
(12) inches of the surface, a second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a
reserve area for future replacement of the system. The reserve area shall be
designated on the plan as not to be built upon.
6.8 Solid Waste
6.8.1 Criterion: Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the Town’s ability to dispose
of solid waste.
6.8.2 Standard:
If solid waste estimated to be generated by the proposed subdivision exceeds the
capacity of the Town of Skowhegan Solid Waste Facility, or would cause the
facility to no longer be in compliance with its license from the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection, the applicant will make alternate arrangements for
disposal of solid waste from the subdivision.
6.9 Aesthetic, Cultural, and Natural Values
6.9.1 Criterion: Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of
the area, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat, or rare and
irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual access to the
shoreline.
6.9.2 Standards:
6.9.2.1 The board may require the reservation of open space within a proposed
subdivision in order to provide for the recreational needs of the occupants of the
subdivision or to maintain the scenic or natural beauty of the area. In
determining the need for open space the board shall consider the proximity of
the subdivision to neighboring dedicated open space or recreation facilities; the
needs identified in the comprehensive plan for open space or recreation facilities
in the neighborhood of the Subdivision; the type of development and the
demographic characteristics of potential residents in the Subdivision; and the
density or lot sizes of the development.
Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and
location suitable for the particular use intended. A site intended to be used for
active recreation purposes, such as a playground or a play field, should be
relatively level and dry, have total frontage on one or more streets of at least
200 feet, and have no major dimensions of less than 200 feet. A site for scenic
or passive recreation purposes shall have no less than twenty-five (25) feet of
road frontage. Sites shall be deemed adequate by the board with regard to
scenic or natural attributes to be preserved.
Page 23
6.9.2.2 The board may require that the application include a landscape plan that will
show the extent of preservation of existing trees, the replacement of trees and
vegetation, graded contours, streams, and the preservation of scenic, historic, or
environmentally significant areas. Cutting of trees on the northern borders of
lots should be avoided as far as possible, to retain a natural wind buffer.
6.9.2.3 If the proposed subdivision contains any historical or archeological sites
identified by the comprehensive plan or reports from the Heritage Council, the
applicant shall contact the Maine State Historic Preservation Commission for a
review of the development plan and recommendations for preserving the
resources. The applicant shall describe how historic or archeological resources
on the site will be avoided or preserved.
6.9.2.4 If any portion of the tract to be subdivided contains areas identified on maps
published by the Beginning with Habitat Program of the Maine Department of
Conservation as being significant wildlife habitat, habitat for threatened or
endangered species, or a critical natural area, the applicant will propose that
these areas be shown on the subdivision plan as designated open space or part of
lots of no less than ten (10) acres.
6.9.2.5 Any public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body or to abutting
property shall be included by means of easements or right-of-way, or should be
included in the open space, with provisions made for continued public access.
6.10 Conformity with Local Ordinances and Plans
6.10.1 Criterion: Is in conformance with the duly adopted plans and ordinances for the
Town of Skowhegan.
6.10.2 Standards
6.10.2.1 Lots within the proposed subdivision will conform to the dimensional
standards and design criteria below:
1. All lots proposed to be connected to the public sewer line shall be have a
minimum of one hundred feet (100') of frontage on an existing or proposed
street and contain not less than 10,000 square feet. No more than two (2)
dwelling units may occupy a lot of less than 20,000 square feet.
2. All lots serviced by individual subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall
have a minimum of two hundred (200') feet of frontage on an existing or
proposed street and contain not less than 40,000 square feet exclusive of
areas of identified wetland.
3. Lots proposed for multi-family dwellings to be connected to the public
sewer shall have a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of frontage on an
Page 24
existing or proposed street and shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square
feet for the first dwelling unit and 5,000 square feet for each additional
dwelling unit. All other multi-family dwelling lots shall have a minimum of
(200') feet of frontage on an existing or proposed street and shall contain a
minimum of 20,000 square feet for the first dwelling unit and 5,000 square
feet for each additional dwelling unit. Lot configuration and area shall be
designed to provide for adequate off-street parking and service facilities.
4. A subdivision proposed for commercial or industrial use shall have a
minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on an existing or proposed
street and shall contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet for each building
or building division. All commercial or industrial subdivisions shall access
the public sewer system.
5. Lots within a mobile home park shall not be less than fifty (50') feet in
width:
a) Lots connected to the public sewer shall contain not less than 6,500
square feet;
b) Lots connected to a central, on-site subsurface wastewater disposal
system approved by the Maine Department of Human Services shall
contain not less than 12,000 square feet;
c) Lots served by individual subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall
contain not less than 20,000 square feet.
6. The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required
minimum lot size shall be laid out in such a manner as to either facilitate or
preclude future additional divisions.
7. Wherever possible, side lot lines should be perpendicular to the street.
8. If a lot on one side of a road fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot
size, it may not be combined with a lot on the other side of the road to meet
the requirement.
9. Where public utilities could be extended to the subdivision in the
foreseeable future, the subdivision shall be designed to accommodate the
extensions of utilities.
6.10.2.2 Lots subject to the Skowhegan Shoreland Zoning Ordinance and/or Flood
Management Ordinance shall comply with the provisions of those ordinances
with regard to lot size.
6.10.2.3 Clustering of Lots: In order to reduce the costs of installing utilities (roads,
water, sewer), promote more affordable housing, or preserve open space and
resource land, a developer may propose to cluster lots within a subdivision.
Page 25
Clustering means that dwelling units will be located closer together, and land
will be associated with the subdivision which is not developed. The following
provisions are intended to protect residents and the Town from potential
negative impacts of this design.
1. Lots connected to the public sewer or to a common subsurface wastewater
treatment facility may be reduced to no less than four thousand (4,000)
square feet, with a street frontage no less than fifty (50) feet.
2. Lots to be served by individual subsurface wastewater treatment systems
may be reduced to no less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area,
with a street frontage no less than one hundred (100) feet.
3. If lots are located within a shoreland zone, lot sizes shall not be reduced
below the minimum required in that zone.
4. The total number of lots may exceed the number permitted by conventional
subdivision by no more than twenty (20) percent. The number of lots
permitted by conventional subdivision shall be calculated based on the
following formula:
Total acreage of the parent parcel less the acreage of land unbuildable
due to wetlands or slopes exceeding 25 percent, less the acreage of
existing easements for rights-of-way, utilities or drainage; the result
divided by the minimum lot size permitted under conventional
subdivision.
5. The plan shall illustrate the placement of buildings and the treatment of
open space, roads, service and parking. Building envelopes shall be drawn
on the plan, and shall be separated by no less than twenty (20) feet in
distance. Building envelopes shall exclude areas unbuildable due to
wetlands, steep slopes, or utility or drainage easements. The plan shall
contain a note that all buildings will be placed within the building envelope.
6. Proposed common land/open space shall be identified as a separate lot within the
development. The precise description of the property restricted and the legal
mechanism for the restriction shall be provided to the board. Common land or
open space shall be identified on the subdivision plan with the words: “Not to
be developed.” Further subdivision of the open space lot and its use for other
than non-commercial recreation, forestry, agriculture or conservation purposes,
except for easements for underground utilities, shall be prohibited.
7. Ownership of the open space may be retained by the developer or transferred to a
homeowners association as described in section 6.11.2.4, or to an association which
has as its principal purpose the conservation or preservation of land, or proposed
for transfer to the Town of Skowhegan or State of Maine. When open space is to
be owned by an entity other than the Town of Skowhegan or State of Maine, there
Page 26
shall be an easement in place prohibiting future development, except for structures
and buildings accessory to uses listed in subsection 6, above.
8. A portion of proposed open space shall be suitable for use for passive recreation by
owners of lots within the subdivision. The development shall be designed so that
each lot has access to the open space, either directly abutting the parcel or along
road frontage. Where the subdivision abuts a body of water, a usable portion of the
shoreline, as well as reasonable access to it, shall be a part of the common land.
6.10.2.4 All proposed lots shall be surveyed and monuments placed to designate lot
boundaries. Monuments shall be placed as follows:
1. Stone monuments or iron pins shall be set at all street intersections and
points of curvature, but no further than 750 feet apart along street lines
without curves or intersections.
2. Stone monuments or iron pins shall be set at all corners and angle points of
the subdivision boundaries where the interior angle of the boundaries is 135
degrees or less.
3. Stone monuments shall be a minimum of four (4") inches square at the top
and four (4') feet in length, and set in the ground at final grade level. After
they are set, drill holes ½ inch deep shall locate the point or points described
above.
4. Iron pins shall be of adequate size (no less than 1/2" bar) to identify corners
and shall bear the number of the professional land surveyor who installed
them.
5. All other Subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot
boundary corners and angle points shall be marked by suitable monuments.
6.11 Financial and Technical Capacity
6.11.1 Criterion: The developer has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the
standards of this ordinance.
6.11.2 Standards:
6.11.2.1 The applicant shall demonstrate that he or she has adequate financial
resources to complete the subdivision development. “Adequate financial
resources” may be demonstrated by the development of an estimate of
construction costs to be incurred with the subdivision and a plan for providing
or obtaining the resources necessary to meet the costs.
6.11.2.2 The applicant shall demonstrate that he or she has the technical capacity to
complete the subdivision development. The applicant will provide names and
Page 27
addresses of contractors, engineers, or other professionals retained for the
development or describe the process by which such individuals will be hired.
6.11.2.3 The applicant shall make provision for long-term maintenance of all land and
facilities proposed for the general benefit of occupants of the development including
but not limited to common open space, landscaping, drainage systems, private roads
and parking lots, community recreation facilities or sewerage systems.
6.11.2.4 Within a residential subdivision, common land and facilities shall be placed under
the ownership of a homeowner’s association to be formed prior to the sale of lots.
Division of interests or fractional ownership of common property shall be prohibited.
Articles of incorporation and bylaws for a homeowners association shall be submitted
to the Town prior to final review. Articles of incorporation shall require mandatory
membership of all owners of property within the subdivision. Bylaws shall provide
mechanisms for management and maintenance of common property, including
provision for allocating costs among property owners and mandating payment. A
transition arrangement shall be provided, with the developer responsible for
maintenance until a sufficient number of lots have been sold to support the
association.
6.11.2.5 The board shall not approve an application from a person who is in default on
a previously approved subdivision or commercial development plan.
6.12 Surface Waters
6.12.1 Criterion: Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any pond
or lake or within 250 feet of any wetland, great pond or river, will not adversely
affect the quality of such body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of such
body of water.
6.12.2 Standard:
The applicant will demonstrate that he or she has complied with all of the terms of
the Town of Skowhegan Shoreland Zoning Ordinance. All permits required to be
obtained under the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance will be provided prior to final
review of the application.
6.13 Ground Water
6.13.1 Criterion: Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect
the quality or quantity of ground water.
6.13.2 Standards:
6.13.2.1 No subdivision shall increase any contaminant in the ground water to more
than one-half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No subdivision shall
increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than the
Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
Page 28
6.13.2.2 If ground water already contains contaminants in excess of the Primary
Standards, and the subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water
supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved
or treated.
6.13.2.3 If ground water already contains contaminants in excess of the Secondary
Standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the substance
in question to exceed 150% of the existing concentration.
6.13.2.4 The board may require a hydrogeologic assessment of the tract to be
subdivided if it is located above the sand and gravel aquifer mapped for the
Town of Skowhegan or if it exceeds forty (40) lots or dwelling units with
individual wells and septic systems, or if it is a commercial or industrial
subdivision. When a hydrogeologic assessment is required, the assessment
should contain at least the following information:
1. A map showing the basic soils types.
2. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
3. Drainage patterns throughout the subdivision.
4. Data on existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the
subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
5. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems
and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 200 feet of the
subdivision boundaries.
6. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground water
resources. In the case of residential development, the evaluation shall, at a
minimum, include a projection of post-development nitrate-nitrogen
concentration at any wells within the subdivision, at the subdivision
boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shorter distance. For subdivisions within the
watershed of a lake, projections of the subdivision’s impact on phosphate
concentrations shall also be provided.
6.13.2.5 Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be
constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If
construction standards for drinking water wells are recommended in the
assessment, those standards shall be included as a condition of plan approval,
and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
Page 29
6.14 Flood Areas
6.14.1 Criterion: Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information
presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area.
6.14.2 Standards:
6.14.2.1 If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in a flood-prone area, the applicant shall
map the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the
subdivision.
6.14.2.2 All public utilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
6.14.2.3 The plan shall indicate that all principal structures on lots in the subdivision
shall be constructed with their lowest habitable floor, including the basement,
at least one foot above the 100 year flood elevation. This provision shall also
be included in the deed to any lot wholly or partially within the flood prone
area.
6.15 Freshwater Wetlands
6.15.1 Criterion: All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of
these wetlands.
6.15.2 Standard:
Freshwater wetlands shall be delineated on the ground and on plan drawing
submitted with the application. Wetlands shall be identified in accordance with the
1987 Corps. of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual or subsequent revision.
Mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done with the help of the local soil and
water conservation district.
6.16 Farmland
6.16.1 Criterion: All farmland within the proposed subdivision has been identified on
maps submitted as part of the application.
6.16.2 Standard:
All areas of farmland must be identified on one or more plan drawings. Farmland is
defined by state statute as any area of five (5) or more acres of land that is classified
as prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland of statewide importance by the
USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service, or is used for the production of
Page 30
agricultural products as defined in 7 M.R.S.A. section 152 (2). Any mapping of
farmland may be done with the help of the local soil and water conservation district.
6.17 River, Stream or Brook
6.17.1 Criterion: Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed subdivision
has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application.
6.17.2 Standard:
All rivers, streams and brooks within the proposed subdivision shall be depicted on
one or more plan drawings. For purposes of this section, "river, stream or brook"
has the same meaning as in 38 MRSA, section 480-B(9).
6.18 Storm Water
6.18.1 Criterion: The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water
management.
6.18.2 Standards:
6.18.2.1 Adequate provisions must be made for the collection and disposal of all
stormwater that runs off proposed streets, parking areas, other impervious
surfaces. A Stormwater Management Plan will be required when the
subdivision involves the construction or improvement of roads.
6.18.2.2 To the extent possible, the plan should retain stormwater using the natural
features of the site and without adverse impacts on abutting or downstream
properties.
6.18.2.3 Unless the discharge is directly to the Kennebec River, stormwater runoff
systems must detain or retain water such that the rate of flow from the site
after development does not exceed the predevelopment rate. The applicant
must demonstrate that on- and off-site downstream channel or system capacity
is sufficient to carry the flow without adverse effects, including but not
limited to, flooding and erosion of shoreland areas, or that he/she will be
responsible for whatever improvements are needed to provide the required
increase in capacity and/or mitigation.
6.18.2.4 Any applicant for a project which requires a Stormwater Management Permit
from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection must submit a copy
of the approved permit at time of final review.
6.18.2.5 For projects which do not require a Stormwater Management Permit, the use
of Low Impact Development techniques, consistent with the publication
Page 31
Stormwater Management for Maine, (DEP, January 2006 or as revised) is
highly encouraged.
6.18.2.6 For projects involving structural treatments such as detention ponds, a
Stormwater Maintenance Agreement must be submitted at the time of
application. The SMA must indicate how stormwater management structures
will be maintained through the course of their projected life.
6.18.2.7 The biological and chemical properties of receiving waters must not be
degraded by stormwater runoff. The use of oil and grease traps in catch
basins, the use of on-site vegetated waterways, and vegetated buffer strips
along waterways and drainage swales, and the reduction in use of deicing salts
and fertilizers may be required.
6.19 Spaghetti Lots Prohibited
6.19.1 Criterion: If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a river,
stream, brook, or great pond as these features are defined in 38 MRSA, section 480-
B, none of the lots created within the subdivision will have a lot depth to shore
frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
6.19.2 Standards (Apply to all lots):
6.19.2.1 The ratio of lot length to width shall not be more than five to one (5:1) except
where the rural setting of the lot and topographic configuration of the land
will permit a greater ratio, there is no shore frontage involved, and deed
covenants or other restrictions prevent the resubdividing of the lot.
6.19.2.2 Panhandle (“Flag”) lots and other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are
joined to other parcels in order to meet minimum lot size requirements are
prohibited.
6.20 Lake Phosphorous Concentration
6.20.1 Criterion: The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not
unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus concentration during the
construction phase and life of the proposed subdivision.
6.20.2 Standard:
If the proposed subdivision is to be located all or part within the direct watershed of
Lake George or Oak Pond, the application will demonstrate that the export of
phosphorous will be consistent with the standards of the DEP manual Phosphorus
Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating New Development,
revised May 1992, or as further revised. In calculating the allowable level of
Page 32
phosphorous import, a “moderate” level of lake water quality protection is to be
assumed.
6.21 Impact on Adjoining Municipality
6.21.1 Criterion: For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the
proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe
conditions with respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining
municipality in which part of the subdivision is located.
6.21.2 Standard:
If any proposed subdivision crosses municipal boundaries, the board shall conduct a
review parallel to the review of the adjoining municipality, and shall attempt to
conduct at least one (1) joint meeting. If either municipality requests a traffic study
or traffic impact an analysis of the applicant, the study shall be made available to
both review authorities.
6.22 Lands Subject to Liquidation Harvesting
6.22.1 Criterion: Timber on the parcel being subdivided has not been harvested in
violation of rules adopted pursuant to 12 MRSA, section 8869, subsection 14,
adopted by the Maine Forest Service to substantially eliminate liquidation
harvesting.
6.22.2 Standards:
6.22.2.1 If the tract to be subdivided shows evidence of having been forested within
the preceding ten (10) years, the applicant shall submit an affidavit concerning
the status of timber harvesting operations. The affidavit shall be signed by the
Department of Conservation, Bureau of Forestry or a forester licensed
pursuant to Title 32, chapter 76. The affidavit shall state whether the timber
was harvested in compliance with 38 MRSA, section 8869.
6.22.2.2 If a violation of the above-cited rules adopted by the Maine Forest Service has
occurred, the board must determine prior to granting approval for the
subdivision that five (5) years have elapsed from the date the landowner under
whose ownership the harvest occurred acquired the parcel. The board may
request technical assistance from the Department of Conservation, Bureau of
Forestry to determine whether a rule violation has occurred.
Page 33
ARTICLE 7 -- POST APPROVAL ACTIVITIES
7.1 Performance Guarantees
With submittal of the application for approval, the applicant shall provide a proposal for
one of the following forms of Performance Guarantee. The guarantee must be for an
amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required improvements and
streets, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule and the inflation
rate for construction costs. The type, conditions and amount of the Performance
Guarantee shall be determined by the board with the advice of Road Commissioner,
Board of Selectmen, and/or Town Attorney.
7.1.1 Conditional Agreement: The board at its discretion may permit the subdivider to
enter into a binding agreement with the Town in lieu of financial performance
guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the plan on the
condition that no lot may be sold or built upon until either:
1. It is certified by the board and the Road Commissioner or their agent that all the
required improvements have been installed in accordance with this ordinance
and the board’s conditions of approval, or
2. A financial guarantee acceptable to the Town is submitted in an amount
necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount
adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portion of the required improvements
already installed.
All conditional agreements shall have a time limit for completion and shall be
approved by the board and by the Board of Selectmen prior to final review of the
plan. Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be noted on the plan which is
recorded at the Somerset County Registry of Deeds.
Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures contained in Section 7.1.7.
7.1.2 A Cash Bond for the establishment of an escrow account. A cash contribution to the
establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified check made
out to the Town of Skowhegan, a direct deposit into a savings account, or the
purchase of a certificate of deposit naming the Town as owner. For any account
established by the subdivider, the Town of Skowhegan shall be named as owner or
co-owner, and the consent of the Town shall be required for withdrawal. Any
interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the subdivider unless the
Town has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case, the interest
earned shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the
subdivider and the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements.
Page 34
7.1.3 A Performance Bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company licensed to
practice in the State of Maine and approved by the Board of Selectmen or Town
Manager. The Performance Bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method
for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the subdivider, and the procedures
for collection by the Town. The bond documents shall specifically reference the
Subdivision for which approval is sought.
7.1.4 An irrevocable letter or line of credit from a financial institutional licensed to
practice in the State of Maine, establishing funding for the construction of the
improvements, from which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate. An
irrevocable letter of credit shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the
construction of the subdivision and may not be used for any other project or loan.
7.1.5 Contents of Guarantees: The Performance Guarantee shall contain a construction
schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account
inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the
release of part of or all of the Guarantee to the subdivider, and a date after which the
developer will be in default and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish
construction.
7.1.6 Final Approval of Guarantees: The performance guarantee submitted for final
review shall have received approval from the Town Manager or Board of Selectmen.
All necessary agreements and other documents shall have been fully executed.
7.1.7 Release of Guarantees: Financial Performance Guarantees shall remain in effect for
one year after completion of construction unless other arrangements are made, in
writing, with the board or the Board of Selectmen. Prior to the release of any part of
the Performance Guarantee, the board shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon
the report of the Code Enforcement Officer (and any other departments involved)
that the improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for
that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.
7.1.8 Default: If, upon inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plan
specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall so report in writing to
the Board of Selectmen, the board and the subdivider or builder. The Board of
Selectmen shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town’s rights.
7.2 Enforcement
7.2.1 Violations and Enforcement:
7.2.1.1 No plan of a division of land within the Town of Skowhegan which would
constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a Plan
has been approved in accordance with this ordinance.
Page 35
7.2.1.2 No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree
to convey any land in a subdivision, which has not been approved by the
board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds, nor may they convey, offer or
agree to convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on
the approved Plan as a separate lot.
7.2.1.3 No public utility, water company, sanitary district or any utility company of
any kind shall serve a lot in a subdivision for which a Plan has not been
approved.
7.2.1.4 Development of a subdivision without approval shall be a violation of law.
Development includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land or
lots, or construction of buildings which require approval under this ordinance.
7.2.1.5 No lot in a subdivision may be occupied and no occupancy permit will be
issued before the street upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance
with this ordinance up to and including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit
in a multi-family development shall be occupied before the driveway and
parking lot serving the unit is completed in accordance with this ordinance.
7.2.1.6 Any person who sells, leases, develops, builds upon, or conveys for
consideration, offers or agrees to sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey for
consideration any land or dwelling unit in a subdivision that has not been
approved under this ordinance and under Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter 1,
article 6 481-490, where applicable, shall be penalized in accordance with
30-A MRSA, section 4452.
7.2.1.7 Any person who sells, leases or conveys for consideration any land or
dwelling unit in a subdivision approved under this ordinance and exempt from
Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter 1, article 6, 481-490, because of the operation
of Title 38, Section 488, Subsection 5, shall include in the instrument of sale,
lease or conveyance a covenant to the transferee that all the requirements of
Title 38, section 488, subsection 5, have been, and will be satisfied.
7.2.2 Enforcement Authority:
7.2.2.1 The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this ordinance and shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To enter property at reasonable hours and to enter any building with the
consent of the property owner, occupant or agent to inspect the property for
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. To issue a summons to any person who violates any provision of the
ordinance.
Page 36
3. When specifically authorized by the Board of Selectman to represent the
Town of Skowhegan in the District Court in the prosecution of alleged
violations of this ordinance.
7.2.2.2 The Board of Selectmen, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, is
hereby authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal
or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of
fines that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance in the name of the Town of Skowhegan. The Board of Selectmen,
or their designated agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this ordinance
and recovering fines without court action. If, however, the Town is the
prevailing party it may collect attorney’s fees and court costs.
7.2.3 Inspection of Required Improvements:
7.2.3.1 At least five (5) days prior to commencing each major phase of construction
of required improvements, the subdivider or builder shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when they propose to commence
construction of such improvements, so that the Board of Selectmen can cause
inspection to be made to assure that all specifications and requirements shall
be met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the
satisfactory completion of improvements.
7.2.3.2 If the inspecting official finds upon inspection of the improvements that any
of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specification filed by the subdivider, he shall so report in writing
to the Town Manager, planning board, and the subdivider or builder. The
Town Manager shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town’s rights,
including declaring the subdivision to be in default of its obligations.
7.2.3.3 At any time before or during the construction of the required improvements,
the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock,
natural springs, etc. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this
section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the planning
board. Revised plans shall be filed with the Town. For major modifications,
such as relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by
more than one percent (1%), etc., the subdivider shall obtain permission to
modify the plans from the board.
7.2.3.4 By December 1 of each year during which construction is done on the site, the
inspecting official shall submit a report to the planning board based on that
inspection, addressing whether storm water and erosion control measures
(both temporary and permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and
appear adequate to do the job they were designed for. The report shall also
Page 37
include a discussion and recommendations on any problems which were
encountered.
7.2.3.5 Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Board of
Selectman to submit a proposed town way to a town meeting, a written
certification signed by a Registered Professional Engineer shall be submitted
to the Board of Selectman at the expense of the subdivider, certifying that the
proposed town way meets or exceeds the design and construction
requirements of these regulations. If there are any underground utilities, the
servicing utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a
manner acceptable to the utility. All fire hydrants will also be certified to
meet construction and capacity specifications.
7.2.3.6 The subdivider or builder shall be required to maintain all improvements and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the Town.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
TRAFFIC ORDINANCE
(Approved, Selectmen’s Meeting, July 8, 1997)
(Amended, Selectmen’s Meeting March 10, 1998)
(Amended Selectmen’s Meeting. June 13, 2000)
(Amended Selectmen’s Meeting July 9, 2002)
(Amended Selectmen’s Meeting February 10, 2004)
(Amended Selectmen’s Meeting January 9, 2019)
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 1. Definitions
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words shall have
the following meanings:
Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, and
such ambulances and emergency vehicles of Municipal Departments or public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the Board of Selectmen.
Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty (20) inches in diameter.
Bus shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than fourteen (14) passengers
and used for the transportation of passengers; and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
designed for the transportation of persons for compensation.
Business or residence district shall mean the territory of the Town contiguous to any way which
is built up with structures which are situated less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet apart for a
distance of at least one-quarter (1/4) of a mile.
Crosswalk shall mean:
(1) That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral
lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in
the absence of curbs, from the edge of traversable roadways;
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
Driveway shall mean every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
2
Intersection shall mean the area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if
no curb lines are established, then the lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more streets or
highways which join one another at an angle whether or not one such street or highway crosses
the other.
Motor vehicle shall mean any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively on tracks,
including motorcycles, but not including snowmobiles as defined in Title 12, Section 1971 of the
State law.
Operator shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle
upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor
vehicle.
Owner for the purposes of registration owner shall mean any person, firm, corporation or
association holding title to a vehicle or having exclusive right to the use thereof for a period
greater than thirty (30) days or the mortgagor or the vendee in a conditional sales contract, and
shall mean any person, firm, corporation or association owning a vehicle, or having the right to
use the same, under contract, lease or hiring; except this definition shall not apply when said
vehicle is engaged exclusively for the use set forth in Title 35, section 1560, subsection 1,
paragraph E, of the State law or Acts amendatory thereto. It shall not mean or include a person
engaged in the business of renting Maine registered vehicles without drivers, as provided for in
29 M.R.S.A. section 901. Nothing contained in this definition shall require an owner or a
common or contract carrier by vehicle operating under permit or certificate of the Interstate
Commerce Commission or the Public Utilities Commission to register a vehicle leased by such
owner or carrier for the purpose of augmenting such owner’s or carrier’s equipment, if such
vehicle is properly registered by the owner or carrier in this or some other State.
Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, attended or unattended
upon a street, otherwise then temporarily for the purpose of and while expeditiously taking on or
leaving passengers or loading or unloading merchandise then in readiness for immediate loading
or delivery or otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot.
Right-of-way shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb
lines or, where no curb lines are established, that part devoted to vehicular traffic.
Safety Zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive
use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by proper signs as to be
plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
3
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property
lines.
Stop when required means complete cessation from movement.
Stop or stopping when prohibited shall mean any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control or signal.
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel.
Traffic-control devices shall mean all signs, signals, markings, and devices placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulation, warning
or guiding traffic.
Vehicle shall include all kinds of conveyances on ways for persons and for property, except
those propelled or drawn by human power or used exclusively on tracks or snowmobiles as
defined in Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, Section 1971. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §1;
Selectmen’s Meeting, 3-10-56, No. 13)
Sec. 2. General penalty.
Whenever in this ordinance any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or
whenever in this ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared
to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of
this ordinance shall constitute a civil violation for which a forfeiture set by the Board of
Selectmen (See Town of Skowhegan User Fees), plus costs, may be adjudged. Each offense
shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 3. Authority to remove, impound vehicles; costs of impoundment.
Upon request of the road commissioner, a police officer may remove or cause to be removed any
vehicle or vehicles left upon any street or way when such vehicle is not in the apparent charge of
any driver or other person which interferes with plowing or removal of snow by the highway
department.
All costs incurred with the removal of said vehicle will be the responsibility of the owner
thereof.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
4
Sec 4. Public employees to obey regulations.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in
the service of the United States Government, this State, or Town, and it shall be unlawful for any
such operator to violate any of the provisions of this ordinance, except as herein otherwise
permitted.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §4)
Sec. 5. Applicability of ordinance to authorized emergency vehicles.
The provisions of this ordinance controlling the movement, parking and standing of vehicles
shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the driver of such vehicle is operating the
same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not,
however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard for
the safety of others. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §5)
Sec. 6. Moving of vehicles to avoid provisions of this ordinance a violation.
The moving of vehicles from one location to another to avoid provisions of this ordinance shall
be deemed a violation of this ordinance. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §53)
Sec. 7. Boarding, alighting from moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §18)
Sec. 8. Clinging to moving vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, sled or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon a way. (Town Meeting, 9-
23-44, §41)
Sec. 9. Riding in portion of vehicle not intended for passenger use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated
or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not
apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or within truck bodies in
space intended for merchandise. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §19)
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
5
ARTICLE II. OPERATION GENERALLY
Sec. 10. Authority to determine and designate the character and type of traffic-control
devices; devices to be uniform; authority to place, maintain devices.
(A) The Board of Selectmen shall determine and designate the character and type of all official
traffic signs, signals, traffic calming devices and parking meters. All signs, signals, traffic
calming devices and parking meters required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, meet the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices manual and be uniform
throughout the Town.
(B) The Board is hereby authorized to place and maintain or cause to be placed or maintained all
official traffic signs, signals, traffic calming devices and parking meters. (Town Meeting, 9-23-
44, § 6(a))
Sec. 11. Provisions unenforceable when signs not in proper place and legible; when
provisions effective without signs being erected.
No provisions of this ordinance for which signs are specifically required shall be enforceable
against an alleged violator, if at the time and place of the alleged violation, the sign herein
required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary observant
person. Whenever a particular section of this ordinance does not state that signs are required,
such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §6 (b))
Sec. 12. Unauthorized signs, signals, markings, devices.
(A) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized
sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or so interferes with the effectiveness of any official trafficcontrol
device or any railroad sign or signal as to endanger the public, and no person shall place
or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection
upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information or
promoting highway safety and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. Any person,
firm, corporation or political subdivision of the State, while working on, under, over or
immediately adjacent to any highway may erect temporary warning or directional signs or
signals for the purpose of safeguarding or protecting its workmen and facilitating and protecting
travel along the highway by the traveling public.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
6
(B) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance and the
authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway may order the same removed and, if not
removed within forty-eight (48) hours after receipt of the notice, is empowered to remove the
same or cause it to be removed. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §9; Town Meeting, 3-9-53, No.7)
Sec. 13. Traffic-control signal legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or
colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red
and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying word legend, and said
lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(A) Green indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn
right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and
to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such
signal is exhibited.
(2) Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with
another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications
shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as provided in 29 M.R.S.A.
Section 950, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(B) Steady yellow indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green
movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestriancontrol
signal as provided in 29 M.R.S.A. Section 950, are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian
shall then start to cross the roadway.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
7
(C) Steady red indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall
remain standing until a green indication is shown.
(2) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in 29 M.R.S.A.
Section 950, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
(D) Official traffic-control signal.
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an
intersection, this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions, which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement,
indication where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop
shall be made at the signal.
Sec. 14. Authority to designate, mark areas for rotary traffic; operators of vehicles to
comply.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to designate certain areas for rotary traffic. The Board
shall place suitable marks indicating such areas in streets or squares with proper signs requiring
vehicles to pass to the right of said areas, and no operator of a vehicle shall fail to comply
therewith.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §46)
Sec. 15. Selectmen authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to establish and to designate and shall thereafter
maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of
the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as it may deem necessary.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §11)
Sec. 16. Ordinances establishing crosswalks not affected by this ordinance.
Nothing in this ordinance shall affect any ordinance designating or establishing crosswalks, and
all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length in this ordinance.
Sec. 17. Authority to locate and designate safety zones and mark traffic lanes.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
8
(A) For the protection of pedestrians, the Board of Selectmen is authorized to locate safety
zones by suitable designations within the roadways of squares or highways.
(B) The Board is also authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as it
may deem advisable, consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44,
§12)
Sec. 18. Ordinances designating safety zones not affected by this ordinance.
Nothing in this ordinance shall affect any ordinance establishing or designating safety zones, and
all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length in this ordinance.
Sec. 19. Authority to designate through ways.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to designate as through ways such other streets or
parts of streets as in its discretion it feels that such designation is necessary to promote public
safety. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §39 (d); Selectmen’s Meeting, 3-9-53)
Sec. 20. Authority to place, maintain signs on streets intersecting through ways.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized and required to place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained on each and every street intersecting a through way designated herein at
or near the property line of the through way stop or other appropriate signs. (Town Meeting, 9-
23-44, §39(c))
Sec. 21. Schedule of through ways.
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute through ways for the
purpose of this ordinance:
BAILEY STREET
BEECH STREET.
CHANDLER STREET: From the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North
Avenue.
COTE STREET
DORE STREET
DYER STREET: From the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North
Avenue.
EAST RIVER ROAD
FAIRVIEW AVENUE
WATERVILLE ROAD:
FAIRVIEW AVE.
GREENWOOD AVE.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
9
HANOVER STREET
HATHAWAY STREET
HIGH STREET: the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of Water Street.
JEWETT STREET: the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North Avenue.
LEAVITT STREET: the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North Avenue.
MADISON AVENUE
MAIN STREET
MALBONS MILL ROAD
MEADOW VIEW DRIVE
MILBURN ST.
MT. PLEASANT AVENUE
NORRIDGEWOCK AVENUE
NORTH AVENUE
RUSSELL ROAD: from Spring Street north.
OAK POND ROAD
PLEASANT STREET
POOLER AVE.
PROSPECT STREET: the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North
Avenue.
SILVER STREET
SPRING STREET: From the east line of Summer Street to the west line of Madison
Avenue.
SOUTH FACTORY STREET
DANE AVENUE:
ST. MARKS STREET
WATER STREET: From the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of Malbons
Mills Road.
WEST FRONT STREET.
WINTER STREET: From the east line of Madison Avenue to the west line of North
Avenue.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §39(a); Selectmen’s Meeting, 4-7-53, Nos. 22, 23; Selectmen’s
Meeting, 11-1-54, No. 23)
Adams Street East Madison Road Maple Street Short Street
Alder Street East Maples Street Mary Street Silver Street
Ash Street East Ridge Road McClellan Street Smith Street
Avore Street East River Road Meadowview Street South Factory Street
Back Road East Street Mechanic Street South Street
Bailey Street Eaton Mountain Road Merrill Street Spring Street
Beauford Street Edward Court Michael Street St. James Street
Beech Street Elm Street Milburn Street St. John Street
Bennett Avenue Dickey Street Mill Street St. Mark Street
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
10
Bigelow Hill Road Fairview Avenue Mitchell Street Stevens Road
Blair Street Forrest Greene Street Molunkus Road Steward Hill Road
Bloomfield Street Free Street Moody Street Summer Street
Bridge Street French Street Mt. Pleasant Avenue Swain Hill Road
Brown Street Gem Street Norridgewock Avenue Timberview Drive
Bungalow Street Glen View Drive North Avenue Turner Avenue
Burrill Hill Road Grassland Lane Notch Road Union Street
Bush Street Green Street Oak Pond Road Varney Road
Canaan Road Greenwood Avenue Oak Street Wallace Farm Road
Cardinal Street Hanover Street Olive Street Walnut Street
Cedar Street Harding Street Palmer Road Walton Court
Center Street Hathaway Street Park Street Water Street
Carpenter Street Heather Drive Parkman Hill Road Waterville Road
Chamberlain Street Heselton Street Parlin Street Waye Street
Chandler Street High Street Patrick Street West Front Street
Chestnut Street Hilton Hill Road Pattern Court West Street
Cleveland Street Industrial Park Road Pennell Street Weston Street
Coburn Avenue Island Avenue Philbrick Drive Willow Street
Commercial Street Jackson Street Pine Street Wilson Street
Cote Court Jason Street Pleasant Street Willette Street
Court Street Jewett Street Pomelow Street Winter Street
Cowette Street Jimmy Street Pooler Avenue Wood Street
Cresent Street Josie Street Poplar Avenue Woodvale Street
Cross Street Joyce Street Porter Road Wyman Street
Dane Avenue Judkins Court Poulin Drive York Street
Dartmouth Street Kennebec Street Pratt Court
Dawes Street Lambert Road Precelly Drive
Dennis Street Land Street Prospect Street
Dinsmore Street Landfill Access Road Railroad Street
Dominic Street Larone Road Reed Street
Dore Street Lawton Street Robin Court
Dr. Mann Road Leavitt Street Robinson Street
Dudley Corner Road Lessor Street Rowe Road
Dyer Street Locust Street Russell Road
East Chandler Street Madison Avenue Sandy Lane
East Dyer Street Main Street School Street
East Leavitt Street Malbons Mills Road
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
11
Sec. 22. Discontinue certain streets to motor vehicle traffic.
The following streets will be closed to motor vehicle traffic except emergency vehicles.
MILL STREET: From the intersection of Main Street easterly to the east corner to the
New Balance Shoe Company warehouse building.
Sec. 23. Four way stop intersection; schedule of streets.
DANE AVE DYER STREET
(Adopted Selectmen’s Meeting, 9-25-90)
DANE AVE. CHANDLER STREET
(Adopted at Selectmen’s Meeting, 8-27-91)
GREENWOOD AVE COWETTE STREET
GREENWOOD AVE LUCUST STREET
HANOVER STREET SMITH STREET
HATHAWAY STREET MITCHELL STREET
(Adopted Selectmen’s Meeting, 2-10-04)
HATHAWAY STREET SOUTH STREET
(Adopted Selectmen’s Meeting, 2-10-04)
Sec. 24. Authority to place turning markers directing left turns.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to place or cause to be placed turning markers at
the entrances of intersections, directing that traffic turning left shall follow a line of travel other
than as directed in section 25. Whenever turning markers have been placed as herein provided,
traffic turning left shall follow the line as directed by such markers.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §32(c)).
Sec. 25. Required position and method of turning at intersections.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(1) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move
in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line
thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection and
after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to
the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left
turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
12
(3) Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted
to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn
left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and after
entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such
direction upon the roadway being entered. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §32 (a,b,d))
Sec. 26. Signs to be erected indicating one-way traffic.
A sign indicating the direction of traffic shall be erected and maintained at every intersection
where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Town Meeting 9-23-44, §40;
Selectmen’s Meeting 3-10-56, §40, no.15)
Sec. 27. Operation on one-way streets restricted; schedule of streets.
Upon the following streets vehicular traffic shall move only in the following specified direction:
CROSS STREET: From Court Street to North Avenue.
MADISON AVENUE: From the intersection of Commercial Street and Madison
Avenue to Water Street.
MECHANIC STREET: From Waterville Road to French Street.
REED STREET: From Jewett Street to Chandler Street.
COMMERCIAL STREET: From the intersection of Water Street and Commercial Street
to Madison Avenue.
WATER STREET: From Madison Avenue to the intersection of Commercial Street and
Water Street.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §40; Selectmen’s Meeting, 3-10-56, No.15)
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
13
Restricted to right turn only:
SKOWHEGAN PLAZA: Right turn only at the West exit onto Main Street from the
Skowhegan Plaza.
DODGE COURT: Right turn only onto the North Channel Margaret Chase Smith Bridge.
(Adopted at Regular Selectmen’s Meeting, 7-11-89)
CLEVELAND STREET: Right turn only onto Madison Avenue.
COURT STREET: Right turn only onto Commercial Street.
LOCUST STREET: Right turn only onto Madison Avenue.
SHERWIN WILLIAMS: Right turn only onto Madison Avenue.
Sec. 28. Operation on streets restricted; schedule of streets.
No through trucks on the following streets:
Cleveland Street from Madison Avenue to Greenwood Avenue.
Greenwood Avenue from Jewett Street to Cleveland Street
Gem Street from North Avenue to Greenwood Avenue.
(Adopted at Regular Selectman’s meeting 6-25-91.)
Heselton Street from North Avenue to the intersection of Malbons Mills Road.
(Adopted Regular Selectman’s meeting 5-26-92)
Cowette Street from North Avenue to Greenwood Avenue.
Locust Street from Madison Avenue to Greenwood Avenue.
(Adopted Regular Selectman’s meeting 11-26-02
Sec. 29. Overtaking vehicles stopped to permit pedestrians to cross roadway.
Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (Town Meeting, 9-
23-44, §14(b))
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
14
Sec. 30. Driving through funeral processions.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between or attempt to cut across the
line of a hearse and the other vehicles and pedestrians constituting a funeral procession. (Town
Meeting, 9-23-44, §42)
Sec. 31. Duty upon entering public way from private road, etc.
The driver of a vehicle entering a public way from a private road, alley, driveway or building
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public way and shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on said public way or sidewalk; and before crossing
any sidewalk, or before entering such public way where no sidewalk shall exist, shall proceed
cautiously across said sidewalk or into said public way. “Private road” as used in this section
shall be construed to include a private road, a private way of any description, an alleyway or a
driveway. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §35)
Sec. 32. Speed in municipal parking lot.
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle within the municipal parking lot to drive at a
speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §29 (d); Town Meeting,
3-10-58)
Sec. 33. Driving on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same on any sidewalk, except for
the purpose of crossing the same when necessary, and then only in the shortest way between the
street and the abutting estate. (Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §36)
Sec. 34. Authority to work areas for snow removal; operation in areas prohibited.
(a) For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow, the road commissioner, upon
authority of the Board of Selectmen, may place properly marked signs along any street or
streets or portions thereof as he shall from time to time deem necessary.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter upon, stop or park within
the spaces indicated by such sign.
(Town Meeting, 9-23-44, §56(b))
Sec. 35. Rules and Regulations restricting heavy loads on closed ways.
SUMMARY: The following rules and regulations restrict heavy loads on posted State and State
Aid Highways from November 15 to June 1.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
15
DEFINITIONS
A. The definitions contained in Title 29-A, Section 101, of the Maine Revised Statutes
Annotated shall govern the construction of the words contained in this regulation.
B. Gross weight is the combined weight of the vehicle and its load.
DESIGNATED CLOSED WAYS
In order to prevent excessive damage to Town Maintained Roads the Road Commissioner may
close all or part of a highway to heavy weight vehicles during any time from November 15 to
June 1. No vehicles shall travel over closed ways except those permitted by this regulation.
NOTICE
Notice shall be given by erecting at each end of the closed highway a poster indicating the
following: 1) the date of the posting, 2) a description of the highway closed, 3) a summary of the
vehicles exempt from the closing, 4) the name, business address, and telephone number of the
Division Engineer, 5) statutory and regulator references.
EXEMPTIONS - FROZEN HIGHWAYS
This regulation shall not apply to any closed highway which is solidly frozen.
EXEMPT VEHICLES
The following vehicles are exempt from this regulation:
A. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight of 23,000 pounds or
less.
B. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of 23,000
pounds and traveling without a load other than tools or equipment necessary for the
proper operation of the vehicle. This exemption does not apply to special mobile
equipment. It shall be a defense to a violation of this subsection if the combined actual
weights of any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess
of 23,000 pounds and its load are in fact less than 23,000 pounds.
C. Any vehicle under the direction of the Skowhegan Highway Department and with
permission of the Skowhegan Highway Department engaged in emergency maintenance
of the public highway.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
16
D. Highway maintenance vehicles under the direction of the Skowhegan Highway
Department.
E. Any vehicle transporting home heating fuel (Oil, gas, coal, wood) to a private
consumer, bulk milk or bulk feed which is registered in excess of 23, 000 pounds
carrying a partial load with a weight equal to or less than indicated on an exemption
certificate issued by the Skowhegan Highway Department as documented by delivery
slips or bills of lading accompanying the vehicle. The allowable weight indicated on the
exemption certificate will be calculated based on various reduced loads per inch tire
width, manufacturer’s rating.
BASIS STATEMENT: This regulation is designed to prevent excessive damage to
highways from heavy weight vehicles during seasons when special protection is required.
AUTHORITY: 29-A M.R.S.A. §2395
PENALTIES:
Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to a civil forfeiture determined by
the Board of Selectmen, See Section 2.
(Regular Selectmen’s Meeting, 3-27-84)
ARTICLE III. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION I. GENERALLY
Sec. 36. Authority to change parking time limits; posting of new times required.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to amend this article for the purpose of
changing the designation of any parking time limit and for the purpose of designating the
hours when parking time limits shall be in effect, when in it’s discretion, such change or
designation is necessary, and any such change or designation in the parking time limit or
effective hours of said parking time limit shall be posted as required in Section 37.
Sec. 37. Parking time limits to be posted.
The parking time limits in effect in the Town shall be appropriately posted in all areas
affected.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
17
Sec. 38. Authority to determine, mark or sign streets where angle parking is
permitted.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be
permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to be marked or signed.
Sec. 39. Manner of parking vehicles generally.
The operator of a vehicle shall park such vehicle headed in the direction of traffic with
the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within one (1) foot of the edge of the roadway, except
when:
(1) Streets are marked or signed for angle parking;
(2) An accident or obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals
dictates otherwise.
Sec. 40. Vehicles to be parked within angle marks.
Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be
parked at an angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs.
Sec. 41. Parking within stalls required in Municipal Lot.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the Municipal Parking Lot except within the
limits of the designated parking stalls as indicated by curb or street marking lines.
Sec. 42. Vehicles longer than twenty (20) feet not to park in angle spaces.
No vehicle having an overall length of more than twenty (20) feet shall park in areas
marked or signed for angle parking.
Sec. 43. Stopping, standing, parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
When signs are posted giving notice thereof, no vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or
allowed to stand on the following streets or portions of streets at any time:
CEDAR STREET: East side from the south line of Mill Street to the north line of the
Waterville Road.
CLEVELAND STREET: South side from the east curb line of Wilson Street to the west
curb line of Greenwood Avenue.
CROSS STREET: South side from Court Street to the westerly line of the post office
driveway
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
18
HEATHER DRIVE: South side from Fairview Avenue west to Main St.
WATERVILLE ROAD: Both sides within one hundred and sixty (160) feet from the
intersection of the east curb line of Main Street.
East side of said road measuring northerly three hundred (300) feet from the Central
Maine Power Pole No. 130, no parking for a distance of two hundred and forty-two (242)
feet.
West side of said road measuring southerly eighty (80) feet from Central Maine Power
Pole No. 128, no parking for a distance of one hundred and thirteen feet (113) from this
point.
South side within one hundred (100) feet easterly of the east curb line of Poplar Street
and within one hundred (100) feet westerly of the west curb line of Poplar Street.
ELM STREET: North side from a point fifty (50) feet westerly of the west drive of the
Skowhegan Savings Bank to the east curb line of Coburn Avenue.
South side from Central Maine Power Pole No. 5 to the junction of Norridgewock
Avenue.
GREENWOOD AVENUE: West side from the south curb line of Cleveland Street to a
point one hundred and ninety (190) feet southerly.
JEWETT STREET: North side within one hundred (100) feet of the east curb line of
Madison Avenue.
South side within fifty (50) feet of the east curb line of Madison Avenue.
MADISON AVENUE: Both sides from the junction of Commercial Street and Elm
Street in a northerly direction, to the Skowhegan- Madison town line.
MAIN STREET: Both sides within twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the
southerly curb lines of the Waterville Road with Main Street and West Front Street with
Main Street.
East side between the northern curb-line of the Waterville Road to the northerly end of
the North Channel Margaret Chase Smith Bridge on Island Avenue.
West side between the northern curb-line of West Front Street to the northerly end of the
North Channel Margaret Chase Smith Bridge on Island Avenue.
COMMERCIAL STREET: North side from the junction of Commercial Street and Water
Street to the junction of Madison Avenue and Commercial Street.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
19
WEST FRONT STREET: Both sides within fifty (50) feet from the intersection of the
west curb line of Main Street.
EAST MAPLE STREET: North side from North Avenue easterly to Memorial Field.
Sec. 44. Stopping, standing, parking on certain streets for longer than two (2) hours.
When signs are posted giving notice thereof, no vehicle shall, except on legal holidays
and Sundays, be parked, stopped or allowed to stand on the streets or portions of streets
for a period of time longer than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00
P.M.
Sec. 45. Parking on streets between midnight and 6:00 A.M. from November 1st to
May 1st restricted; maximum parking limit on Municipal Parking Lot.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park the same on any street
or public way and on any municipally owned property within the Town for a period
longer than fifteen (15) minutes between the hours of twelve (12:00 A.M.) midnight and
6:00 A.M. from the first day of November in any year to the first day of May of the
following year.
Exceptions:
Vehicles may be parked in the northern half of the Municipal Parking Lot, south
of High Street for a continuous period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during the
period November 1st to May 1st of the following year.
Vehicles may be parked in the designated Park and Ride Lots for a continuous
period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours during the period November 1st to May 1st of
the following year, per the State of Maine Park and Ride Policy.
SPECIFIC PENALTY: Any motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the fee as indicated in Sec. 2. The Skowhegan Police Department may
cause any motor vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this section during the
course of a snow storm or thereafter during the period of time when snow is being
removed from the public ways and parking lots be removed at the expense of the owner
of the vehicle. This removal provision may be enforced in addition to the other penalty
provision provided herein.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
20
Sec. 46. Authority to locate, designate loading zones; when parking in zones
unlawful.
(a) For the purpose of restricting parking in front of doorways and entrances of
buildings where people congregate, or where unusual loading or unloading of
merchandise exists, the Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to determine
the location of loading zones and the times during which such zones shall be so
used, and shall cause to be erected and maintained appropriate signs indicating the
same.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to park such vehicle in any
place marked as a loading zone during the period designated for its use as such.
Sec. 47. Double parking: Defined, regulated, evidence of violation, penalty.
1. Definition: Double parking shall be deemed to mean the parking of any motor vehicle
outside any area designated for parking by painted lines and contrary to the
provisions of Section 39 of this ordinance or in such a manner that the curbside
wheels of such motor vehicle are more than ten (10) feet from the paved edge of the
street.
2. Regulated: It shall be unlawful to double park any motor vehicle, except for the
purpose of loading or unloading; provided that it shall be unlawful to double park
between the hours of 11:30 A.M. and 1:30 P.M. And 3:00 P.M. and 4:00 P.M.
Monday through Friday on Water Street between the intersections of Madison
Avenue and North Avenue, or on Commercial Street, or on Madison Avenue between
the intersections of Water Street and Commercial and Elm Streets.
3. Evidence of Violation: The unlawful parking of any motor vehicle shall be prima
facie evidence of the unlawful parking by the person, firm, partnership or corporation
to whom the vehicle is registered.
4. Penalty: Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating this
Section shall be subject to a civil forfeiture as described in Section 2, each offense
shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 48. Stopping , standing, parking on specific places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any
of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
1. On or within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection on a public way.
2. On or within twenty (20) feet of any crosswalk.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
21
3. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty (20) feet of a point
on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless the Board of
Selectmen shall indicate a different length by signs.
4. Within twenty-five (25) feet of a point where the curb lines if extended would
intersect at a street corner, or within such distance in any specific location as shall
be determined by the Board of Selectmen, and indicated by markings on the
pavement or curb or by suitable signs, or both.
5. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway.
6. In front of, so as to obstruct the use of any driveway or alley entrances or ten (10)
feet to either side thereof.
7. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such standing or
parking would obstruct traffic.
8. Within ten (10) feet of any white pole or sign indicating a bus stop on the side
from which passengers board or alight, except that in lieu of this provision, the
Board of Selectmen may, where it deems necessary, indicate by proper signs,
spaces which will provide proper access to buses.
9. Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant when the location of such fire hydrant
is indicated by signs or suitable markings.
10. At angles in streets and at or near intersections where the standing of motor
vehicles would obstruct the free movement of traffic, and in the front of and
opposite of fire stations, passenger bus turnouts, where the Board of Selectmen
shall deem necessary and shall so indicate by signs.
11. Within twenty-five (25) feet of the terminus of the corner radius along the curb
line at street intersections.
Sec. 49. Leaving vehicle stationary so as to obstruct way prohibited; leaving animal
drawn teams unattended.
No person shall leave his vehicle stationary on a way so as to obstruct the free passage of
other vehicles, or allow an animal drawn team to be in the way unattended unless it is
reasonably fastened.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
22
Sec. 50. Stopping of buses.
Except at a loading station it shall be unlawful for the operator of a bus to bring the same
to a stop, to receive or discharge passengers at any place other than close to the curb
alongside of the traveled way when same is accessible. When a curb is not accessible to
stop for such purpose, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a bus to stop, to receive or
discharge passengers in any position which does not permit other vehicles to pass on the
side opposite the side where passengers are to be received or discharged.
Sec. 51. Unlawful to park in bus stops, taxi stands; taxi operator to park only in
assigned stands.
a) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same in an
officially designated bus stop, or for the operator of any vehicle other than a taxi
to park the same in an officially established taxi stand.
b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxi to park the same in any other
officially established taxi stand than that assigned to it.
Sec. 52. Parking vehicles displayed for sale on streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon a street for the sole purpose of
displaying the vehicle for sale.
Sec. 53. Fifteen (15) minute parking.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle in the following parking space longer than
fifteen (15) minutes where lines are painted or durably marked on the curb or street
designating a parking space and a sign is posted designating fifteen (15) minute parking.
Elm Street
- Proceeding westerly from the junction of Madison Avenue, the last parking stall
east of the entrance to the Skowhegan Savings Bank.
The foregoing parking regulation shall be in effect between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Saturday except legal holidays.
Commercial Street
- Proceeding westerly from the junction of Water Street, the first and last parking
stall on the south side of the street. (Selectmen’s Meeting 3-28-2006)
Madison Avenue
- The last parking stall at the southeast corner of the avenue.
The foregoing parking regulation shall be in effect between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Saturday except for legal holidays.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
23
Sec. 54. Two (2) hour parking.
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle for a time period in excess of two (2) hours
on the following streets where lines are painted or durably marked on the curb or street
designating a parking space and a sign is posted designating two (2) hour parking.
Water Street
• North side from the junction of North Avenue with Water Street to the
junction of Court Street and Water Street.
• South side from the main entrance of the Riverview Parking lot easterly to
the west side of the Veteran’s Memorial.
Elm Street
• North side from the junction of Madison Avenue proceeding to the
easterly property line of the Skowhegan Savings Bank. South side from
the junction of Madison Avenue westerly to Central Maine Power Pole
No. 5.
Court Street
• East side from the junction of Water Street and Commercial Street to the
junction of High Street.
Municipal Parking Lot
• Southern half of the lot, north of Commercial Street.
• Indian Lot north of High Street.
River View Parking Lot
• South from Water Street to the north side of the Kennebec River and the
west end of the parking lot from the walking bridge.
The foregoing parking regulation shall be in effect between 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Saturday except legal holidays.
Water Street
• North side from the junction of Madison Avenue and Water Street
easterly to the junction of Commercial Street and Water Street.
• South side from Island Avenue to the entrance to the Riverview Parking
Lot.
Madison Avenue
• From the junction of Elm and Commercial Streets to the junction of Water
Street.
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE January 9, 2019
24
Commercial Street
• South side from the junction of Water Street westerly to the junction of
Madison Avenue.
The foregoing parking regulation shall be in effect between 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Monday through Saturday except for legal holidays.
Sec. 55. Enforcement, penalty and waiver fees.
Parking ordinances shall be enforced by the Skowhegan Police Department or other
official duly appointed and authorized by the Board of Selectmen. A violation of this
Ordinance is a civil violation punishable by a fine as described in Section 2, for each
offense. Any person charged with a violation of this Ordinance may waive court action
by paying a fee to the Skowhegan Police Department within 30 days of the violation.
Such fees upon such waiver shall be as determined by the Board of Selectmen:
Sec. 56. Evidence of unlawful parking
No person shall cause, allow or permit a motor vehicle registered in his or her name to
park in violation of any Town of Skowhegan parking ordinances. The fact that a motor
vehicle is unlawfully parked shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of
such vehicle by the person whose name such vehicle is registered.
For the enforcement of two (2) hour parking, a vehicle shall be deemed to be in violation
when parked in the same stall for a time period in excess of two (2) hours and then once
per hour thereafter.
Sec. 57. Handicapped parking and Fire Zones.
The Chief of Police, upon approval of the Board of Selectmen, is authorized to enter into
agreements with owners of private off-street parking for the policing of stalls and spaces
dedicated for handicapped persons’ vehicles and fire zones. Any vehicle parked in such a
parking stall or space designated as a handicapped parking space, that does not bear a
special registration plate, placard, or hang tag issued under M.R.S.A Title 29-A, Section
521, or a similar plate, placard, or hang tag issued by another State, is in violation of this
section and the registered owner is subject to the penalty indicated in Section 2.
-111-
Chapter 15
TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
ORDINANCE GOVERNING VICTUALERS LICENSES FOR
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS, INNKEEPERS, AND LODGING HOUSES
Adopted: Town Meeting, March 8, 1999
THE TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN HEREBY ORDAINS the following ordinance
governing victualers licenses for food service establishments, innkeepers, and lodging houses.
TITLE:
This Ordinance shall be know as the Town of Skowhegan, Maine, Victualers, Innkeepers,
and Lodging House Ordinance, and shall be referred to hereinafter as the “Ordinance”.
AUTHORITY: This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of
Title 30-A, Section 3812 of the Maine State Revised Statutes Annotated. (M.R.S.A.)
PURPOSE: The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the issuance of licenses to the various
food service establishments in the Town of Skowhegan.
DEFINITIONS: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall mean:
1. Innkeeper. “Innkeeper” means a person who keeps an inn, bed and breakfast
establishment, hotel or motel to provide lodging to travelers and others for
compensation and also to provide meals.
2. Licensing Board. “Licensing Board” means the Municipal Officers of the Town
of Skowhegan.
3. Lodging House. “Lodging House” means a building in which three (3) or more
rooms are rented, but does not include 1) a house where lodgings are rented to
persons within the second degree of kindred to the person operating the lodging
house; 2) the dormitories of charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions;
or 3) the emergency use of private dwelling houses at the time of conventions or
similar public gatherings.
4. Victualer. “Victualer” means a person who serves food or drink prepared for
consumption on the premises by the public.
5. Premises. “Premises” means all lands, buildings, structures, places and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
-112-
LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate as a victualer within the Town of Skowhegan unless licensed to
do so by the Town, unless specifically waived by the Town. Applications for victualers’ licenses
shall be made in writing upon forms supplied by the Skowhegan Town Clerk and shall state the
name of the applicant; his residence and mailing addresses; the name of the business to be
conducted; his business address; the location(s) to be used; residence and business telephone
numbers; and the date of the application. Upon receipt of the application, the Town Clerk shall
refer the same to the Code Enforcement Officer for a determination to assure compliance with
the ordinances, statutes and regulations of the Town of Skowhegan and the State of Maine.
HEARING:
The Board of Selectmen shall hold a hearing on any original application for a license for
food service within thirty (30) days of the date of the request received at which time the
testimony of the applicant and that of any interested members of the public shall be taken. The
applicant shall be notified of the hearing date.
The municipal officers shall grant a license unless they find that issuance of such license
will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or would be in violation of any Town
or State ordinance, rules or regulations.
SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS:
The municipal officers may, after a public hearing, suspend or revoke any license for
non-compliance with the ordinances, statutes and regulations of the Town of Skowhegan and the
State of Maine.
FEES AND EXPIRATION:
Each person initially licensed as an innkeeper or victualer shall pay to the Town Clerk a
fee of thirty dollars ($30.00). All licenses, unless otherwise provided, expire May 31 of each
year. Renewal of said victualer’s license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00).
ANNUAL VICTUALERS LICENSE HEARING:
The licensing board shall meet annually during the month of May on a date and at a time
and place in the municipality that they determine. At least seven (7) days before the meeting
they must post notices stating the purpose of the meeting in at least two (2) public places in the
municipality.
-113-
PENALTY:
Any person who violates any section of this Ordinance commits a civil violation for
which a forfeiture of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense or any subsequent
offense may be adjudged. All forfeitures to be recovered, on complaint, will be to the use of the
Town of Skowhegan.
1
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ORDINANCE
FOR THE TOWN OF SKOWHEGAN
Adopted: March 8, 1999
I. GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. The business of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with Maine
Statutes, Town Ordinances, and Roberts’ Rule of Order.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the members of the Board to become familiar
with all the duly enacted ordinances of the Town which they may be expected
to act upon, as well as with the applicable State statutes.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the members of the Board to become familiar
with the community goals, desires, and policies as expressed in the Town of
Skowhegan’s Comprehensive Plan, now in effect, and grant the minimum
relief which will insure that the goals and policies of the plan are preserved
and substantial justice is done.
II. APPOINTMENTS:
A. The Board shall consist of five members appointed by the municipal officers
of the Town of Skowhegan for terms of five years.
B. Neither a municipal officer nor his or her spouse may be a member of the
Board.
C. Any member of the Board may be removed from the Board, for cause, by the
municipal officers, before expiration of his/her term, but only after notice and
an opportunity for a hearing at which the member in question has an
opportunity to refute specific charges against him/her. The term “for cause”
shall include, but not be limited to, failure to attend four consecutive Board
meetings or hearings without sufficient justification or voting when the
member has a conflict of interest.
D. When there is a permanent vacancy the Chairperson shall immediately notify
the Town Clerk. The municipal officers shall, within sixty (60) days, appoint
a person to serve for the unexpired term.
III. OFFICERS AND DUTIES:
A. The officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson,
and Secretary who shall be elected annually by a majority of the Board.
B. CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson shall perform all duties required by law
and this Ordinance and preside at all meetings of the Board. The Chairperson
shall rule on issues of evidence, order and procedure and shall take such other
2
actions as are necessary for the efficient and orderly conduct of hearings,
unless directed otherwise by a majority of the Board.
C. VICE CHAIRPERSON. The Vice Chairperson shall serve in the absence of
the Chairperson and shall have all the powers of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence, disability, or disqualification.
D. SECRETARY. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board
meetings and all correspondence of the Board. The Secretary is responsible
for maintaining those records which are required by statute or this Ordinance
as part of the various proceedings which may be brought before the Board.
The Board may provide, by regulation, which shall be recorded by the
Secretary, for any matter relating to the conduct of any hearing, provided that
the chair may waive any regulation upon good cause shown. All records to be
maintained or prepared by the Secretary are public records, shall be filed in
the Town Clerk’s office, and may be inspected at reasonable times.
IV. ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES:
Administrative duties, subject to the direction of the Board, Chairperson, and the
Secretary, shall be performed by a member of the municipal office staff who shall take
minutes of all Board proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The staff person shall also arrange
proper and legal notice of a hearing, attend to correspondence of the Board, and to other
normal clerical duties of the Board. The staff person shall make a record of all
resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings and determinations of the Board, and
shall prepare a complete record of each hearing including: date(s), time (s), place(s) of
the hearing (s); subject of the hearing; identification of each participant; any agreements
made between parties and the Board regarding procedures; the testimony presented;
findings of the facts and conclusions; the decision of the Board; and the date of issuance
of the decision. All records shall be forwarded to the Secretary for review and comment
and inclusion in the public record.
V. CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
Any question of whether a particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient
to disqualify a member from voting thereon shall be decided by a majority vote of the
members, excluding the member whose potential conflict is under consideration.
The term “conflict of interest” shall be construed to mean a direct or indirect
pecuniary interest, which shall include pecuniary benefit to any member of the person’s
immediate family (grandfather, father, wife, son, grandson, etc.) or to his employer or the
employer of any member of the person’s immediate family.
3
VI. POWERS AND LIMITATIONS:
The Board shall have the following powers to be exercised only upon receipt of a
written appeal by an aggrieved party:
A. The Board may interpret the provision of any applicable Town Ordinance.
B. The Board may approve the issuance of a special exception permit, or
conditional use permit, in strict compliance with any applicable Town
ordinances.
C. The Board may grant a variance only where strict application of any Town
ordinance, or provision thereof, that would cause undue hardship to the
petitioner and the property. The words “undue hardship” as used in the
subsection means:
1. The property in question can not yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted; and
2. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and
3. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
4. The hardship is not a result of action taken by the applicant or prior
owners.
D. The Board shall have the power to hear and determine all appeals by any
person directly affected by any decision, action or failure to act with respect to
any permits, variance or other required approval (hereinafter a Decision):
1. rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board pursuant
to the Shoreland Zoning Ordinance;
2. rendered by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Building Inspector
relating to building code enforcement pursuant to any statute or Town
ordinance;
3. rendered by the Planning Board pursuant to the Town of Skowhegan’s
Subdivision Standards Ordinance or the Maine subdivision statute;
4. rendered by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
the Ordinance relating to Flood Hazard Building Permit System and
Review Procedures;
4
5. rendered by the Planning Board pursuant to the Site Plan Review
Ordinance.
VII. MEETINGS:
A. The meetings of the Board shall be held as necessary.
B. An annual organizational meeting of the Board shall be held in April.
C. Meetings of the Board shall be called by the Chairperson. The Chairperson
shall also call meetings of the Board when requested to do so by a majority of
the members or by the municipal officers. At least forty-eight (48) hours
written notice of the time, place and business of the meeting shall be given to
each member of the Board, the Selectmen, the Planning Board and the Code
Enforcement Officer.
D. The order of business at meetings of the Board shall be as follows:
1. roll call,
2. reading and approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting,
3. action on held cases,
4. public hearing (when scheduled),
5. other business
6. adjournment.
E. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, except executive
sessions. No votes may be taken by the Board except in public meeting. The
Board shall not hold executive session except for consultation between the
Board and its legal counsel concerning litigation or other legal matters.
F. The transcript or tape recording of testimony, if such a transcript or tape
recording has been prepared by the Board, and the exhibits, together with all
papers and requests filed in the proceeding, constitutes the public record. All
decisions become a part of the record and must include a statement of finding
and conclusions, as well as the reasons or basis for the findings and
conclusions, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented
and the appropriate order, relief or denial of relief. Notice of any decision
must be mailed or hand delivered to the petitioner, the petitioner’s
representative or agent, the Planning Board, agency or officer and the
municipal officers within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision.
VIII. VOTING:
A. A quorum shall consist of three members of the Board.
5
B. No hearing or meeting of the Board shall be held, nor any action taken, in the
absence of a quorum.
C. All matters shall be decided by a roll call vote. Decisions on any matter
before the Board shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire
membership of the Board unless otherwise specified herein.
D. A tie vote or favorable vote by a lesser number than the required majority
shall be considered a rejection of the application under consideration.
E. If a member has a conflict of interest, he/she shall not be counted by the Board
in establishing the quorum for such matter.
F. No member shall vote on the determination of any matter requiring public
hearing, unless he or she has attended the public hearing thereon, however,
where such a member has familiarized themselves with such matter by
reading the record, he or she shall be qualified to vote.
IX. APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved by an action which comes under the jurisdiction of the
Board pursuant to Section VI must file such application for appeal, in writing on
forms provided within thirty (30) days of the granting or denial of a permit. The
applicant shall file this appeal at the office of the Town Clerk, setting forth the
ground for his/her appeal. Upon receiving the application for the appeal, the
Town Clerk shall notify the Chairperson of the Board.
X.HEARING:
A. The Board shall schedule a public hearing on all appeals applications within
thirty (30) days of the filing of a completed appeal application.
B. The Board shall cause notice of the date, time and place of such hearing, the
location of the building or lot, and the general nature of the question involved,
to be given to the person making the application and to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, the date of the
publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The Board shall
also cause notice of the hearing to be given to owners of the property abutting
that for which the appeal is taken at least seven (7) days prior to the date of
the hearing.
C. The Board shall provide as a matter of policy for exclusion of irrelevant,
immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
D. The Order of business at a public hearing shall be as follows:
1. The Chairperson calls the hearing to order.
2. The Chairperson determines whether there is a quorum
6
3. The Chairperson gives a statement of the case, reads all correspondence,
and reports received.
4. The Board determines whether it has jurisdiction over the appeal.
5. The Board decides whether the applicant has the right to appear before the
Board.
6. The Board determines which individuals attending the hearing are
“interested parties”. “Interested parties” are those persons who request to
offer testimony and evidence and to participate in oral cross-examination.
They would include abutting property owners and those who might be
adversely affected by the Board’s decision. Parties may be required by the
Board to consolidate or join their appearances in part or in whole, if their
interests or contentions are substantially similar and such consolidation
would expedite the hearing. Municipal officers, the Planning Board, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall automatically be made parties to the
proceeding.
Other persons attending the hearing and Federal, State, Municipal and
other governmental agencies may be permitted to make oral or written
questions through the Chair.
7. The appellant is given the opportunity to present his or her case without
interruption.
8. The Board and interested parties may ask questions of the appellant
through the Chair.
9. The interested parties are given the opportunity to present their case. The
Board may call its own witnesses, such as the Code Enforcement Officer.
10. The appellant may ask questions of the interested parties and Board
witnesses through the Chair.
11. All parties are given the opportunity to refute or rebut statements made
throughout the hearing.
12. The hearing is closed after all parties have been heard. If additional time
is needed, the hearing may be continued to a later date. All participants
should be notified of the date, time and place of the continued hearing.
The Chairperson, after an affirmative vote of the Board, may waive any of the
above if good cause is shown.
7
XI. DECISION:
A. Decision by the Board shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of
the final hearing.
B. The final decision on any matter before the Board shall be made by written
order signed by the Chairperson. The transcript of testimony, if any, and
exhibits, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall
become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and
conclusions, as well as the reasons and basis therefor, upon all material issues
of fact, law or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial
thereof.
C. The Board, in reaching said decision, shall be guided by standards specified in
the applicable State laws, local ordinances, policies specified in the
Comprehensive Plan and by Findings of Fact by the Board in each case.
D. In reviewing an application on any matter, the standards in any applicable
local ordinance or State statute shall take precedence over the standard of
these rules whenever a conflict occurs. In all other instances, the more
restrictive rules applies.
E. The Board may reverse the decision or failure to act, of the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Planning Board only upon a finding that the decision or failure
to act, was clearly contrary to specific provisions of this Ordinance or
unsupported by substantial evidence in the record.
F. Notice of the Board’s decision shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant,
his representative or agent, the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer, and the municipal officers within seven (7) days of the decision.
G. Decisions of the Board shall be immediately filed in the office of the Town
Clerk and shall be made public record. The date of filing of each decision
shall be entered in the official records and minutes of the Board.
H. Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the board for a permitted
use shall expire if a building or occupancy permit for the use is not obtained
by the applicant within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision;
however, the Board may extend this time by an additional ninety (90) days.
XII. RECONSIDERATION:
8
A. The Board may reconsider any decision. The Board must decide to reconsider
any decision, notify all interested parties and make any changes in its original
decision within thirty (30) days of its prior decision.
B. The reasons for reconsideration shall be for, but not limited to, one of the
following:
1. The record contains significant factual errors due to fraud or mistake,
regarding facts upon which the decision was based on.
2. The Board misinterpreted the Ordinance, followed improper procedures,
or acted beyond its jurisdiction.
XIII. APPEAL TO SUPERIOR COURT:
The decision of the Board of Appeals may be appealed, within forty-five (45)
days after the decision is rendered, by any party to Superior Court in accordance with the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
XIV. SEVERABILITY:
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not be held to
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.